Ethereum is a decentralized system, fully independent, and is not under anybody’s authority.
The Ethereum world lately has been very busy as the Number of Ethereum non-zero addresses just reached an all-time high of 42,385,447 from previous all-time high of 42,382,991 on 26 June 2020.
$ETH addresses growing to an all-time high! https://t.co/QolM9w1TrJ
READ MORE: Bitcoin Cash gains 65% since March, shows more stability
In addition the total gas used on Ethereum network reached an all-time high this week as miners on the network voted to increase block gas limits by 25%. This will allow the ethereum network to handle 44 transactions per second, instead of the previous limit of around 35.
Total gas used on ethereum reached an all-time high this week as miners on the network voted to increase block gas limits by 25%. This will allow the ethereum network to handle 44 transaction per second, instead of the previous limit of around 35. https://t.co/lZZGwrDRBl pic.twitter.com/3DNgcK9Ja9
— CoinDesk Research (@CoinDeskData) June 27, 2020
Data from Coinmarketcap, shows Ethereum, as the second-most valuable cryptocurrency by market capitalization, had a value of $25.3 billion and a daily trading volume that stood at about $5.9billion, at the time of drafting this report.
Quick fact; Ethereum is a cryptocurrency designed for decentralized applications and deployment of smart contracts, which are created and operated without any fraud, interruption, control, or interference from a third party.
Ethereum is a decentralized system, fully independent, and is not under anybody’s authority. It has no pivotal point, and its platform is connected to thousands of its users through their computing system around the world, which means it’s almost impossible for Ethereum to go offline.
“The increase in gas usage indicates a continuous growth in the use of Ethereum’s platform, as measured by the number of transactions, as well as demand for block space, as measured via gas per transaction,” said Wilson Withiam, research analyst at data provider Messari.
Gas is the token that energizes the Ethereum’s blockchain. It is the standard used to calculate the amount of charges an individual needs to pay in order to make transactions on Ethereum’s blockchain.
Like with many other crypto assets, speculating with Ethereum can be highly profitable and has had a good history of giving its investors huge returns. However, there are also many other options to make income from Ethereum. These options include Ethereum mining, Ethereum faucets and Ethereum staking.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
