Then, on stage last week, SEC director William Hinman spoke ten magic words that brought that clarity and have sent much of the cryptocurrency world into a tizzy: “Current offers and sales of ether are not securities transactions.”
Cboe president Chris Concannon was on a flight from Chicago when he heard the news and tells Forbes the first thing he did was call his director of communications to prepare for a deluge of requests from the media. The moment he and his team had been waiting for had finally happened, and it was time to act.
“We have been contemplating futures on ethereum for sometime,” Concannon told Forbes. “This clearly makes the complexity of ether potentially being a security go away, and it certainly clears a path for launching a future on ether.”
While Concannon was not able to publicly talk about whether the $15.6 billion Cboe is actively preparing to launch ethereum futures, he says the exchange has wanted to do so since it first started exploring cryptocurrency.
To help jump-start that process, Cboe, the largest options and futures exchange in the U.S. with 22.95% of the market share, formed an exclusive partnership last year with the New York-based Gemini Trust Company, run by Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss. Using Gemini's bitcoin market data for bitcoin derivatives and indices, Cboe launched the first bitcoin futures (XBT) contract in the U.S. in December 2017, and has since traded 680,000 contracts with a notional value of $6.85 billion, according to company documents.
Justification for the firm’s entry into bitcoin comes from a 2015 decision from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) that officially recognized the cryptocurrency that doesn't rely on a central authority—and any copy, or “fork” of its code—as a commodity. But ethereum, which kicked off in 2014 by selling a portion of its cryptocurrency prior to launch, has remained in a gray area, with many skeptics saying the cryptocurrency was more centralized than some wanted to admit.
While the uncertainty has prevented regulated U.S. companies from offering ethereum futures, Cboe partner Gemini added ethereum to its trading platform in 2016 and since last July has been holding a daily ether auction at 4pm ET. Data from this auction would play a crucial role in the pricing of any ethereum futures contract Cboe might eventually launch, Concannon said.
In fact, it is the Cboe partnership with Gemini that Concannon believes could accelerate his company’s time to market if it ever decides to launch any number of cryptocurrency futures. In addition to bitcoin and ethereum, Gemini last month added support for zcash, litecoin, and bitcoin cash, all of which are forks of bitcoin.
“That partnership was structured to allow us to roll out additional products on other currencies and literally use the same structure,” said Concannon. “So we don’t have to do anything unique. It just follows in the same footsteps as the bitcoin future.”
A week after Cboe launched the first ever regulated U.S. bitcoin futures, fellow Chicago commodities giant CME Group followed suit and started blazing its own trail toward possible ethereum futures adoption.
Unlike Cboe, which quickly got to market by partnering with Gemini, CME Group created its own bitcoin indices in partnership with U.K.-based Crypto Facilities. Called the CME CF Bitcoin Reference Rate and CME CF Bitcoin Real Time Index, the increasingly controversial indices were launched in November 2016 and generate a bitcoin price based on data contributed from participating exchanges.
A little over a year after launching the indices, CME Group initiated its own bitcoin futures contracts (BTC) that rely on those indices. For the past three months, BTC future contracts have traded on average $130 million in notional volume per day, according to company data.
While global head of CME Group’s equity products Tim McCourt told Forbes the exchange doesn’t currently have plans to launch ethereum futures, a very familiar playbook as with bitcoin has already started to unfold. Just last month CME Group announced it had partnered with Crypto Facilities, the company that helped it with bitcoin futures, and launched an ether-dollar reference rate and real-time index.
Rolled out in phases, the index became a full “industrial”-scale service earlier this month, and while the number of subscribers isn't being revealed, a CME Group spokesperson told Forbes the company’s ether landing page had been visited 5,200 times since launch. McCourt says CME Group is gauging interest in the index from existing market participants and could build any number of services based on demand.
“Just like the bitcoin future was designed and deployed in response to customer demand,” said McCourt, “so will any further product development, whether it be ether or other tokens, crypto or digital assets.”
In spite of CME Group’s denial that it has any plans to follow its bitcoin futures with an ethereum futures product, a closer look at the exchange’s past work with Crypto Facilities provides some hard evidence of what this "customer demand" might look like.
Long before CME Group had launched bitcoin futures, its partner, Crypto Facilities, had started offering the contracts, and it continues to expand its related services. Founded in 2015, the London-based startup has been years ahead of the curve in the cryptocurrency futures space. Overseen by the less stringent U.K. regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), as far back as October 2016 Crypto Facilities had started trading XRP futures, and last month, just a week before CME Group revealed its ether indices, Crypto Facilities launched the first regulated ethereum futures using those same indices.
In the short time since those ethereum futures were launched, they have grown to represent a tenth of the total value, and company founder and CEO Timo Schlaefer expects $150 million in transaction volume this quarter alone. Monthly XRP volumes are now at about $125 million, compared with $30 million in February, he said, and total futures trading volumes are up 84% in Q1 2018 compared to Q4 2017, he added.
“We see a strong demand for reliable and trusted price points for the top cryptocurrencies,” said Schlaefer.
But of course, it’s not all upside in the nascent world of cryptocurrency futures. Beyond increasing concerns that the ability to short bitcoin has contributed to the cryptocurrency’s drop in price from $19,000 last year to $6,420 today, a rising tide of concerns relates to even more malicious manipulations.
Last week, the CFTC demanded data from several exchanges associated with the CME CF Bitcoin Reference rate. In spite of a number of safeguards in place for the reference rate, including a volume-weighted median of data and discarding outlier data points, concerns have persisted that the largely unregulated nature of the underlying exchanges providing the data is a potential weakness in the system.
To help address these concerns and more, Crypto Facilities last month hired Sui Chung, the former managing director of Euromoney Institutional Investor, to oversee the index and pricing product business. While acknowledging the concerns, Chung detailed the cryptocurrency futures weighting process in an email to Forbes and stood by the data:
“We are always reviewing the adoption and liquidity levels of tokens to understand if the market requires and we can produce reliable, trusted and robust price points.”
I report on how blockchain and cryptocurrencies are being adopted by enterprises and the broader business community. My coverage includes the use of cryptocurrencies such
I report on how blockchain and cryptocurrencies are being adopted by enterprises and the broader business community. My coverage includes the use of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Ethereum and Ripple, and extends to non-cryptocurrency applications of blockchain in finance, supply chain management, digital identity and a number of other use cases. Previously, I was a staff reporter at blockchain news site, CoinDesk, where I covered the increasing willingness of enterprises to explore how blockchain could make their work more efficient and in some cases, unnecessary. I have been covering blockchain since 2011, been published in the New Yorker, and been nationally syndicated by American City Business Journals. My work has been published in Blockchain in Financial Markets and Beyond by Risk Books and I am regularly cited in industry research reports. Since 2009 I’ve run Literary Manhattan, a 501 (c) (3) non-profit organization dedicated to showing Manhattan’s rich literary heritage.
