Bakkt Bitcoin Futures A Big Positive Say Crypto Insiders, Step Towards ETFs
Gary McFarlane, the cryptocurrency analyst at interactive investor, shares his thoughts – and those of other industry figures and experts – on Bakkt bitcoin futures.
But onboarding institutions into crypto is just the first part of the plan from the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE)-backed platform.
the push into crypto payments, as seen in its partnership with Starbucks and in
blockchain technology with Microsoft bringing its talent pool to the table.
Although the much-delayed launch is welcome news, some of the
upside may already have been priced in. But until the futures products – a
daily and monthly contract – start trading and we can see the volumes, it is
hard to predict its impact on the bitcoin price.
At the centre of the offering is the custody service, Bakkt Warehouse
of the crypto space, and the reliability of price discovery in particular.
Going by the balance of comments from industry figures canvassed below,
Bakkt futures will be a boon for cryptoassets.
Cash-settled, but will it move the bitcoin price?
Typically, though, most contracts are closed before expiry.
Assuming the same behaviour is apparent in the bitcoin market, then the need to
noticeable demand pressuring the spot price higher.
It could be that the biggest impact will be felt more indirectly,
treatment, with Ethereum the top candidate. The tie-up with Microsoft could be
The dominant platform by a mile in DeFi is Ethereum, despite the
network being “almost full” as the Tether stablecoin begins to swamp capacity,
bitcoin exchange traded fund (ETF) is approved in the US. Price discovery and
(SEC) cited as holding back approval.
the spot price, at both regulated and unregulated exchanges.
facilitating a crypto payments ecosystem.
long on the market as a result. But the reality as we have seen before with CME
this results in Bitcoin going down.
a coin to hold for long term.
There is no ramifications for Overbit, we are registered in
I have no comment regarding to the recent HK protest, however I
Lee Birkett, founder and chief executive of JustUs, Moneybrain BiPS
the ruler will have well and truly been all over every piece of that legal structure,
probably more so than with any other global asset class ever. It is a big step
forward for a new asset class like crypto.
I still don’t see bitcoin price stability improving with this move because bitcoin is still controlled by the whales.
I turned to Crypto as we had overseas investors wishing to invest in our UK centralised Peer to Peer platform, however banks would not let the cpaital flow accross borders. Using Blockchain and our own currency unlocks this impasse and provides global liquidity for all eligible jurisdictioins.
blockchain. Bakkt, instead, could represent the core catalyst. Supported
by global companies like Starbucks and Microsoft, the payment system that the
company is developing could even reach millions of people from day 1.
Design-Driven Entrepreneur. With over 15 years’ experience within fintech, telco,
science, banking. He is a mentor at Google Launchpad, StartupBootCamp and
physically-settled future crypto derivative is rather unpredictable. The main
on the delivery of services for B2Bs and Institutions. That will undoubtedly be
a significant step forward for the whole ecosystem.
of Ethereum on Microsoft Azure in the past months, it wouldn’t be surprising to
see also an ETH future product being launched in the coming months.
in huge bounds to the market. It is proof that the industry is evolving.
Bakkt is interesting because it’s physically settled, but
they grow to facilitate the trading needs of each industry is incredibly high.
of last year). It is long-term strength.
strength for crypto so perhaps higher lows in btc price during movement.
cryptocurrencies one way or another. The institutions that want to trade it are
not until clear regulatory guidelines are established.
Disclaimer: This article is not meant to give financial advice. Any additional opinion herein is purely the author’s and does not represent the opinion of EWN or any of its other writers. Please carry out your own research before investing in any of the numerous cryptocurrencies available. Thank you.
Gary is a cryptocurrency analyst at interactive investor, the UK’s second-largest stockbroker. He has been writing professionally about cryptocurrency since 2013, when he initiated bitcoin coverage at Money Observer, one of the UK’s most respected investment magazines. Gary writes for EWN in a personal capacity and his contributions should not be taken as investment advice.
