All the major cryptocurrencies have sky-rocketed in value as market confidence buoys upward (Image: Getty)
The world’s top cryptocurrencies have shot up in price and prompted hopes that a boom is on the way.
Back in 2017, the financial world was stunned when the value of Bitcoin shot up to $20,000 – but then watched with dismay as it plunged over the course of 2018.
Now it’s hoped that the good old days are coming back again.
Over the course of the past month, the price of Bitcoin has rocketed from $8,000 to $10,000, whilst Ethereum has shot up from just over $220 to a high of more than $250.
The surge may be driven by positive news from big financial institutions.
JP Morgan, for instance, is rumoured to be planning to merge its own blockchain unit Quorum with a Brooklyn-based startup called ConsenSys.
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web
This would be an enormous vote of confidence from a big bank and represents the sort of institutional support which could shore up the notoriously volatile crypto markets and push the digital currencies towards mainstream adoption.
It’s also hoped the rumoured link-up will cause a ‘bull market’, which means a market that’s growing and experiencing price rises.
On Twitter, the respected crypto-focused account Satoshi Flipper wrote: ‘So why is this so bullish for Ethereum?
Earlier this week, the US Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell said he was looking into ‘the costs and benefits’ of developing a digital currency.
This revelation comes as China prepares to unleash its own digital yuan which could allow it to dominate the growing cryptocurrency sector.
However, last year President Donald Trump made his distaste for cryptocurrencies clear in a tweet which said: ‘I am not a fan of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, which are not money, and whose value is highly volatile and based on thin air. Unregulated crypto Assets can facilitate unlawful behaviour, including drug trade and other illegal activity.’
So we’ve got a long way to go until crypto takes its place in the mainstream – but this in itself is an opportunity, because every rumour about established banks or authorities adopting the digital dosh is likely to spark a price rally.
