For traders News and features Analysis Cryptocurrency predictions: what coins to choose in 2020?
The cryptocurrency sector has been in existence since 2009, the year Bitcoin (BTC), the top crypto based on market capitalisation, came into being.
Eleven years down the line, cryptocurrencies are now a part of modern society, with their number surpassing 3,000.
Cryptocurrency projections are crucial in distinguishing the profitable cryptocurrencies, based on optimal return on investment (ROI) . As a result, cryptocurrency prices predictions are fundamental in determining what crypto coins to invest in 2020.
The coronavirus pandemic has been wreaking havoc so far this year, and this has triggered shocks in the financial markets. On March 12, commonly referred to as Black Thursday, the global markets nosedived, and cryptocurrencies were not spared.
For instance, Bitcoin lost 50 per cent of its value as its price reached $3,800. Since, it has witnessed a steady increase as it is currently trading at $6,856 .
2020, therefore, seems to be a bright year for cryptocurrencies based on the strides being made by Bitcoin. For instance, payment giant Visa (V) recently partnered with Fold, a crypto startup, to provide a credit card where consumers will be rewarded with Bitcoin for spending in major companies and outlets like Uber (UBER) , Amazon (AMZN) , Airbnb, Nike (NKE) , Domino’s (DPZ) and Starbucks (SBUX) . This move seeks to propel Bitcoin’s mainstream adoption.
Cryptocurrency forecasts have been rife, and 2019 proved to be a great year in the crypto space. For instance, cryptocurrency adoption skyrocketed as compared to the previous year.
Despite cryptocurrencies performing commendably in 2019, some stood out as better compared to others, and their bullish run continues in 2020.
Bitcoin continued its dominance as one of the best crypto performers in 2019. It started the year at $3,742 and reached an all-time high of $12,407 in June 2019. Its overall performance was outstanding because it closed the year at $7,293, up by 95 per cent.
One of the factors that prompted Bitcoin’s commendable performance was that crypto exchanges boosted its adoption through margin trading . As a result, BTC’s trading volume was elevated.
At the time of writing Bitcoin’s price stood at $7,161.
Bitcoin Cash proved to be another significant player in the crypto space in 2019. BCH is a hard fork of Bitcoin meaning; it was crafted out of the leading cryptocurrency. Its price stood at $135 in mid-January 2019, and an all-time high of $480 was witnessed on June 26.
By the end of December 2019, BCH was hovering around $210, representing a 55.5 per cent hike. Presently, Bitcoin Cash is trading at $233 .
Being one of the best crypto performers in 2019, NEO acts as both a cryptocurrency and an open-source platform that developers use to create decentralised applications or Dapps. Neo is currently ranked at position twenty-two among the leading cryptocurrencies according to CoinMarketCap.
NEO emerged as one of the best performing crypto based on the blockchain ecosystem it offers developers. During the start of 2019, it was trading at $7.5, but it closed the year at $9, up by 20%. Presently, its price stands at $7.45.
The coronavirus pandemic has compromised the start of 2020 as it has necessitated measures such as lockdowns, social distancing, and quarantines for it to be curbed.
There is no doubt that the Covid pandemic has made the global economy plummet, as many sectors have halted to a standstill. As a result, governments have found themselves being forced to incorporate solutions such as quantitative easing and zeroing interest rates.
Cryptocurrency predictions show that this may be an advantage for the crypto space as typically printing money devalues a currency, and inflation becomes inevitable. Cryptocurrency predictions 2020 have quite a positive spirit, in spite of the terrible circumstances.
Now, you may be asking yourself what crypto coins to invest in 2020 amid the tough times being witnessed across the globe. To answer this question, below, we have compiled a list of digital coins with the best cryptocurrency forecasts.
Bitcoin has been setting the ball rolling in the crypto space as it has proven to be one of the best crypto performers over the years. A BTC bullish run is expected in 2020 based on the much-anticipated Bitcoin halving event that is approximately four weeks away. This is an occasion that happens after every four years, and mining rewards are reduced by 50 per cent, hence decreasing the rate of the supply of Bitcoin.
