Amsterdam, March 13th 2019 - The Dutch and leading Bitcoin Futures and Options exchange Deribit is now listing Ethereum. With this listing, Deribit now makes it possible for the public to trade European,  vanilla-style Ethereum options for the first time in history.
Deribit is well known for being the first true Bitcoin options exchange and is also offering Futures and the popular Deribit Perpetual.
John Jansen, CEO and founder of Deribit says: “The volume on our Bitcoin options has been growing tremendously for the last couple of months. Many customers and OTC desks are eager to see Ethereum options being launched.”
Until now Deribit has solely been focussed on Bitcoin however on Wednesday 13th March 2019: Deribit is making one of the largest upgrades to date that enables Ethereum products on the platform.
Demand for options in the cryptocurrency space has been steadily increasing as financial institutions and more & more traders and realise what a useful instrument they are - for both trading and hedging. Due to its unique options platform, the vast majority of worldwide Bitcoin options volume is on Deribit. The chart below shows the monthly options volume on Deribit for the last 14 months.
Options allow sellers to collect a premium and allows buyers to limit their risk without the danger of being ‘stop hunted’ or liquidated. On Deribit, any trader is welcome to buy or sell both puts and calls creating a truly peer-to-peer market.
The new Ethereum products will use Ethereum itself as collateral. This again sets Deribit apart from competitors as users who already hold Ethereum can now use it to hedge or trade without worrying about the BTC/ETH conversion rate. This will be useful to a range of people from smaller traders, miners, startups that did an ICO - up to large Ethereum holders who wish to use their holdings and hedge without worrying about converting to other currencies.
Derivatives help form part of a healthy and efficient financial market by providing hedgers, speculators and arbitrageurs a market to trade with each other. Deribit intends to be at the forefront of providing this functionality for the relatively new asset class of cryptocurrencies.
Zero Fee Trading At Launch!
To celebrate the launch of these new products, Deribit is offering zero-fee trading on both the Ethereum Perpetual and the Futures markets!
This is the initial maker/taker fee structure for the Ethereum products:
