The remaining 11 per cent who were against the “hard fork” decided not to upgrade their software to account for the decision. This created an incompatibility in the network and a potential solution was the creation of the Ethereum Classic (ETC).
Ethereum Classic is fully independent from Ethereum (ETH) and acts individually. It offers identical features, most notably a focus on smart contract and Decentralised applications.
There are some major differences that impact the Ethereum Classic price forecast for 2020 and beyond. Most notably, Ethereum Classic has no fixed yearly supply of new coins and has a total supply capped between 210 million and 230 million ETC. By comparison, ETH has an uncapped total supply and a fixed yearly supply of 18 million ETH.
Ethereum Classic is also at a major disadvantage as Ethereum has the full support of its original lead developers, including Vitalik Buterin and Joseph Lubin.
The disparity between the two couldn’t be more evident by comparing the corresponding market caps. At the time of writing, Ethereum Classic has a market cap of around $540 million versus around $13.8 billion for Ethereum . From a fundamental perspective, investors may prefer shying away from Ethereum classic in favour of the much larger Ethereum.
Ethereum classic price prediction 2020: what the chart says
Taking a look at the one-year chart for a better ETC price forecast 2020 did show some encouraging signs in prior months, but the same can’t be said as of late March. The chart shows a clear breakout at the start of the year from around $4.50 to north of $12 which marks a one-year high.
The coin attempted to break above $12 in late January/early February and once again in mid-February before losing all bullish momentum and falling back to $4. At the time of writing, the chart is showing a small breakout above $4 although it is unclear if it can retest its yearly highs, especially at a time when nearly every asset class is getting hammered by the coronavirus outbreak.
Taking a look at the long-term chart, there is little reason to support a case for Ethereum classic future price to return to prior highs. The price of ethereum classic coin traded above $40 when the entire cryptocurrency industry was benefiting from tremendous momentum. Aside from this anomaly, the coin struggled on many occasions to find any momentum above the $20 level and all short-term breaches were followed by a period of weakness.
Any ETC price prediction that it will surpass its larger rival any time soon, let alone return to its former glory days, would be foolish. ETC’s all-time high was $44.34 while ETH hit an all-time high of $1,402.54. Both coins have lost a lot of value since their highs, but the same can be said for nearly every cryptocurrency.
Still, the crypto market, including Ethereum Classic, is extremely volatile, which provides huge potential for speculation. Stay tuned to the latest cryptomarket news, which can drive ETC price movement. Track the performance of the top-20 cryptocurrencies live and trade Ethereum Classic CFDs with Capital.com.
