New Transaction With $539K Fee Spotted on Ethereum Blockchain. Hack or Money Laundering?
This kind of comparison between equities and crypto first started to appear in late February when the most precious stock market sell-off in history only started gaining momentum.
As reported by U.Today , the S&P 500 chart looked like your casual Bitcoin dump on Feb. 28 when crypto was still relatively stable.
Things got really ugly in early March when it was clear that Bitcoin became highly correlated to the broader market. On March 12, BTC logged its biggest daily loss in seven years (more than 51 percent) when the overleveraged market crumbled under selling pressure.
On March, 15, the S&P 500 tanked 11.98 percent, which was the third-biggest drop in the history of the index that was first introduced in 1923.
This was followed by a speedy V-shaped recovery for both Bitcoin and stocks in Q2.
Bitcoin Price Likely to Revisit $7,000 This Summer, Says Tone Vays
On June 11, the most brutal day on Wall Street since March, the Dow, another benchmark stock index, shed almost seven percent (1,862 points).
Despite a strong opening, the stock market rally quickly hit a snag after the Federal Reserve warned about the ‘quite persistent’ economic damage of the pandemic and dragged BTC to an intraday low of $9,230 on the Bitstamp exchange.
Bitcoin has since recovered to its current price of $9,428 in tandem with equities as volatility continues to persist.
Subscribe to U.Today on Twitter and get involved in all top daily crypto news, stories and price predictions!
Alex Dovbnya (aka AlexMorris) is a cryptocurrency expert, trader and journalist with extensive experience of covering everything related to the burgeoning industry — from price analysis to Blockchain disruption. Alex authored more than 1,000 stories for U.Today, CryptoComes and other fintech media outlets. He’s particularly interested in regulatory trends around the globe that are shaping the future of digital assets, can be contacted at alex.dovbnya@u.today.
