Home » Cryptocurrency » Ethereum performs a hard fork, successfully delays the difficulty bomb
Ethereum performs a hard fork, successfully delays the difficulty bomb
Ethereum successfully performed a hard fork known as Muir Glacier and postponed the difficulty bomb for another 20 months.
The difficulty bomb was created to increase mining difficulty and halt the network, which should have served as an incentive for developers to bring forth Ethereum 2.0.
While it failed to do so until now, the Ethereum 2.0 upgrade is scheduled to happen in Q1 2020.
successfully delayed the project’s difficulty bomb. The difficulty bomb, which
threatened to freeze the network due to major difficulty increase, was now
delayed by another 20 months, and it should not become a problem again for
emerged several months earlier than expected. It surprised the developers by
bringing the Ice Age that was not supposed to happen for quite some time.
We thought we had months until it kicked in, but those numbers were wrong. The Ice Age is already being felt!
There is now a proposal for a single-EIP upgrade after Istanbul to push it back: EIP-2387 a.k.a. Mountain Glacier?
We'll see on the call if & how it goes through!
— Tim Beiko | timbeiko.eth (@TimBeiko) November 29, 2019
fork known as Muir Glacier, which was successfully pulled off earlier today.
According to what is known, Muir Glacier has
will activate the time bomb once again. This translates to approximately 611
bomb is predicting how it will affect the network, due to its unpredictability
— making the difficulty bomb more predictable, or removing it completely.
The bomb was originally introduced back in August 2015, and its presence guaranteed a hard fork within 16 months from the moment of its introduction. It came as a new concept that doesn’t reduce the rewards that miners get (like Bitcoin halving does), but rather, it increases the time needed to mine the block.
increased difficulty. This was its intended function, as it should have ‘encouraged’
the upgrade to Ethereum 2.0, and force the community into an agreement, or risk
the failure of the project.
It has been over four years since then, and
Ethereum 2.0 has yet to arrive, currently scheduled to occur in the Q1 2020.
Meanwhile, the difficulty bomb saw several delays. the latest of which has just
been implemented. This also led to a lot of criticism of the project, accusing
it of over-promising and under-delivering. Even the developers agree that the
difficulty bomb was a mistake.
— Joseph Delong (@josephdelong) November 30, 2019
Still, if all goes as planned, the bomb should
not be a problem for much longer, and ETH might finally reach its second phase
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
