By Steven Anderson June 7, 2020 Off
StarkEx, is the scalability engine, which is now live on Mainnet. It powers the @deversifi DEX, w/self-custodial trading up to 9K tps. They state that they have facilitated a robust product. They have published an overview of the basic flows like the withdrawal and deposit between the off-chain and on-chain components
Previously Starkware expressed that, in 2018, Ethereum gave then a grant to select a STARK-friendly hash function & develop open-source ZKP code.  They also clarified that they will deliver their work (pre-audit) in a few weeks, ahead of schedule. Further reinstating that ethSTARK code will prove statements 20X faster than any ZKP code out there
Joseph Lubin, Co-founder of Ethereum and Founder of ConsenSys Building the decentralized Web 3.0 on Ethereum, recently stated, thousands of TPS are online or coming online at Layer 2 of Ethereum. Scalability has arrived.
Sydney Ifergan, the crypto expert, tweeted:  “There can be no better news than Scalability coming to the Ethereum Network.  Counting on more updates on Scalability from Joseph Lubin.”
Joseph Lubin opines that there are better ways to improve scalability and opines that the community as a whole is responsible for it.
He recollected on how they are talking a lot at ConsenSys and in the Ethereum ecosystem about creating technologies that empower people, reimagine failing institutions, and build fairer systems for the future.
On June 02, 2020, he spoke in a virtual Mainnet 2020 about the ETH 2.0 and the future of Ethereum.  In the past month, he was excited when he said, after quite a few weeks of anticipation, ETH futures are here.
He also stated that he and John Lothian, CEO Tom Chippas discussed about bringing physically delivered ether futures to the market, which is stated would be the first of their kind in the US. Financial tools for IT commodities.
Joseph Lubin has been seen excited about so many things happening in the ecosystem. He stated that there is so much momentum and excitement in the ecosystem, particularly around ETH2 and DeFi. He encouraged the community to continue to experiment and to learn and build from where ever they are.
Joseph Lubin, tweeted: “Big news from @baselineproto today: they’ve released a demo showing business process automation between SAP & Microsoft Dynamics 365 using the public Ethereum Mainnet.”
Joseph expressed his firm belief in that the builders of the decentralized systems will be able to accelerate the legacy economy, while building a brave new world with revolutionaries and evolutionaries.
