The Ethereum community has been debating a proposal called ProgPoW as many ETH proponents believe the Programmatic Proof-of-Work function will alter the network significantly. The contentious topic has seemed to galvanize the community, with the ProgPoW proposal favored by a significant proportion while being detested by others. A few Ethereum participants were shocked on February 21 when the Ethereum Improvement Proposal (EIP) 1057 (ProgPoW specification) was submitted at a developers meeting.
While the Steemit and Tron communities argue and bitcoiners from various big blocker and small blocker communities squabble, Ethereum participants have been debating as well. There’s been various headlines and threads on forums and social media about “ProgPoW,” a proposal that stands for Programmatic Proof-of-Work. Basically ProgPoW is an extension of the current Ethereum algorithm Ethash but it allows graphic card components to join the mining race.
#ProgPoW dominated Friday's #ethereum core developers call. The debate took 2/3 of the 3 hour meeting.
With ASICs possibly on the way out, there could be a significant network hashrate drop in the near future.
— f2pool (@f2pool_official) March 9, 2020
In a post on the Reddit forum r/ethereum called “ELI5: What Is ProgPoW?” the independent programmer and miner Jonathan Toomim explained what ProgPoW is and how it relates to the Ethereum network. “ProgPoW is a proposal to change the Proof of Work function for Ethereum from the current Ethash algorithm (which can be effectively performed by both ASICs and GPUs, though ASICs are more efficient) to a new algorithm that is more heavily biased towards GPUs,” Toomim said .
ProgPoW has had a long and controversial history since it was introduced more than two years ago. It was created by a group called Ifdefelse and one of the original members Kristy Leigh-Minehan has written extensively about the subject. “A lot of research was done into ProgPoW and to whether it protects the incentives of the network participants (common and commercial miners). We believe it does ,” Minehan wrote in June 2018. The proposal has two algorithm features that are claimed to make mining more decentralized by making graphic card mining more competitive against a network full of Application-Specific Integrated Circuits or ASICs. Minehan and other ProgPoW proponents wholeheartedly believe the proposal will address centralization within the mining ecosystem.
To be fair to Satoshi, GPU driver support was awful in 2009. pic.twitter.com/TEDGFdTFRs
— Kristy-Leigh Minehan (@OhGodAGirl) March 8, 2020
“ProgPoW addresses the problem of centralization by minimizing the benefit of specialized, secretly-developed ASICs,” Minehan’s blog post called “A Perspective on ProgPoW” notes. “A simpler algorithm benefits those developing a secret ASIC. Those who say simple algorithms allow competition are misunderstanding the hardware ecosystem.” Minehan’s editorial adds:
ProgPoW has been designed to be a vendor-neutral proof-of-work, or more specifically, proof-of-GPU. ProgPoW has intentionally avoided using features that only one core architecture has, such as LOP3 on NVIDIA, or indexed register files on AMD.
While some Ethereum proponents believe ProgPoW will decentralize mining, others detest the idea and hope it never gets implemented.
Despite the beliefs of Minehan and others, ProgPoW is not favorable in the eyes of many ethereans. Some have called the idea a “socialist agenda” which uses “the initiation of force to redistribute wealth.” Last year as the debates continued, Ethereum supporter Martin Köppelmann tweeted that he is against the ProgPoW concept. “I am against a ProgPoW hard fork,” Köppelmann wrote . “To me, there are only two legitimate reasons to hard fork Ethereum – address an existential threat or bring Ethereum one step closer to a long term sustainable stable state. ProgPoW is tinkering in favor of one group (GPU miners) vs another.” Ethereum members also took issue with an audit published in September 2019. The audit was delivered by Least Authority, a security consulting company. The audit revealed a unique type of the cryptographic function Keccak and Least Authority addressed this change. The Ifdefelse Twitter account responded to the community’s concerns over the change but it remained a topical discussion .
The ProgPoW debate continued during a developer meeting held on February 21 and even more so when the Ethereum Improvement Proposal (EIP) 1057 (ProgPoW specification) was submitted for review. ProgPoW haters don’t think driving ASIC miners off the network is ideal and skeptics say that ASIC resistance has destroyed networks like Bitcoin Gold.
Finally, I decided to disclose ProgPoW vulnerability exploits ASIC resistance for the future of Ethereum. https://t.co/P8nQTi12vT https://t.co/Rw5EsL9iLF #ProgPoW #EthCC @hudsonjameson
— kikx (@kikx) March 4, 2020
At this point in time, numerous crypto influencers don’t believe an ASIC resistant chain can be built securely and ASIC manufacturers will always find a way to create an ASIC rig that mines the coin. Other ethereans see ProgPoW as a distraction toward moving the Ethereum chain toward proof-of-stake (PoS). People think that ProgPoW could cause a potential chain split like the Ethereum Classic hard fork and skeptics also take issue with the fact that Ifdefelse representatives are anonymous.
Well done to @kikx for his findings! Thank you for strengthening ProgPoW! https://t.co/lkBstnP5hd
— Kristy-Leigh Minehan (@OhGodAGirl) March 5, 2020
On March 2, Ethereum developer Hudson Jameson addressed the “topic of contention in the Ethereum community” in a blog post called “ProgPoW: The Ethereum Community Speaks.” Jameson discussed a number of pros and cons associated with the proposal and he denounced those who have harassed people during the debate.
“We need to have productive, civil discourse as we try to solve difficult governance and communication problems — I believe we can do it,” Jameson wrote.
What do you think about the ProgPow debate within the Ethereum community? Do you think ASIC resistance is not feasible or do you think developers will be able to stop ASICs going forward? Let us know what you think about this subject in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Want to create your own secure cold storage paper wallet? Check our tools section. You can also enjoy the easiest way to buy Bitcoin online with us. Download your free Bitcoin wallet and head to our Purchase Bitcoin page where you can buy BCH and BTC securely.
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
The bitcoin ASIC mining rig manufacturer, Ebang International Holdings, was recently listed on Nasdaq last Friday on June 26. Ebang is now the second mining rig manufacturer to have a U.S. initial public offering (IPO) by selling company shares. Since ... read more.
A number of cryptocurrency proponents have been discussing the stablecoin DAI this week, as the DAI allegedly held on the Compound platform is much larger than what is recorded in circulation. At press time, Compound statistics show there’s $523 million ... read more.
A Russian district court has dismissed bitcoin theft as a crime since cryptocurrency is not regulated in Russia and there is no legal status for bitcoin. The accused were found guilty, sentenced to prison, and ordered to return only the ... read more.
The UK is denying Nicolas Maduro access to Venezuela's gold worth about $1 billion, stored at the Bank of England. The UK High Court has ruled that the country does not recognize Maduro as president of Venezuela, blocking him from ... read more.
Arcane Crypto, a Norway-based investment company, said Thursday that it is planning to go public through a reverse takeover by Vertical Ventures, a publicly traded Swedish firm. Vertical Ventures will buy Arcane Crypto for $33 million by issuing over 6.6 ... read more.
According to a number of crypto prediction markets and futures, Trump will still win the election in 123 days, but his chances have lessened a great deal. No matter who wins, however, the large sums of money flowing into these ... read more.
Crypto Use-Cases in Africa on the Rise, According to Luno
Twitter and Square CEO, Jack Dorsey recently said “Africa will define the future (especially the Bitcoin one!)” But was he right? Crypto in Africa on the Rise Sad to be leaving the continent…for now. Africa will define the future (especially ... read more.
The United States tax agency has published a request for information pertaining to privacy-centric cryptocurrencies and technologies that obfuscate crypto transactions. The IRS-CI Cyber Crimes Unit request is also asking for information in relation to “layer two offchain protocol networks, ... read more.
A global bitcoin scam has reportedly leaked personal data of about 250,000 people from more than 20 countries. The majority of the compromised data were of people in the U.K., Australia, South Africa, and the U.S. This bitcoin scam operates ... read more.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has a new president as Germany took over the presidency from China. The intergovernmental organization also highlighted the need for more guidance on cryptocurrencies as many countries have not yet fully implemented its revised ... read more.
More than 2,500 merchants in Austria can accept three types of cryptocurrencies via the payment processor Salamantex. The company explained that the system was tested with a number of select A1 5Gi network shops. Since the Covid-19 outbreak, contactless payments ... read more.
Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome ... read more.
