For traders News and features Analysis Ethereum price prediction: could ETH outperform BTC in 2020?
The native cryptocurrency of the Ethereum network, Ether (ETH) , needs no introduction. Being the second-most-popular digital currency after bitcoin (BTC) , it can boast of a huge fan base and growing interest from modern investors.
However, 2019 was a rather disappointing year for those holding ETH. Even though it peaked at $351 in June, the coin surprised investors with its price going down from $136.55 on January 1 to $132.610 on December 31.
On the positive side, even after going through many hardships like a hard fork, criticism of the community and the emergence of competitive projects, ETH is still strong enough to stay the second-largest cryptocurrency by market cap. Besides, in recent weeks, Ether has posted higher lows when compared to its peer BTC .
With much-awaited Proof-of-Stake transition standing right around the corner, Ethereum price speculation may seem like a quite lucrative activity to savvy crypto traders. Do you also want to profit from the coin’s future price fluctuations but not sure how ETH is set to perform in the months to come? We have you covered.
In this article, we recap the project’s latest news, review the coin’s recent price movements and check out what the Ethereum price prediction for the rest of 2020 and beyond looks like.
What has been recently happening to Ethereum?
While BTC has enjoyed a lot of attention over the past few months, investors’ focus is slowly shifting toward other cryptocurrencies. There is a reason for that: the long-pending Bitcoin halving event is now behind us, and the markets are now reverting to their normal day-to-day fluctuations.
Launched in 2015, Ethereum is the largest and most well-established open-ended decentralised software platform. It allows the deployment of smart contracts and dApps to be built and run with no fraud, downtime, control or interference from a third party.
Throughout its history, both the platform and its cryptocurrency have been generating a lot of interest among the cryptizens, allowing ETH market capitalisation to reach a whopping $23.2bn with 111,008,303 ETH as its current circulating supply. At the time of writing, May 21, ETH was changing hands at $209.5 with its daily trading volume exceeding $12.9bn. But will Ethereum rise in value going forward?
While the list of its achievements is rather extensive, newer projects such as Cardano (ADA) , EOS , Stellar (XLM) , Tron (TRX) and NEO are actively seeking to replace Ethereum as the smart-contract platform leader or share the market by avoiding the technical issues it has faced in the past.
To stay afloat and thrive in the emerging competition, the project’s upgrade known as Ethereum 2.0 was announced. Long being subject to delay, Ethereum’s transition from the Proof of Work (PoW) to Proof of Stake (PoS) Consensus mechanism is finally about to happen, assumingly on June 30, as stated by the core developers. However, some experts, including Ryan Selkis, the CEO of crypto analytics firm Messari, believe the Ethereum 2.0 PoS transition might get delayed until 2021.
Named as Phase Zero, the shift toward Ethereum 2.0 is one of the most awaited events by the crypto enthusiasts as it is supposed to transform the Ethereum network by leaps and bounds.
As many people feel rather optimistic about the upcoming changes in the project, there have recently been reports of Ethereum on-chain metric surging substantially, including transactions per day, average transaction values and daily active addresses. For example, the number of on-chain transactions has increased to around 850,000 per day over the past few months, with an average block time of 13.33 seconds, which is one of the fastest in ETH history.
Moreover, Ethereum remains one of the world’s leaders in terms of adoption. In 2019, according to a report by Dapp.com, it recorded over 1.4 million active dApp users, a substantially higher number when compared to the 800,000 recorded in 2018.
In regards to Ether, in the project’s own words, “people all over the world use ETH to make payments, as a store of value, or as collateral.”
In addition, ErisX, a crypto trading platform, has recently launched ETH futures trading in the US, becoming the second cryptocurrency derivatives product on offer in the country. The announcement came a few days after the platform obtained a digital currency licence from financial regulators in New York.
Talking to Cointelegraph, a senior research analyst at Fundstrat Global Advisors, David Grider, commented on the event: “My view is that futures add greater liquidity to the market, which de-risks the asset and has a positive impact on valuations. Overall, it’s good that Ethereum has opened up to the US, and I suspect demand for ETH trading will grow slowly over time as it did for BTC.”
ETH started 2020 trading at $130 per coin but continued to rally higher as the general crypto market gained an upside momentum. In the middle of February, it peaked at $279 per coin. Such a dramatic boost in value was due to the rising interest in the cryptocurrency space and Enjin launching its game development platform on the Ethereum network.
After Vitalik Buterin assured the community that the launch of Phase Zero of Ethereum 2.0 is being worked on, ETH managed to stay above the $250 mark till February 25. However, the price then started to drop due to the growing uncertainty over the implications of the Covid-19 virus on the global economy. Besides, the news that CryptoKitties is planning to leave the Ethereum network for its own blockchain has further negatively affected the ETH’s value. On March 13, the coin traded as low as $95.87.
The cryptocurrency then started to soar, reaching $227 on April 30. However, the uptrend was short lived, and May 10 saw Ethereum price drop below the $200 mark, falling from $211 to $184 in one day. At the time of writing, May 21, the coin traded at $209.5.
Ethereum price prediction: could ETH end 2020 as the best-performing crypto?
Regardless of the growing competition, Ethereum remains a very special technology that has the ability to completely change the world as more and more is built on top of the smart contract focused protocol.
By far, the biggest potential for Ethereum now lies in the upcoming Ethereum 2.0 update and the massive growth of decentralised finance, or simply DeFi.
Last month, the value of the tokens underpinning the DeFi protocols has surpassed $1bn. Over the past year, the number of DeFi projects providing lending services has increased dramatically, with DeFi transactions coming to represent up to one-third of the Ethereum block space. This has significantly boosted the demand for Ether in recent months and will likely support the price of the coin going forward.
With the crypto market moving at a rapid pace, it may be rather difficult to predict its future movements. To bring some clarity on the matter, we have compiled below a list of the Ethereum projections for 2020 and beyond from various sources.
