Currently, the market capitalisation of Bitcoin is around $163 billion, with a 24-hour volume of over $21 billion. The current circulating supply is 17,763,562 BTC.
Ethereum has also been moving fast and furious, making constant progress. In the past six months, it is performing its best now, reaching the $279 mark on 16 June. Currently, ETH price remains in a positive zone and trades above the $270 resistance against the US dollar.
Price forecasts for BTC and ETH: what the future holds
The most recent price fluctuations in both Ethereum and Bitcoin value have drawn many into price forecasting. It is believed that 2020 will prove to be the most remarkable year for Ethereum and other cryptocurrencies.
Bitcoin has gone through lots of ups and downs. However, big names in the crypto industry are sure that Bitcoin has finally recovered after the eighteen-month-long cryptowinter, foreseeing its success and prosperity.
Wences Casares, the CEO of Xapo and Bitcoin evangelist, has recently said that BTC value might surge by at least 250 times in the foreseen future. Tim Draper, another famous Bitcoin enthusiast and crypto billionaire, stated that in only years, Bitcoin will be everywhere and fiat currencies will become archaic; he predicted the Bitcoin price to hit $250,000 within four years.
Elon Musk, the founder of SpaceX and Tesla , called Bitcoin "brilliant" in public and said BTC is better than old-school paper money as it can transfer value. Fran Strajnar, the founder and CEO at Techemy Ltd, also has very high hopes for BTC, believing it might reach $200,000 by January 2020. One of China’s biggest OTC traders and Bitcoin billionaire, Zhao Dong, has recently predicted that BTC might go as high as $50,000 by 2021, saying that now is the best time to invest in this cryptocoin.
In addition, Bitcoin implementation is growing at a rapid pace. NASDAQ, the second largest stock exchange in the world, has announced its plans to launch Bitcoin futures in the first half of 2019. Bakkt, a cryptocurrency payment system and digital assets trading platform, is going to be introduced to the masses later this year.  An asset management giant Fidelity is also looking to join the Bitcoin trading foray in 2019. Even Bitfury Group, together with a South Korean R&D firm, is launching a network of Bitcoin mining centres in Paraguay.
According to statistics , Ethereum’s dApps have more than 110,000 daily active users, who perform 1.79 million transactions on a daily basis. Joseph Raczynski, the founder of Joe Technologist.com and a blockchain enthusiast, predicts that the value of Ethereum might go up to $1,000 by the end of 2019. Ian McLeod, a technology expert at Thomas Crown Art, believes that ETH can hit $500 in 2019, as it might experience a global and monumental breakout.
According to the TradingBeasts.com website, the price of Ether might get as high as $908 by the end of this year, with the average price revolving around $650. Brian Schuster, the founder of Ark Capital LLC, made another bullish and optimistic guess, stating that ETH might reach $100,000 in the next 5 years and will eventually replace gold with crypto. Ethereum's co-founder, Steven Nerayoff, in an interview with CNBC said that Ethereum price might get tripled, estimating its value to reach $3,000 by the end of 2019.
Truth be told, nobody has a crystal ball to predict the future. However, in the long term, both Ethereum and Bitcoin’s advocates may just be right – the virtual sky may be the only limit for the cryptocurrencies. Today, it does seem increasingly apparent that the markets are in a steady uptrend that will likely continue in the foreseeable future.
Choosing whether to invest in Ethereum or Bitcoin can be rather difficult, as both cryptocurrencies offer many advantages. In the last two years, the value of these has skyrocketed, giving potential investors many positive promises. As with any investment, it’s always best to arm yourself with as much knowledge as possible before throwing your hard-earned cash at it. However, the one thing about BTC and ETH is certain – these have a strong fundamental basis, a large fan base with many followers and a reputation of the most advanced blockchains available today. So, if you’re looking for relatively stable crypto to invest in, you should definitely keep your eye on BTC and ETH .
*Mention that this article should not be construed as financial or investment advice.
