Microsoft, EY, and ConsenSys have managed to launch a new Ethereum protocol, Baseline.
The protocol is intended for companies that are interested in using Ethereum blockchain, but were hesitant due to its total transparency.
Now, they have Baseline, which will allow them to keep their privacy while serving for procurement and other purposes.
A new protocol called Baseline was just launched by Microsoft , ConsenSys , and EY. The protocol was designed for all businesses and companies that are interested in using Ethereum’s blockchain in private, secure ways. This is a major game-changer for firms interested in ETH, that were concerned about its blockchain being too public.
Baseline, which was originally announced on March 4th, had its source code published on GitHub only days ago, which made it available for all developers
and businesses that wanted to inspect it and obtain it.
create a private system on Ethereum’s blockchain. Due to its transparency, all
Ethereum transactions are completely public and available for everyone to see,
own private blockchains, creating enterprise versions of ETH blockchain. Now,
with Baseline seeing an official launch, there will be no need for businesses
to go through this extra effort. They can simply use Ethereum and not
private by using zero-knowledge proofs, distributed identity systems, and
protocol may have been developed for product procurement purposes, although it
can also be used for other business activities. This can be seen in its ability
data can then be handled on Ethereum via smart contracts.
Another aspect of the protocol is a demo,
The protocol holds quite a large potential,
Quorum reliance, ConsenSys is one of the largest Ethereum companies, and EY
already created its own blockchain a few years ago. Now, the protocol is attracting
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
