Tesla and SpaceX CEO Elon Musk has denied the rumors of a possible collaboration or project on the Ethereum blockchain.
Musk confirmed that he is not an ETH investor, but does not speak out against the platform.
Tesla and SpaceX CEO Elon Musk has been building ties with the crypto community since he admitted to owning 0.25 Bitcoin (BTC) in February 2019. At that time, the entrepreneur called the cryptocurrency a very brilliant invention and a better transmitter of value than conventional money. Meanwhile, another crypto-space personality started a rumor linking Musk to an alleged project on the Ethereum blockchain .
The actor William Shatner, famous for playing Captain James Kirk in the legendary Star Trek series, published a tweet announcing a cooperation to establish an authentication system. In the May 10, 2019, release, the actor implied that Elon Musk and Ethereum co-creator Vitalik Buterin failed to materialize a project involving him, Shatner said :
Kryptonians! My friends Vitalik Buterin and Elon Musk were trying to decide what to build on Ethereum. I have been waiting and waiting, I finally decided to do something myself. Join me!
A series of tweets by Musk, published a month after the rumor were strengthening the theory of a partnership. At the end of April of that year, Musk just tweeted: “Ethereum”. He then received numerous responses from the crypto community. TRON CEO Justin Sun responded: TRON and invited Musk to test his platform. Otherwise, Morgan Creek Digital co-founder Anthony Pompliano invited him to his podcast to discuss his enthusiasm for Bitcoin, Ethereum and cryptocurrencies .
However, the definitive answer to the rumors has come after some time. A year after Shatner started the rumors, Tesla’s CEO has decided to respond to his publication. Musk has denied any connection to Ethereum and made it clear that he’s not developing anything on the platform yesterday:
I’m not building anything on ethereum. Not for or against it, just don’t use it or own any (ETH).
Elon Musk and Kanye West bullish on Bitcoin?
Tesla’s CEO also caused a stir after the famous rapper Kanye West tweeted a picture of him and Elon Musk wearing black and orange the day before yesterday. The crypto community took this as further confirmation of Musk’s bullish sentiment on Bitcoin. The color orange and black are associated with Bitcoin.
