Commodities Futures Trading Commission exec believes Ethereum futures are likely to be launched in the future.
While the futures would theoretically increase institutional interest in the Ethereum market, it could also cause a price collapse.
Heath Tarbert, the chairman of the Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), said that Ethereum futures are likely in the future. He said:
We are doing a lot in the digital asset space. We are seeing exchanges started to list; certainly, we have seen Bitcoin futures, both cash-settled as well as physically-delivered. My guess is we are going to see Ether futures as well. And as things start to migrate into the commodity space, we will see even more.
Adam White, the president of Bakkt, also said that the CFTC would theoretically approve Ethereum futures. However, specific details regarding when or where Ethereum futures will be launched have not been disclosed. Presumably, the crypto community will perceive the launch of Ethereum futures to be good news . For instance, the futures would theoretically increase institutional interest in the Ethereum market and would make the market more mature and reputable.
On the other hand, Ethereum Futures could also be bad news for the Ethereum market. Back in 2017, Bitcoin went through a significant price collapse after the launch of Bitcoin futures . Many in the community are worried that the launch of Ethereum futures could crash the Ethereum market via substantial short-selling pressure.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
