The Ethereum ( ETH ) blockchain has become home to a number of stablecoins. On January 29, Messari researcher Ryan Watkins explained that the stablecoin value transfer issued on the ETH chain recently flipped the number of native ether transactions. Essentially, Ethereum’s value transfer is now largely made up of stablecoins like tether, pax, and dai.
Also read: Cashfusion Far More Practical Than Other Coinjoin Protocols, Says Data Analyst
On Wednesday, Messari analyst Ryan Watkins reported on the Ethereum blockchain and how the ETH economy is now dominated by stablecoins. The ETH chain has a great number of stablecoins such as TUSD, USDT , DAI, PAX, and GUSD. All five of these stablecoins leverage the ETH chain for stable value transfers. “Stablecoin transfer value has now flipped ETH on Ethereum,” Watkins tweeted . While sharing another chart , Watkins indicated that most of the story is consumed by tether ( USDT ) transitioning to Ethereum last year. Watkins believes the flippening took place in mid-2019 and emphasized that since then “Ethereum’s economy is now dominated by stable value transfer.”
During the last week of August 2019, news.Bitcoin.com reported on the significant migration of tether from the Omni Layer network to Ethereum. At the time, ERC20 tether transactions flipped their Omni equivalent. The stablecoin tether is a $4.6 billion dollar network and all the coins are issued and maintained on chains like BTC (Omni), ETH (ERC20), EOS , and Tron. After the significant migration into the ERC20 standard, a majority of the USDT in circulation stems from the ETH chain. Additionally, researchers have noted that 70% of the circulating tether supply is controlled by roughly 104 addresses. Following Watkins’ tweet about stablecoins flipping the chain’s native currency ether, Binance founder Changpeng Zhao (CZ) commented on the topic.
“Many of us (early adopters) don’t like stablecoins,” CZ tweeted . “But [the] fact is, that’s what’s needed to help us cross the chasm, as most new crypto people will still think in fiat base for a while to come. I wish that’s not the case, but we live on earth, not utopia.”
One person disagreed with CZ and said that certain stablecoins will likely remove revenue from trading platforms. “Very hypocritical — I totally agree with you about centralized stablecoins like Paxos – Binance USD or USDC,” the individual wrote . “[But] how about crypto — collateralized ones like DAI? The truth is that [decentralized finance] apps, like Uniswap, [and] Makerdao take away a lot of revenue from exchanges like Binance,” he added. However, the Binance founder said he wasn’t worried about that situation and stated :
The more choices for users, and the more innovation for the industry, the better for all of us. Don’t worry about Binance, we will manage — We are adaptable.
Another crypto proponent agreed with CZ’s assessment and said: “That’s usually how new tech and ideas are adopted. The present generation needs one foot on the old and one on the new at the same time to feel safe and be familiarized in their new surroundings.” Out of the five stablecoins maintained on the ETH chain, tether USDT is by far the most dominant. This is followed by Circle’s USDC, Makerdao’s DAI, Pax Global’s PAX, True USD (TUSD), and Gemini’s GUSD.
Today, @RyanWatkins_ reported that transfer value of stablecoins on ethereum has surpassed that of $ETH . Token transfers as a whole have been happening with higher frequency on ethereum than non-token transfers. These are both signs $ETH is proving more utility than currency. pic.twitter.com/cAt4hfqBLU
— Christine Kim (@christine_dkim) January 29, 2020
At the time of publication, 2.29 billion USDT is represented by ERC20 tokens and there are 439 million USDC tokens housed on the ETH chain as well. In addition to all the stablecoin value held on Ethereum, a great number of exchange tokens leverage the chain . For example, exchange tokens like BNB , LEO, HT, CRO, OKB, and KCS just scratch the surface when it comes to exchange-created coins hosted on the ETH chain. Stablecoins and exchange tokens are the most used ERC20s today by a long shot, and they have surpassed most of the initial coin offering (ICO) ERC20s issued in 2017-2018. Observers like Watkins and others have asked whether “it is good for ETH or does it damage ETH ’s monetary premium?” Watkins further discusses this topic in his latest research analysis hosted on the Messari website.
What do you think about stablecoins flipping ether on the Ethereum chain? What do you think about the number of stablecoins and exchange tokens that leverage the ERC20 standard? Let us know what you think about this topic in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, stablecoins or companies. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Image credits: Shutterstock, Twitter, Messari analyst Ryan Watkins , Fair Use, and Pixabay.
Did you know you can buy and sell BCH privately using our noncustodial, peer-to-peer Local Bitcoin Cash trading platform? The local.Bitcoin.com marketplace has thousands of participants from all around the world trading BCH right now. And if you need a bitcoin wallet to securely store your coins, you can download one from us here .
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
The bitcoin ASIC mining rig manufacturer, Ebang International Holdings, was recently listed on Nasdaq last Friday on June 26. Ebang is now the second mining rig manufacturer to have a U.S. initial public offering (IPO) by selling company shares. Since ... read more.
A number of cryptocurrency proponents have been discussing the stablecoin DAI this week, as the DAI allegedly held on the Compound platform is much larger than what is recorded in circulation. At press time, Compound statistics show there’s $523 million ... read more.
A Russian district court has dismissed bitcoin theft as a crime since cryptocurrency is not regulated in Russia and there is no legal status for bitcoin. The accused were found guilty, sentenced to prison, and ordered to return only the ... read more.
The UK is denying Nicolas Maduro access to Venezuela's gold worth about $1 billion, stored at the Bank of England. The UK High Court has ruled that the country does not recognize Maduro as president of Venezuela, blocking him from ... read more.
Arcane Crypto, a Norway-based investment company, said Thursday that it is planning to go public through a reverse takeover by Vertical Ventures, a publicly traded Swedish firm. Vertical Ventures will buy Arcane Crypto for $33 million by issuing over 6.6 ... read more.
According to a number of crypto prediction markets and futures, Trump will still win the election in 123 days, but his chances have lessened a great deal. No matter who wins, however, the large sums of money flowing into these ... read more.
Crypto Use-Cases in Africa on the Rise, According to Luno
Twitter and Square CEO, Jack Dorsey recently said “Africa will define the future (especially the Bitcoin one!)” But was he right? Crypto in Africa on the Rise Sad to be leaving the continent…for now. Africa will define the future (especially ... read more.
The United States tax agency has published a request for information pertaining to privacy-centric cryptocurrencies and technologies that obfuscate crypto transactions. The IRS-CI Cyber Crimes Unit request is also asking for information in relation to “layer two offchain protocol networks, ... read more.
A global bitcoin scam has reportedly leaked personal data of about 250,000 people from more than 20 countries. The majority of the compromised data were of people in the U.K., Australia, South Africa, and the U.S. This bitcoin scam operates ... read more.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has a new president as Germany took over the presidency from China. The intergovernmental organization also highlighted the need for more guidance on cryptocurrencies as many countries have not yet fully implemented its revised ... read more.
More than 2,500 merchants in Austria can accept three types of cryptocurrencies via the payment processor Salamantex. The company explained that the system was tested with a number of select A1 5Gi network shops. Since the Covid-19 outbreak, contactless payments ... read more.
Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome ... read more.
