Ethereum Price Predictions Signals Strong Buy.  Will it Break $200?
Ethereum (ETH) and many cryptocurrencies are making climbing today, with the EU rallying pushing into the $170 region while Bitcoin pushes into $9,000. Ethereum price quotes started the week with growth along with the rest of the cryptocurrency market, supported by investors’ concerns regarding the spread of the deadly coronavirus in China. The epidemic may decrease Chinese housekeeper by 1% during the first half of this year. Thus, cryptocurrencies act as shelter assets and tend to grow along with metals. However, the current market strengthening may be temporary since the Chinese virus poses a potential threat to the cryptocurrency sector itself. Despite the prohibitions of the authorities, China continues to be a leader in the number of private investors in cryptocurrencies. The continued spread of the disease may reduce investment in the sector, and investor activity in the market.
As for the Ethereum network, it continues to prepare for the transition to version 2.0. On Monday, the creator of ETH, Vitalik Buterin, talked with community members and dismissed all allegations of the weakness of the second world cryptocurrency, saying that for him, the coin looks stronger than ever before.
Recover Your Investment Losses. Please Contact Haselkorn & Thibaut at 1 888-628-5590 or visit InvestmentFraudLawyers.com for a free consultation on recovering your investment loses.
There are very high expectations for the crypto market for 2020, especially for the flagship crypto Bitcoin (BTC), which has the bulls to dominate since January. Many traders and analysts are predicting Ethereum to go in the $200s very soon, and the extreme bulls say it be at $800 or more by year-end.
READ MORE Investing in Stocks for Beginners: What is A Stock?
Galaxy, an analyst, and trader is exceptionally bullish on Bitcoin and predicting it could break the trendline, creating record highs. He also says that Ethereum’s and Tether ‘s weekly charts show they are on the verge of breaking the 2018 downtrend and could reach new highs.
“ETH is weeks away from breaking out its two-year downtrend. Possible Bull signal incoming next week. February is take-off month,” Galaxy’s tweet reads.
