Bitcoin has had a bright start to the year. It ended 31 December trading at $7,177, having doubled over the course of 2019. Its momentum has spilled over into 2020, and it trades at $8,652 at time of writing, a rise of just over 20% year to date.
Nobody can agree why. Some blame rising tensions between the US and Iran, as many investors see the crypto-currency as a safe haven. Confidence may also be growing as new Bitcoin funds and futures trading platforms launch. The rewards for mining Bitcoin will halve in May, and the reduced incentive could tighten supply.
As ever, nobody knows for sure. What I do know is that if I had £20k to invest today, I wouldn’t put a penny of it into Bitcoin. The virtual currency is simply too uncertain. It is volatile and moves randomly. It could go anywhere from here. The same goes for other altcoins such as Ethereum, Ripple, and Litecoin.
To me, a better way to invest the money would be to return to the real world, and invest in stocks and shares instead. As Warren Buffett, the most famous and successful investor of all time, once said: “Never invest in a business you cannot understand.”
I don’t really understand Bitcoin. I don’t see the point, what practical uses it has, or what factors are likely to determine its future movements. For me, that makes investing in Bitcoin pure speculation.
I prefer to buy stocks, because they are hooked into the real-world performance of the global economy. By investing in the stocks of companies, you are buying businesses that actually make and sell real products, to real people.
Those products can be a vast range of things – oil, pharmaceuticals, mobile phone contracts, clothes, cars, houses, you name it. They are the lifeblood of the global economy, and underpin our daily lives, and the lives we aspire to lead.
I would invest inside a Stocks and Shares ISA, because then you can take all of your capital growth and dividend income free of tax, for life.
The rewards can be huge. I have just written about one stock that turned £10k into £127,500 in just five years. If you prefer to spread your risk by investing in collective funds, you can also enjoy outsize returns. For example, this tech investment trust is up 550% in 10 years.
So I’d forget Bitcoin. Instead, take time to research shares with high quality, underlying real-world businesses, and develop a target list of companies to consider buying. Next time the stock market dips, look at your watch list, and buy one of them.
I would use as much of this year’s £20k ISA allowance as I could before it expires on 5 April, then start on next year’s. Over time, you have a far better chance of building a £1m portfolio than by gambling on Bitcoin. Because that’s what it is, a gamble.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Harvey Jones holds one Bitcoin but has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
