In 2018, taxpayers who owned the token VEN, had to go through a token swap . The predetermined conversion rate was 1:100 . So, after the swap, each single unit of VEN was replaced with 100 units of VET.
Let’s assume Eduardo has 100 VEN. He sends his VEN balance in for a swap. VEN is discarded, and he receives 10,000 (100 x 100) VET in return. If Eduardo fails to properly perform the swap, he will lose access to the legacy token, whose blockchain may have stopped operating.
Although there is no direct tax code governing token swaps, it is reasonable to think that guidance related to stock splits apply to token swaps. According to the IRS , a stock split occurs when a company creates additional shares, thus reducing the price per share.
If you own stock that has split and now own additional shares, you must adjust your basis per share or per the lots of the stock you own. If the old shares of stock and the new shares are uniform and identical, then:
Thus, stock splits are not taxable events. However, they do affect cost basis for a shareholder. Applying this logic to token swaps, new coins resulting from token swaps do not create a taxable event. However, it is crucial that you allocate the basis among the new coins and start tracking them properly. Figuring out the cost basis and distributing them among the new coins can be tricky after you go through a coin swap.
Continuing with the example above, let’s assume the cost basis of Eduardo’s 100 VEN is $5,000. This means that the cost basis per unit of VEN is $50 ($5,000 / 100). After the swap, the total basis of Eduardo’s 10,000 VET remains the same. However, the cost basis per unit of VET goes down to $0.50 ($5,000/ 10,000).
In summary, token swaps do not lead to a taxable event. However, keeping a good record of the basis of new coins is crucial in calculating capital gains/losses when you dispose of them in the future.
There are several token swaps that have occurred in the cryptocurrency space. Here is a non-exhaustive list of some examples:
