Crypto Briefs is your daily, bite-sized digest of cryptocurrency and blockchain-related news – investigating the stories flying under the radar of today’s crypto news.
Major crypto hardware wallet manufacturer Ledger launched a crypto buying option on their Ledger Live application. This feature, operated by Coinify, allows to buy bitcoin (BTC) , ethereum (ETH) , bitcoin cash (BCH) , and dash (DASH) , using a credit card or a bank transfer. Stellar (XLM) and tether (USDT) "will be soon" available too. There is a 4.5% fee for credit card users and 1.7% for bank transfers.
Cashback app EthModo is launching cashback rewards and rewarded advertising, while allowing users to pick the tokens and rewards they earn, as well as control the settings and information that's shared. Per the website, those interested can now join the waitlist for early access and prizes. The app helps users earn ETH when you shop online; ETH can be claimed or turned into other rewards, such as other tokens or loyalty points from major brands. EthModo is partnered with more than 50,000 merchants, they add.
Mike Novogratz’s Galaxy Digital Holdings is partnering with Intercontinental Exchange's crypto trading platform Bakkt to offer “white-glove” service for large asset managers looking to buy and store BTC, reports Bloomberg. According to the article, quoting John Conneely, head of custody business development at Bakkt, this partnership is the result of a demand seen from institutions "with a capital 'I'." Tim Plakas, head of sales at Galaxy's over-the-counter trading desk Galaxy Digital Trading, is quoted as saying that the target is multi-billion-dollar asset managers from traditional finance.
A group of developers decided to launch a fork of the Brave Browser and create its alternative version - Braver Browser - for users to switch to if they so choose. Per their tweet, the first test build of the new browser is already completed. Braver Browser removed all affiliate links, adware, rewards, as well as Brave's native Basic Attention Token (BAT) . On June 9, the Brave team apologized for the affiliate codes error that resulted in a scandal in the community.
Crypto exchanges in Japan are increasingly looking to take their shareholder meetings online – and will turn to blockchain-based voting systems. Leading exchange bitFlyer has announced that it will hold a virtual shareholders’ meeting with blockchain-powered voting using a solution named bVote, developed by its own bitFlyer Blockchain subsidiary. The company’s CEO Yuzo Kano took to Twitter to claim that the meeting would be a “world’s first” when it was held “later this month,” and promised a commercial rollout “in about three months.” As previously reported , rival trading platform Coincheck has also expressed a willingness to use blockchain voting at virtual meetings this month.
BTSE exchange has launched bitcoin-priced gold futures in response to institutional interest in the performance of gold versus bitcoin, as the first exchange to do so, they say. According to the emailed press release, this tool enables traders to directly compare and speculate on the performance of BTC versus gold and predict their future developments. Instead of viewing the gold price in USD, users can see and predict the price per troy ounce of London fine gold in BTC.
London-based ETC Group will list a centrally cleared bitcoin exchange-traded product (BTCE) on Deutsche Börse’s Xetra electronic trading market later this month. Per the press release, the exchange-traded cryptocurrency (ETC) tracks the price of BTC and is 100% physically backed. It will be distributed and marketed using HANetf platform. The German financial regulator BaFin approved BTCE in March.
Bitfury is set to launch Japan’s first Bitcoin mining fund offering in July this year, reports Nikkei. The Amsterdam-based company said that it has joined forces with Nippon Angel Investment Company, a licensed Japanese fund manager that is policed by the regulatory Financial Services Agency. The parties say they are set to launch what Bitfury called, in a blog post , a “digital currency infrastructure fund,” making reference to the company’s international “data centers.”
Crypto users can expect to hear money printers going BRRR in Latin America after Argentina began starting to create new money to pay off its international loans and fund coronavirus pandemic-mitigating efforts. Per Criptonoticias, inflation in the nation is expected to soar, with the country’s central bank conceding that the inflation rate could climb above 50% as a result of the measures – the largest issuance of the Argentinan peso for three decades.
