OmiseGO, a small digital coin up, 150% in less than 30 days, as Bitcoin fails to break $10,000
OmiseGO traded at $0.5 on April 1st and is presently trading at %1.26, with a market capitalization of about $276 million.
OmiseGO, an ethereum token that energizes smart contract platforms and trades under a sticker known as OMG, surged after popular American based cryptocurrency exchange, Coinbase, revealed that it would list the token on its exchange.
OmiseGO, which is not even in the top 30 most valuable cryptos in the world, has gained over 150% since April 1, according to data obtained from Coinmarketcap.
What you need to know: OMG coin was designed as a white-label eWallet. It was designed on the Ethereum blockchain by a Thailand based financial services company called Omise. Its full name is OmiseGo.
OmiseGo helps in easing the transfer of coins from one blockchain to another without using a crypto exchange.
Meanwhile, the broader bitcoin market is closely watching for Bitcoin to break the $10,000 price level, after Bitcoin went through a supply squeeze a few weeks ago. Yet, Bitcoin’s price has remained around the $9200+ mark in recent days.
However, Teju Adeyinka a product manager at Nigeria’s fast-growing crypto exchange, Buycoins, explained to Nairametrics why cryptos such as Bitcoin would continue to be a leading force in future. She said:
“Bitcoin is the next important thing because it ushers in a new level of financial inclusion for everyone. It is a financial system that is truly democratized and in the interest of the people. It enables people to have total control over their money and decide what it does or where it goes.
READ MORE: Blue-chip stocks take Nigerian bourse to 5 days winning streak, Investors cash in N232 billion
“It also opens up borderless trading and enables people who have been previously shut out economically to partake in financial opportunities beyond their geographical boundaries.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
