Whether Tuesday's rally kicks off a strong recovery or    fades to more sell-offs, investors should "drip-feed new money    into the market" while assets are relatively cheap, Nigel    Green, CEO of financial advisory deVere Group, said.
Other firms admitted that near-term growth will likely    suffer before noting that investors who held steady through the    Great Recession enjoyed major gains through the subsequent    recovery.
Here's what five financial sector experts said about    markets' new volatility and how to invest amid the heightened    risk environment.
Visit the    Business Insider homepage for more stories.
Investors hoping for a break from coronavirus-fueled volatility  got the opposite and then some this week.
The outbreak continued to spread rapidly around the world over  the weekend, and the rising death count in the US gave investors  plenty to worry about before Monday's open. Stocks already ended  two weeks of high volume, trading down roughly 12% on Friday as  concerns about the virus' economic fallout compounded.
Market woes weren't confined to the coronavirus' tightening grip  on the global economy. Saturday saw the triggering of an unprecedented oil-price conflict between Russia and Saudi  Arabia . The world's two biggest oil exporters entered a  back-and-forth war for market share, both by boosting production  and lowering prices. The news dragged oil on Monday into its  biggest one-day tumble since 1991.
When equity investors were finally able to react to the slew of  weekend headlines, chaos ensued. The S&P 500 tanked 7% within  minutes of the market open, triggering a 15-minute trading halt  for the first time since December 2008. Stock prices remained  deep in the red through the session before closing nearly 8%  lower. The S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average posted their biggest single-day losses since the financial crisis .
Stocks rallied on Tuesday to pare some losses, but economists are  already worried the uptick serves as a so-called "dead cat  bounce," when equities experience a brief recovery before  continuing a downward trend.
Here's what five financial sector experts had to say about the  Monday sell-off and Tuesday leap.
The stock market's downtrend following its February 19 peak  placed it dangerously close to bearish territory by Monday's  close, but investors who lived through the 2008 crash know such  plunges are part of the game, Greg McBride, chief financial  analyst at Bankrate.com, said Tuesday.
"The market's best days often come in close concert with the  market's worst days and you have to be in it to win it," he  wrote. "Disciplined investors that hold tight and have the  fortitude to buy more when the stock market falls are rewarded in  the long run."
Staying invested through harrowing times is a marathon and not a  sprint, McBride added.
Market slumps are just as normal as the healthy run-ups  experienced over the 11-year bull market, Chris Zaccarelli, chief  investment officer at Independent Advisor Alliance, said Monday.
"For those of us who've worked in the market for a long time,  you've been through days like this before and you know this won't  be the last time, but that's little comfort as you go through  them," Zaccarelli wrote.
The CIO likened Monday's decline to a plane flight entering  turbulent skies. Passengers "both know everything will eventually  be fine" but also that the near-term will be less enjoyable, he  said. Whether one deems it turbulence or volatility, avoiding  selling during downturns is necessary "to enjoy the benefits of  longer-term higher returns," Zaccarelli added.
Though the recent market slip wiped out swaths of wealth from  portfolios, the smartest investors are those who "drip-feed new  money into the market" and review their portfolios where  necessary, according to Nigel Green, CEO and founder of financial  advisory deVere Group.
World economies will bounce back when stimulus packages and  practical anti-contagion measures take effect, he added. The  Federal Reserve already slashed its benchmark interest rate by 50  basis points on March 3 to spur stronger purchase activity amid  the growing outbreak. Future measures in the US and abroad will  fuel a strong recovery once COVID-19 can either be contained or  cured, Green said.
Economists have mulled the coronavirus' hit to global demand and  supply for weeks as factory closures and quarantine activity  dragged on economic growth. The latest threat posed by the  oil-price war means the global economy will be "hit by three  shocks this quarter," according to JPMorgan.
Some may view the positive oil-supply shock as a cushion to gas  costs for consumers and ailing travel companies, the bank's  economists wrote. Yet any boost to oil purchasing power will be  swiftly negated by the virus' drag on out-of-home activity, they  said.
"Given the pullback in consumer demand in travel and  entertainment, the actual boost to household purchasing power  from falling oil prices could be less than usual," the team of  economists led by Bruce Kasman wrote Monday. "The risk that this  event magnifies into a global recession has risen materially."
The market panic that comes with a precipitous drop could spiral  out of control and drive further losses, but investors shouldn't  be without hope, Macquarie Research said Monday.
The firm cited the Greek myth of Cassandra, who was granted the  ability to see the future but cursed with an inability to  convince others of her foresight. The coronavirus outbreak "gave  a new lease of life to modern-day Cassandras" who prophesied a  market downturn, and more have joined their doomsaying,  Macquarie's analysts wrote.
Even though the outbreak can become the biggest economic disaster  since the financial crisis, "the time seems near" when investors  should buy up value stocks while they're cheap, the firm said.
"Prophesies of doom are having their day in the sun, but economic  reset is not inevitable," the team led by Viktor Shvets wrote.  "Global coordination is needed."
Now read more markets coverage from Markets Insider  and Business Insider:
