VeChain Foundation CEO Sunny Lu believes that the project’s optimization for enterprise-based applications stands it in good stead when compared to Ethereum and other blockchain platforms targeting developers of decentralized apps.
Sunny Lu revealed his thoughts in a recent interview on Digital Asset Investor. The VeChain CEO was responding to a question regarding whether or not VeChain will potentially overtake Ethereum. Rather than answer directly, he highlighted what sets VeChain aside from what is currently the leading dApp platform in terms of developer growth.
Sunny Lu recalled a session at a blockchain international convention in Shanghai where Antonio Senatore, Global Blockchain CTO for big-four auditor, Deloitte explained why the firm made the decision to migrate their own & their clients business apps from Ethereum to VeChain.
According to Sunny Lu, “there were many reasons for [Antonio] Deloitte to make that kind of decision, but in summary, VeChain is more enterprise-friendly. That is our mission and vision when we tried to build VeChain. We’re aiming to make it friendly to enterprise-use cases and adoption.”
Sunny Lu’s VeChain also counts big-four auditor, PwC, as one of its shareholders, little wonder the CEO expressed a belief that for any new technology to reach mainstream adoption and bring benefits to everyone, it has to be done by a professional team that primarily includes enterprises.
Additionally, Sunny Lu identified the goal of enterprises with adopting technology, that is, “transforming the technology value to the business.” He then concluded that VeChain is more cost-effective, offers less-lee time, and provides for satisfaction to any kind of enterprise users.
Meanwhile, it is worth noting that while VeChain has become popular as the “enterprise blockchain,” the project could soon branch out to decentralized finance (DeFi) , the latest booming sector of the crypto market.
In a January interview, Sunny Lu revealed that the network’s upcoming version would be home to “financial applications that [people] can use in collateral, assets, for cross-chain protocols,” while the VET token will be used in a different way.
