US stocks have fallen nearly 19% from the all-time high    on February 19 through Monday's close amid the coronavirus    outbreak and an escalating oil price war.
The market rout represents a "golden buying    opportunity" for key tech stocks poised to be long-term    winners, according to Daniel Ives of Wedbush.
Here are the top 10 tech stocks Ives recommends owning    in the coronavirus-driven stock sell-off.
As markets fall amid coronavirus outbreak panic and an unexpected  oil-price war, it could be a good time to buy a list of key  technology stocks, according to Wedbush.
The coronavirus outbreak, while tragic for those impacted,  represents "golden buying opportunities to own the tech themes  and stocks that we believe will be long term winners," Wedbush  analyst Daniel Ives wrote in a note March 1.
Stocks rebounded slightly on Tuesday after President Trump said he's  discussing stimulus including a potential US payroll-tax cut  designed to boost US economic activity. Markets have shed nearly  19% from the all-time high on February 19 through Monday's close,  amid the coronavirus outbreak and an unexpected oil-price war  between OPEC and its allies.
But the broader picture aside, Ives' longstanding view is that we  are in the midst of an unprecedented tech bull market, driven by  themes such as cloud computing, the "transformational" 5G super  cycle, electric vehicle demand, streaming cord cutting, and cyber  security.
Against this backdrop, Wedbush's strategy is "not to hide under  the covers in markets like this, watch the red screens with  frozen fear, and let the uncertainty of the coronavirus outbreak  cloud our bullish longer term view of these transformational tech  names and themes for the coming years."
The coronavirus outbreak has disrupted supply chains of major  tech companies such as Apple, and others including Microsoft and  Mastercard have lowered or rescinded future earnings outlooks due to the  impact of the outbreak, weighing on stock prices.
Still, in the long term, Ives thinks that coronavirus is a "shock  event" that will prove short-lived, according to a Monday note . Once the disruptions from the  outbreak have passed, he expects companies such as Apple to  normalize quickly.
Here are the top 10 technology stocks Wedbush says to own in the  coronavirus sell-off, in no particular order.
"Microsoft firmly remains our favorite cloud play for 2020 and  beyond; despite the bad news from the PC/supply chain (which we  view as temporary) this does not change our bullish thesis around  Azure's growth and the longer-term prospects for Redmond over the  coming years," Ives wrote.
"Our thesis since this coronavirus outbreak began is that it is  primarily a timing issue for iPhone demand and ultimately once  the supply chain gets back towards full capacity the Apple  renaissance of iPhone growth story will resume," according to  Ives.
"The current situation with the coronavirus outbreak will  temporarily push out China supply and demand of Model 3s, but not  alter the longer-term bullish trajectory coming out of the  region," Ives said.
"We believe the potential to hit 150k units/demand out of this  region over the next year still remains intact although could be  delayed by a few months, with the stage set for a massive growth  catalyst."
"Adobe represents a company leading the digital transformation  among both consumers and enterprises over the coming years," Ives  wrote.
"ZS is the best pure play in the cloud security arena, which we  believe is still in the very early innings of taking off with  overall hybrid cloud workloads poised to meaningfully accelerate  over the coming years," Ives said in a March 1 note.
"While the company has seen some speed bumps in the field over  the past year from an execution perspective, we believe SAIL is  still in the early innings of capitalizing on a high priority  identity $10 billion+ security TAM which is being driven by the  move to the cloud and a recently minted new CRO successfully  leading the strategic vision in the field," wrote Ives.
"We view NUAN as a core healthcare cloud play for the coming  years and ultimately coronavirus should have negligible impact on  its business in our opinion, however this crisis/outbreak speaks  to the next generation technology needs in healthcare in which  Nuance plays into with its ACI and AI powered strategic  initiatives looking ahead," Ives wrote.
"As more organizations make the move to digital platforms and are  looking to significantly cut down on the high redundant costs and  time involved in the traditional laborious contracting process,  DOCU is solving a major pain point across the board for  organizations looking for a streamlined software based cloud  platform that solves these growing needs," Ives wrote.
While coronavirus could lead to cancellation of some conferences  and partner summits, which could impact the company's deal flow,  "we do not see this moving the needle on broader demand trends  which remain robust from our vantage point with DOCU a core name  to own for 2020 and beyond," he said.
"We continue to believe NICE has a major runway for growth  heading into FY20 and beyond and plays into a core cloud theme as  more enterprises focus on analytics and cloud driven contact  centers with NICE a significant beneficiary from this trend,"  Ives wrote.
"We see a negligible impact from the coronavirus outbreak given  the company's core customer base and healthy end markets," he  said.
"While Uber is clearly impacted by less travel globally due to  the coronavirus that could negatively affect growth and take  rates in the near-term, we are taking a forest through the trees  approach on owning Uber here," Ives wrote.
He continued: "The ridesharing industry has become one of the  most transformational growth sectors of the consumer market over  the past 5 years with Uber establishing itself as the clear #1  player and in our opinion is paving a similar road to what Amazon  did to transform retail/ e-commerce. "
