Edgar Allan Poe, one of America’s best known authors,wrote in one of his stories: “To be buried alive is, beyond question, the most terrible of these extremes which has ever fallen to the lot of mere mortality.”
However, in the world of crypto it is still possible for some currencies to make a comeback after getting out of their graves!
Check out BitBoy Crypto’s video for more information and predictions on these cryptocurrencies.
Refusing to Die is One Thing, Getting Out of the Grave is Another
Dead Coins, or cryptocurrency projects that have failed for one or several reasons, are nothing new to the crypto world as a lot of projects die before their launch or when they fail in getting adopted by users.
Some of these coins refuse to die completely even after many of their losses from all-time highs reach the 90% percentile bracket.
Projects like EmerCoin just keep going after their fall, supported by their backers and faded glory just to never show signs of waking up.
In this article you will find 6 coins that are showing a heartbeat that and may be ready to rise again.
Digitex Futures Exchange (DGTX) was launched back in early 2019 with the purpose to be the premier destination to trade bitcoin with zero fees, instant transactions, and high leverage.
The project was built around specilation more than a finishes product, giving invetors the hope that the Return of Investment (ROI) would just follow the exchange’s launch, just for it to be delayed twice.
Adam Todd, Digitex’s CEO at the time, revealed that the development team and lack of coordination were the cause for the second delay, causing a huge drop in the project’s price and reputation with the news.
At the time, it seemed as if DGTX would never recover after a drop in price from $0.14 to $0.02 which the coin never recovered from.
The DGTX token is ranked 110 with a price of 0.062097 and Market Cap of $51,819,943, showing a recent increase in price as the project is finding some use with the Decentralized Finance (DeFi) boom.
Born in 2018, Request Network (REQ) was intended to allow online retailers to accept crypto payments directly, bringing a daily-life application to an industry that really needed it at the time.
The hype around REQ was real, resulting in prices going up just to tank in an endless accumulation zone which eventually popped.
Lying at rank 186, Request‘s (REQ) value graph for the last year and a half seem reminiscent of a heart monitor’s flatline when a patient’s exhales its last breath.
However, REQ seems to have been reanimated as its Market Cap rised from $11 million to $20 million during June with a corresponding value increase from $0.014 to $0.027, almost a 100% increase.
The future of REQ is still to be seen but just as with DGTX, it might benefit from DeFi as well as Digital Currency growth.
Will IOST Take Ethereum’s Place?
Launched in 2018, Internet of Services Token (IOST) describes itself as an “ultra-fast, decentralised blockchain network based on the next-generation consensus algorithm: Proof of Believability”.
IOST was seen a many as a potential rival to the Ethereum network, providing enterprises with its own nodes, wallet, and consensus protocol, with a a novel blockchain architecture.
The network experienced a bumpy ride since its creation up to September of 2018 when its performance dropped but remained mostly stable compared to the peaks in early 2018.
IOST has not seen a dramatic increase in the last month as the 2 previous coins but a more gradual increase, with its value going from $0.003 at the beginning of April to $0.005 at the end of June.
The market capitalization for the same period increased from around $24.5 million to $85 million, which represents an increase of more than 300%.
UTrust is a platform similar to Request Network as they both focus their efforts on retail adoption, enabling customers and companies to transfer crypto for everyday goods.
UTrust tries to set apart by providig users with full protections on payments, behavings as a third-party mediator in a way reminiscent of paypal.
The platform is powered by UTK, which showed incredible growth during June starting at a price of $0.011 with a Market Cap of $5.2 million and finishing at $0.04 with a $17.5 million market cap.
Just as with Request, Digital Currency and DeFi’s development will most likely decide how this platform does in the future.
Once again, a project focusing on retail adoption is coming back from the dead as PundiX is basically a gateway accompanied by physical devices that accepts crypto.
PundiX angered a lot of its community by announcing they were launching a second token that many thoughts would devalue the original token, which resulted in a drop in price as is usual with these events.
NPXS has seen gradual rise in value and market capitalization over the last 90 days, going from $0.00011 with $27 million to $0.00019 with $47 million of market capitalization.
Articles on Bitboy may contain affiliate links that help us to remain profitable. It might come as a surprise, but all these great articles aren't cheap to produce. If you don't mind helping us out, please click on the links!
Nicholas Say grew up in Ann Arbor, Michigan with a father that would read him the Wall St. Journal.
Nicholas spent many years in the Southern Cone of South America, sometimes in the middle of absolutely nowhere, draining a whiskey bottle as he dreamed of a better way of living.
Now he lives in the Far East and writes on a variety of subjects. He supposes that ‘nowhere’ is perhaps the only truth there is.
