Business News / Financial Management / Top 3 investments of 2020: Make your money work harder
Top 3 investments of 2020: Make your money work harder
Everyone wants to know how to make their money work harder. Talk to financial experts like Warren Buffet and they’ll say investments are the only way. Having money in the bank is great. However, with interest on savings in the US sitting at 0.01% in 2020 , you could be doing more.
Although investments are never guaranteed to return a profit, the potential upside is better than any interest rate a bank will give you. With this in mind, we’ve picked out three top investments for 2020.
Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin and their peers might not seem as popular as they were in 2017, but they’re still a great investment option. If you go to this website , you’ll see that trading cryptos such as Bitcoin and Ethereum is no longer a complex task. Yes, the nuances of blockchains and cryptography are hard to grasp. However, the process of buying and selling coins is simple.
One of the main reasons crypto trading is now accessible to the masses is technology. Trading robots can make split-second decisions based on live data. Software used by Bitcoin Loophole can execute trades 0.01 seconds ahead of the market. This, in tandem with artificial intelligence (AI) driven algorithms, means users can trade cryptos without having to be experts.
In 2017, Bitcoin’s price rose from $900 to almost $20,000. Such a sharp increase might not be likely in the immediate future. However, the leading cryptos are slowly becoming an integral part of multiple industries. From banking and finance to entertainment and business, cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are the future. This makes them a great investment option in the present.
Even though the property market is prone to peaks and troughs, it’s one of the most stable and consistent investment options out there. According to Money Check, the American housing market has provided stable returns of more than 5% for the last 30 years. Looking at property prices across the US, values increased consistently between 2013 and 2019.
The S&P/Case-Shiller national home price index rose by 3.3% in Q2, 2019. That’s the lowest growth rate since 2012. But even at that rate, you can make a profit if you flip a property. Of course, if you choose to make properties a long-term investment, you can benefit from rising prices and rental income. The combination of immediate returns and future profits is what makes property a solid option.
Our final investment tip for 2020 is funds. Although there’s merit to investing in individual shares, it’s never a bad idea to spread your risk. By investing in funds, you’re buying shares across multiple sectors. The benefit of doing this is that you’re not relying on a single asset to perform. Because the value of the fund is determined by its constituent parts, you can enjoy positive returns overall even if one sector/company is going through a rough patch.
Hargreaves Lansdown (HL) provides an overview of funds and, in turn, where to invest. As an example, a HL fund could be made up of 70% shares, 15% corporate bonds, 7% property, 5% in other funds and 3% in alternative assets. In essence, you’re getting the best of everything when you invest in a fund. Other companies such as Fidelity offer tools that allow you to compare 2,500+ investment funds. As well as comparing the assets within a fund, you can choose between high, medium, and low risk investments. Diversity and flexibility are what make funds an attractive option for novices and professionals alike.
As you can see, there are plenty of ways to invest in 2020. From the innovative to the traditional, you can invest in a way that suits. Of course, you can never be certain of a positive return. However, if you weigh up your options and spend wisely, there’s every chance these options can help you do more with your money.
