The Ethereum project is an effort to democratise the internet by creating a ‘world computer’. It seeks to replace the old model of servers or clouds hosting data with a new approach – ‘nodes’ provided by volunteers. The creators of Ethereum are seeking to introduce an alternative model for data and apps that is not dependent on big technology companies.
Ether, the currency that powers Ethereum, is used to pay for the transactions that occur on the Ethereum network. Its primary purpose is reward the miners who are processing the data transactions on the Ethereum network.
Most people not actively involved with the Ethereum network refer to Ether as Ethereum. Ether was issued as part of the crowd funding campaign that launched Ethereum but millions of new coins are created every year.
To trade Ethereum you don’t need to be working on the Ethereum network. It is possible to trade the price of this Crypto using CFDs, for example. Ethereum has a real world value in currency, which will go up and down over time. This is the amount of another currency one Ether can be exchanged for.
Go long or short: take advantage of both the rises and the falls in the Ethereum price.
Ethereum can be traded around the clock, as it does not depend on a particular market being open.
Be aware, however, that using leverage to trade Ethereum means you will be more exposed to changes in the price. Make sure that you keep stop losses in place to protect yourself against sudden price reversals and you are aware of what your total exposure to the Ethereum price is.
Buying Ethereum requires the use of specialist Cryptocurrency platforms. This can be both a cumbersome and time consuming practice and will make it difficult to react to short term changes in price.
Trading Ethereum using a CFD allows you to react quickly to price changes and take advantage of short term volatility. You don’t need to own Ethereum to be able to trade its price.
Ethereum is a volatile market and although this presents opportunities for traders it can also represent risks. Both buying and trading Ethereum involves risk.
If you have further questions about trading Ethereum, please see out Crypto FAQs
There is technically an unlimited supply of Ethereum. While 60 million Ethereum ‘coins’ were issued as part of the Ethereum crowd funding campaign in 2014, approximately 18 million new coins are mined every year.
As with other Cryptos, it is important to understand that the ‘rules’ affecting the way Ethereum is mined and processed can be changed suddenly, and this can have a big impact on the price, for better or for worse.
In the event that the current cryptocurrency splits into two, new cryptocurrencies are created, this is known as a hard fork. We will generally follow the cryptocurrency that has the majority consensus of cryptocurrency users and will therefore use this as the basis for our prices. In addition we will also consider the approach adopted by the exchanges we deal with, which will help determine the action we take.
We reserve the right to determine which cryptocurrency unit has the majority consensus behind them.
As the hard fork results in a second cryptocurrency, we reserve the right to create an equivalent position on client accounts to reflect this. However, this action is taken at our absolute discretion, and we have no obligation to do so.
If the second cryptocurrency is tradeable on major exchanges, which may or may not include the exchanges we deal with, we may choose to represent that value, but have no obligation to do so. We may do this by making the product available to close based on the valuation, or by booking a cash adjustment on client accounts.
If, within a reasonable timeframe, the second cryptocurrency does not become tradeable, then we may void positions that had previously been created at no value on client accounts.
Over periods of substantial price volatility around fork events, we may take any action as we consider necessary in accordance with our terms and conditions including suspending trading throughout if we deem not to have reliable prices from the underlying market.
