TRON's and Ethereum's leaders are once again reigniting old flames on Twitter, with accusations flying both ways.
Ethereum's Vitalik Buterin recently accused TRON of being scammy, to which Sun retaliated by accusing Buterin of hiring Twitter trolls to target other projects.
This is far from being their first conflict, and many have started to join one camp or another, including even well-known crypto/blockchain businessmen.
blockchains in the industry today, but as many likely remember, there was a
for a while, their founders never really managed to get along.
The rivalry led to quite a few Twitter dramas, bashing of each other’s projects and more. Now, TRON’s Justin Sun and Ethereum’s Vitalik Buterin seem to have entered yet another clash. Earlier today, February 7th, TRON CEO accused Buterin, as well as ConsenSys, of hiring Twitter trolls that would attack and badmouth other projects.
He is not the only one to make such claims.
Block.one’s Brendan Blumer also posted similar criticism on Twitter, and Sun
Agree! @Tronfoundation will never hire community members to attack other friendly crypto projects. We should love and support each other! Shame on you @gitcoin @Consensys @VitalikButerin . https://t.co/glTmjCd2ZH
— Justin Sun (@justinsuntron) February 7, 2020
Interesting. I would rate internal pressure more highly, eg. I'd claim Tron's scamminess is a huge factor limiting their ability to get top quality R&D talent.
— vitalik.eth (@VitalikButerin) February 6, 2020
Now, there is no denying that TRON had its fair share of controversies. Many might remember incidents such as its Tesla giveaway, or accusations of plagiarism. Buterin likely has quite a bit to say on the subject, as he himself accused TRON of copying Ethereum’s white paper, which Sun always denied.
the two did not stay limited to the two projects’ leaders. TRON also got
scammy about TRON. He even defended Sun himself, stating that Sun is an
entrepreneur who simply keeps making big moves.
Adam Back, the CEO of Blockstream, went even further than that. He suggested that the Tron Foundation could maybe even buy the entire Ethereum project and replace its upcoming Ethereum 2.0 with TRON.
Seems to me @Tronfoundation could just buy @Consensys and replace eth2.0 with TRON. Can't be the only person to think that.
