This year headline speakers include FedEx’s Fred Smith, Fidelity’s Abigail Johnson, Twitter and Square’s Jack Dorsey, chairman of the U.S. Securities Exchange Commission, Jay Clayton, and U.S. presidential hopeful, Andrew Yang.
Ethereum, meanwhile, has gained more than 10% over the same period after reports the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) could approve an ethereum futures contract—something that might bring fresh institutional funding into the bitcoin and cryptocurrency market.
"Many people are looking closely at the level $6,200 as a major resistance for bitcoin," eToro senior market analyst Mati Greenspan wrote in a note to clients. "Though I don't see any major significance for this specific number, I suppose it's as good a benchmark as any.
"The crypto markets have been on a roll lately. Bitcoin is significantly outperforming, not only compared to other crypto-assets but every other major asset so far in 2019."
The bitcoin price appears to have been pushed higher by news of potential ethereum futures... [+] contracts.
The CFTC's comments, first reported by bitcoin and cryptocurrency trade news site CoinDesk and attributed to a senior official, suggests the U.S. derivatives markets regulator is willing to oversee an ethereum product similar to the bitcoin futures it permitted in 2017.
"I think we can get comfortable with an ether derivative being under our jurisdiction," CoinDesk reported the unnamed official as saying. "I think that there’s a good chance [a particular derivative that met our requirements] would be [allowed to be] self-certified by us."
The CME Group and Cboe Global Exchange began offering bitcoin futures at the hight of bitcoin's epic 2017 bull run, which saw the bitcoin price near $20,000 per token before falling sharply back throughout 2018.
In March, Cboe announced it was dropping any new bitcoin futures contracts, a decision thought to be down to low trading volumes, though the CME Group continues to offer them.
As well as reports of potential ethereum futures contracts, there has been more positive news for ethereum over recent days.
Ethereum trading volumes on decentralized applications have hit a new high, according to a report from bitcoin and cryptocurrency analytics firm Diar, out yesterday, with the volume of ethereum transacted in April slightly higher than the previous record month set in December last year—the fourth consecutive month of growth.
Meanwhile, ethereum cofounder Joe Lubin has said "lots of people" are working to improve the "virtually everything" about ethereum.
Speaking on the Chain Reaction Podcast hosted by Delphi Digital cofounder Tom Shaughnessy, Lubin said, "it could be argued that [ethereum is moving] too slowly as an ecosystem… Certainly, everything about ethereum needs to improve and there are lots of people that are working to improve virtually everything about ethereum."
The ethereum price got a boost from a CoinDesk report on potential futures contracts.
Musk, who last month revealed his favorite cryptocurrency , tweeted the word "ethereum" before replying to ethereum's creator Vitalik Buterin invitation to attend the ethereum developer conference in October.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
