Vitalik Buterin joined Elon Musk in standing up for Jack Dorsey as Twitter CEO.
The move comes after an attempted takeover of the company, which had a goal of removing Dorsey and remodeling the platform.
Dorsey has been a major Bitcoin supporter, and he also advocates online privacy, which is why he got a lot of support from the crypto industry.
The co-founder of Ethereum, Vitalik Buterin , added his name to a growing list of those who supported Twitter CEO, Jack Dorsey , after activist investors’ attempt to depose him. Buterin is one of the most vocal representatives of the crypto industry, and his support carries a lot of weight.
However, Buterin is not the only major entrepreneur to support Dorsey — even before him, Tesla and SpaceX CEO, Elon Musk , shared his thoughts on the situation, noting that he thinks Dorsey should stay.
Just want say that I support @Jack as Twitter CEO. He has a good ❤️.
— Elon Musk (@elonmusk) March 3, 2020
The attempted takeover came from a hedge fund Elliott Management, whose billionaire founder, Paul Singer, has over $1 billion stakes in Twitter. Singer’s alleged goal was to take over the company and completely rework it.
Singer is also a known Republican mega-donor,
and he believes that Twitter is discriminating against conservatives. As part
CEO and leader. This is where prominent voices in the tech world came in, led
expected as the company’s CEO, and certainly a better job than what a hedge
fund appointed CEO would do if he were to replace him.
I also #StandWithJack . Twitter certainly has flaws but @jack has done a vastly better job than what I expect/fear from a hedge fund appointed CEO swooping in to replace him.
— vitalik.eth (@VitalikButerin) March 5, 2020
crypto world. He had done a lot to support the crypto world, such as adding
Bitcoin emoji to Twitter, posting ‘#Bitcoin’ in his own Twitter bio, and he
standard. He is also a known advocate for privacy, and he even discussed
censorship concerns with US President, Donald Trump last year.
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
