CZ believes those getting into crypto investing right now, should not despair for they are still early in the game.
The CEO of Binance, Changpeng Zhao, is optimistic that anyone investing in crypto now, is still early in the game.
CZ himself got into the game in 2014 after selling his house only for Bitcoin to crash soon after.
He did not sell back then and believes a similar strategy can work till 2025.
He also advised those who can hold to do so rather than risking their bags trading.
The crypto community is very close despite all the push and pull that anyone might see on crypto twitter. Everyone wants Bitcoin (BTC) and the entire spectrum of digital assets to succeed. It is with this closeness and willingness to share advice that the CEO of Binance, Changpeng Zhao, has offered some words of encouragement to investors and traders getting into Bitcoin and Crypto in 2020.
In a tweet, CZ explained that he too got into the game at a time like this 5 years ago and he had initially thought he was late into the game . However, five years later, he still believes it is still early and anyone getting into the crypto game now needs not to worry. In another 5 years, the industry would have grown some more. His tweet
went on to request anyone who is unsure about their trading abilities, to hold their bags rather than risking it all in the markets.
Everyone I have met that got into #crypto, thinks they got in too late, no exceptions, myself included, until 5 years later.
I expect the same will be true in 2025. We are still early in the game.
Not financial advice. And don’t trade if you are not a trader. #hodl.
CZs tweet can be linked to his own story of how he got into crypto in 2014 when Bitcoin was trading at $600. Mr. Zhao had just sold his house and gone all in. However, a few months later and in 2015, Bitcoin crashed to $200 but he kept holding and is now the CEO of the largest crypto exchange around by trade volume . The following tweet by CZ gives a better perspective of his journey into crypto.
I wish I could tell you my lame story from 2015, when the $btc price "crashed" to below $200, and I just sold my house and bought in at $600 a few months earlier…  Well, I am still here.
— CZ Binance 🔶🔶🔶 (@cz_binance) November 20, 2018
Disclaimer: This article is not meant to give financial advice. Any additional opinion herein is purely the author’s and does not represent the opinion of EWN or any of its other writers. Please carry out your own research before investing in any of the numerous cryptocurrencies available. Thank you.
