is a multi-chain, scalable, and interoperable blockchain platform that aims to overcome the numerous challenges faced by legacy networks such as Ethereum . It’s an ambitious project that’s been several years in development, and has recently achieved a significant milestone with the launch of the first Polkadot mainnet iteration, called “Proof of Authority.” Work is already underway on the next phase of implementation. Polkadot is the brainchild of Dr. Gavin Wood, one of the original co-founders of Ethereum.
Even though Polkadot is now establishing itself as a rival platform to Ethereum, the two projects have an entwined history. Dr. Gavin Wood is a computer scientist who was instrumental in launching Ethereum. He was the first Chief Technology Officer at the Ethereum Foundation and is also credited with the invention of Ethereum’s Solidity programming language.
In 2016, Dr. Wood co-founded Parity Technologies together with Dr. Jutta Steiner, who was Ethereum’s security chief. Parity was initially focused on developing core infrastructure for the Ethereum blockchain. Around the same time, Dr. Wood left the Ethereum Foundation. He began developing the idea of Polkadot as a means of overcoming the limitations of Ethereum and some of the challenges that he believed would result from the implementation of sharding in ETH 2.0 .
Parity Technologies later pivoted into becoming the full-time development shop for the Polkadot project. In 2017, Dr. Wood also co-founded the Web3 Foundation together with Parity’s Peter Czaban. Based in Crypto Valley, Switzerland, the Web3 foundation acts as a steward for the decentralized Polkadot network.
Since then, Polkadot has achieved several critical milestones, including two successful token sales, and integrations with other interoperability projects Chainlink and Cosmos .
Most recently, Polkadot launched the first version of its platform on mainnet.
Polkadot is a sharded, interoperable, and scalable blockchain infrastructure. So far, in the blockchain space, there has been a prevailing perception that one blockchain will rise above the rest to become the platform of choice. Polkadot is based on a different vision - one where there are multiple blockchains operating in parallel, that will ultimately need to interact with one another to be effective and stay relevant.
The current blockchain ecosystem is fragmented, consisting of many platforms operating in isolation. The situation is analogous to the internet before the introduction of the TCP/IP protocol, when there were multiple local networks, but without any agreed means of communication.
Furthermore, almost every blockchain platform is struggling with the trilemma of scalability, security, and decentralization. To achieve high throughput, many blockchains use governance models such as delegated proof-of-stake, that centralizes control into only a few nodes. This also creates points of weakness, compromising network security. Those blockchains that have achieved high decentralization, such as Ethereum, tend to be slow and suffer from congestion during times of high traffic.
Another significant challenge is the lack of ability to upgrade traditional blockchains. Networks such as Bitcoin and Ethereum have seen bitter community divisions over disagreements about upgrades, leading to contentious hard forks.
Finally, usability is also an issue with current blockchains. Developers end up sacrificing functionality due to using blockchain architecture that isn’t sufficiently customizable to their requirements or doesn’t have the integrations or tools they need for their application.
Polkadot runs on a central chain called the Relay chain, which runs on a consensus protocol called Nominated Proof of Stake (NPoS.) Parachains are sub-chains that have their own implementation and features and connect to the Relay Chain. The Relay Chain is responsible for overall consensus and network security. Parachains generate and propose blocks to validators on the Relay chain, where they undergo validation.
Parachains are virtually unlimited in their scope and capabilities. They could be dApp-specific or focus on particular traits such as scalability. Polkadot simply requires that a parachain can generate a proof that can be validated by Relay Chain validators assigned to the parachain.
To use a simple analogy, you could consider Polkadot’s Relay Chain as a kind of retail park or shopping mall. It provides all the infrastructure for retailers - premises, security, and the opportunity to benefit from being part of a community with a good reputation for doing business. Parachains are the shops themselves. They can set up a business and pay rent (called “bonding” in Polkadot).
Polkadot has a shared state between the Relay Chain and all parachains. If there’s a need to roll back the Relay Chain to a previous state, then all parachains would also revert to preserve the validity of the entire system.
To achieve scalability, Polkadot uses sharding, where each parachain is a shard that can process transactions in parallel to others. Sharding involves partitioning the blockchain network into segments so that nodes only process a portion of the total transactions and only store a certain amount of historical data. This is in contrast to other blockchains such as Ethereum where every node processes every transaction and stores the entire blockchain history. Sharding on Polkadot enables a theoretical throughput of over 160,000 transactions per second.
A Cross-Chain Messaging Protocol (XCMP) allows parachains to communicate with one another. Due to the role of the Relay Chain in providing shared security and validation logic, messaging is trustless, enabling true interoperability between parachains.
If an external blockchain such as Bitcoin or Ethereum wants to participate in Polkadot to interact with other blockchains, it can connect via bridge parachains that offer two-way compatibility. One example of a bridge parachain is Moonbeam , that allows developers to build dApps that are cross-compatible with other blockchains such as Bitcoin and Ethereum.
Nominated Proof of Stake (NPoS) is a variation of Proof of Stake, where token holders nominated a large but limited number of validators. Unlike the dPoS model used by EOS and others, Polkadot will have hundreds of validators from Genesis.
There are four main roles in Polkadot NPoS:
Fishermen are the “police” of the network, monitoring activity, and reporting bad behavior to validators. Fishermen may be collators or any parachain full node.
Outside of operational consensus, Polkadot operates a governance system comprising a Council and a Technical Committee. Any DOT holder or the Council can make a proposal, which is agreed by a stake-weighted referendum. Any DOT holder can also register to be considered for membership of the Council, which consists of 23 members with a fixed term of one month.
Upgrades to Polkadot are forkless and determined as part of the governance process.
Substrate is the final piece of the Polkadot puzzle, designed to ensure usability. It’s an open-source framework for building customized parachains for rapid deployment on the Polkadot network.
Using Substrate offers several configurable features, including pluggable consensus (PoS, PoW, PoA), efficient storage, P2P networking layer, a suite of libraries to modify elements such as accounts, staking, and more, and user interface kits.
Substrate is available in a range of programming languages, including Rust, C++, Go, and more, meaning there are extremely low barriers to entry for any developer.
The DOT token has three utilities: network governance, staking, and bonding. Token holders can participate in governance by selecting their preferred validators. Validators are required to stake their own DOT tokens to become a validator. They’re rewarded in DOT tokens for their efforts in validating, and will lose their stake if they act against the interests of the network.
Bonding refers to the fee paid in DOT by parachains who want to join the Polkadot network. The fees serve as a kind of proof of stake, whereby outdated or inactive parachains will have their bonded tokens removed.
Five million DOT tokens were already issued as part of the initial minting performed for the token sale.
Unlike Polkadot, Ethereum is a single chain architecture, which severely hampers its throughput. Currently, it can handle around 15-20 transactions per second, meaning the network becomes congested very easily.
Ethereum 2.0 is a planned upgrade, which will only be implemented in phases. The final phase, which is still more than two years away, aims to bring sharding to the platform, potentially enabling far higher throughput. However,  even if Ethereum’s developers pull this off, after multiple delays have already occurred to date, there are still limitations compared to Polkadot. Ethereum’s basic sharding technology will only work with Ethereum-like smart contract chains. In contrast, Polkadot’s sharding protocol is far more advanced and will allow any smart contract or blockchain to work together, offering far greater flexibility than Ethereum.
Even when Ethereum goes live with its sharding protocol, it won’t be interoperable in the same way as Polkadot. Ethereum could join Polkadot as a parachain, but there is no way that Ethereum could host Polkadot. The Ethereum roadmap doesn’t have any plans to offer other blockchains the opportunity to communicate or transfer assets or data, ignoring the shifting focus in the blockchain landscape towards interoperability. In this respect, Ethereum risks becoming outdated before the 2.0 upgrade is even live.
It’s also worth pointing out that Ethereum’s sharding protocol is so far untested and unproven, with other scaling solutions such as Plasma having already been abandoned. Polkadot is already live on mainnet and well into its development roadmap.
Dr. Gavin Wood is the co-founder of Polkadot and co-founder and President of the Web3 Foundation. Due to his contribution to Ethereum and the blockchain sector, he’s a leading figure in the space. He co-authored the book “Mastering Ethereum: Building Smart Contracts and DApps” together with Andreas Antonopoulos. Currently, Dr. Wood leads innovation on Substrate, Polkadot, and Kusama at Parity.
Robert Habermeier is the co-founder of Polkadot and a Thiel fellow. He has a background in blockchain, cryptography, and distributed systems, and is also a longstanding and active member of the Rust community.
Peter Czaban is co-founder and Technology Director of the Web3 Foundation. He holds a Masters in Engineering from Oxford University and brings experience from various sectors, including defense, finance, and data analytics. He specializes in machine learning, mesh networks, and distributed knowledge bases.
Dr. Jutta Steiner is the CEO and Co-founder of Parity Technologies. An applied mathematician who was formerly the Security Chief at Ethereum, she now leads Parity towards its vision of developing and driving the adoption of Polkadot.
With interoperability at the heart of the Polkadot project, it should come as no surprise that there’s a buzzing community around the platform.
PolkaProject lists all the different projects and entities that are participating in the Polkadot ecosystem, including validators, parachain operators, and dApps. Among these are established names in the blockchain space, such as layer 2 solution Celer Network, and enterprise applications such as pharmaceutical supply chain alliance, Mediledger.
In May 2020, the Web3 Foundation also hit the milestone of providing funding grants to 100 projects. 25% of these have already completed all of the development activities covered by their grants - a testament to the quality of those selected for funding.
Polkadot has been running in an experimental format, via its Kusama implementation. Kusama is a kind of sandbox for Polkadot, enabling developers to try and test different innovations in preparation for full deployment on the Polkadot network.
On May 26, 2020, the Web3 Foundation launched the first live version of Polkadot in “Proof of Authority” mode. It’s the first of six milestones laid out on the project roadmap. Each phase has specific deliverables that will enable progression to the next phase.
In the early phases, the Web3 Foundation plans to retain superuser control of the network via a “Sudo module” as a means of maintaining security until Polkadot becomes fully decentralized.
The phases of the roadmap are laid out below.
Polkadot is only just starting out on its journey to full decentralization. However, it’s an extremely promising project that offers the potential to bring full, scalable interoperability to a highly fragmented blockchain ecosystem. The project has a stellar team and has already achieved the significant milestone of an initial mainnet launch. Therefore, Polkadot is shaping up to be one of the most important infrastructure projects in the space.
