Bitcoin price could see a rally to $8,000 following the breakout to $7,000, but a potential selloff in stocks could put BTC at risk of revisiting new lows.
The Bitcoin price ( BTC ) rallied to around $7,300 on April 3, and BTC is still holding onto the $6,700 support level, meaning the price could push the dominant cryptocurrency to the $8,000 area. But, a highly accurate hedge fund manager’s stock market warning could rattle the cryptocurrency market in the short-term.
Dan Niles, the founding partner of Alpha One Capital Partners, said in a note to clients that the dire economic consequence of the coronavirus pandemic could lead to a steeper correction in the U.S. stock market.
With Q2 earnings set to be released in the coming weeks, jobless claims exceeding 10 million , and major European economics in free fall, the appetite for high-risk assets that include single stocks and crypto assets could fade once again.
As Cointelegraph previously reported , prominent trader PentarhUdi predicted the Bitcoin price to recover from $5,200 to the 200-week simple moving average (SMA) at $8,500 before it eventually grinds back down to the $3,000 region.
The pattern of a strong rally leading straight to an intense selloff has already been seen multiple times in the past 12 months. This is the result of Bitcoin’s price abruptly surging in a short period of time and shaking out late shorters in the market. This gives whales time to adjust their positions, often leading to a severe correction afterward.
Since late March, the Bitcoin price has broken out of its correlation with the U.S. stock market . Previously, BTC closely followed the movement in the U.S. stock market, going as far as reacting to pre-market trading of the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
As such, even if the price of Bitcoin sees a large upside movement to the $7,700 to $8,500 range in the short term, the price remains vulnerable to a pullback to the $3,000 to $5,000 area.
The March 12 drop to $3,750 could have technically caused the Bitcoin price to flash crash to zero as discussed by a few industry executives. Fortunately for investors, the price impressively rebounded from $3,600 to $6,700 with barely any pullback apart from a brief wick down to $4,400.
The stock market also demonstrated a similar V-shape recovery as Bitcoin, prompting renowned strategists to predict a deeper correction in the upcoming weeks.
Niles said about the stock market:
“I sort of laugh when I hear people talking about a V-shaped recovery because we are going to have at least 10% unemployment, my guess is closer to 20% before all of this is said and done.”
The same argument for the lack of strength of a V-shaped recovery in the equities market can be applied with Bitcoin. Given that the cryptocurrency has not established strong support levels during its recovery to the $6,700 to $7,300 range, it faces a risk of a March 12-esque fall where a significant amount of long contracts are liquidated in a short period of time.
A long accumulation phase, in contrast to a V-shape recovery, allows spot volume to grow and actual retail investors to buy into the market, rather than highly-leveraged futures orders affecting the short-term price trend of BTC.
