4 Canadian Blockchain Stocks Making a Big Comeback in 2020?
SmallCapPower | February 18, 2020: Bitcoin has seen a spark in investor interest again. Since the beginning of 2020, the cryptocurrency has rallied ~30%, and recently broke $10,000. As a result of the recent Bitcoin surge, several Canadian blockchain stocks have also seen impressive year-to-date rallies. Today we have found four Bitcoin/blockchain stocks with significant stock price appreciation since the beginning of January.
*Share prices as at February 13, 2020, data obtained from S&P Capital IQ
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Hut 8 Mining is a Canada-based cryptocurrency miner. Hut 8 wants to become the biggest cryptocurrency miner, by using its BlockBox AC manufactured in partnership with Bitfury to mine Bitcoins using conventional datacenter infrastructure. Hut 8 currently operates a total of 73 BlockBox Data Centers, including 56 BlockBoxes at its facility in CMH, Alberta, with each BlockBox having 1.2 MW of capacity, representing an aggregate of 67.2 MW of maximum operating power capacity. Hut 8 has a total maximum operating power capacity of 85.9 MW and an average actual operating hash rate of over 640 Petahashes per second.
Bitfarms is a vertically-integrated blockchain infrastructure company that focuses on providing computing power to cryptocurrency networks, such as Bitcoin. Bitfarms operates four blockchain compute centers through its ownership of Backbone Hosting Solutions Inc. For each crypto network that it secures and processes a transaction, the Company earns a fee. Currently, the Company has four facilities that it operates in Quebec: Farnham, which has 10 MW capacity; Saint-Hyacinthe with a 10MW capacity; Cowansville, which has a 4MW capacity; and Magog with a 10 MW capacity.
Galaxy Digital is a diversified asset management firm dedicated to the digital assets and blockchain technology industry. The firm manages capital on behalf of external clients in three distinct business lines: Index Fund Management, Blockchain Ecosystem Funds, and Opportunistic Funds. Galaxy Digital Capital Management’s multi-disciplinary team has deep experience across active and passive portfolio management, capital markets, operations, and blockchain technology. The firm is a subsidiary of Galaxy Digital Holdings, which was founded by Michael Novogratz, a former Principal and Chief Investment Officer of the Fortress Macro Funds, and a former Partner at Goldman Sachs.
HIVE Blockchain is a growth-oriented company building a bridge from the blockchain sector to traditional capital markets. HIVE owns state-of-the-art GPU-based digital currency mining facilities in Iceland and Sweden, which produce newly-minted digital currencies such as Ethereum continuously, as well as cloud-based ASIC-based capacity, which produces newly-minted digital currencies such as Bitcoin. HIVE aims to provide shareholders with exposure to the operating margins of digital currency mining as well as a growing portfolio of cryptocurrency.
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
