By Steven Anderson July 1, 2020 Off
ABBC Coin are focusing on facilitating payment security to their users.  Recently the ABBC Foundation organized a donation campaign to help their friends in the Philippines in the Covid-19 pandemic.
The ABBC Community members took to the relief work in complete selflessness and with complete compassion. Some commentators stated that it is a cryptocurrency with a humanitarian touch.  They know that everybody needs someone and they continue to move along with that ideal.
The community have been very active when it comes to their philanthropic activities during the pandemic. About 70 million KRW which was amassed from nearly 300 investors from the ABBC Korean community were donated to nearly five Korean childcare facilities.
Jason Daniel Paul Philip the founder and CEO of ABBC Coin used to be a blockchain developer before he started ABBC coin.
ABBC facilitate a blockchain platform which ensures seamless cryptocurrency transactions for every user.  They provide Aladdin Pro facilitating seamless crypto transactions, Buy Aladdin for experiencing a shopping paradise, and Alladin Wallet redefines crypto security.
Since the basic apps and tools are facilitated by ABBC Coin, it is possible for users to be able to conduct their transactions at their convenience without having to worry about stuff like mishandled data, stolen assets, or fear of accounts getting hacked.
Sydney Ifergan, the crypto expert tweeted:  “ABBC Coin know their technology. They are working with a clear roadmap and an exhaustive list of exchange partners.  Their projects are listed and visible for all to see.”
The collaboration of the three major blockchain projects like Aladdin Wallet, Aladdin Pro, Buy Aladdin, and Tokenncoin deliver for unique services through the different sectors in the blockchain industry.
The ABBC whitepaper being the official document provides the as in information about concepts, technical terms, information and the upgrades that are implemented in new ABBC Generation 2 Block chain and Wallet.  The intricacies about what makes ABBC a world class blockchain is also well explained.  The business model of the ABBC coin is ever evolving.
ABBC have a strong batch of marketing specialists who are coordinating marketing campaigns integrated with sales activities.  They focus on a lot of things ranging from online advertising, branding, community management, communication, public relation, data analytics, back link creation, campaign promotions, competitive analysis, local marketing, affiliate marketing, marketing automation and a whole lot of stuff to take ABBC coin the people propelling adoption.
