Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
Artur Schaback, chief operating officer and co-founder of cryptocurrency exchange Paxful.
Indeed, in addition to the capital injections from Binance and CoinDCX into various aspects of the industry, Artur Schaback, chief operating officer and co-founder of cryptocurrency exchange Paxful, told Finance Magnates that these effects range “from exchanges offering banking services within hours after the decision was made, to an increase in bitcoin searches online in India.”
Indeed, there was a massive increase in the number of searches of the word “bitcoin” immediately following the lift of the ban; less than six hours after the ban was lifted, CoinDCX announced that users could begin purchasing cryptocurrencies with INR as the exchange, becoming the first platform in India to fully integrate bank account transfers post-ban.
The Economic Times, a local financial news outlet, also reported that “several cryptocurrency platforms that had shifted base to Singapore and elsewhere after the RBI circular that was issued on April 6, 2018, are now looking to move back to India.”
However, Manish Kataria, chief operating officer and co-founder of Quadency, said that true change as a result of the ban’s overturning would likely take more time.
“The immediate effects are quite limited,” Kataria said. “This blanket ban and associated regulatory uncertainty has been stifling innovation for so long that we’re just starting to get insights into how exchanges and other providers are planning to scale not just their Indian market presence, but also adoption itself.”
And there’s also the fact that just as soon as the ban was overturned, the RBI made swift movements to appeal the decision. Within days after the ruling, the Economic Times reported that the bank was planning on returning to the Supreme Court to fight the decision.
And the bank may have a good deal of support behind it. Despite the fact that some Indian banks have already made moves to work with cryptocurrency firms, some of the country’s major banks–including HDFC and Indusind Bank–have chosen to ignore the court’s overturning of the ban, saying that they are waiting for the official word from the RBI itself before they begin providing services to crypto companies.
The Economic Times reported that in an attempt to address the continuous denial of services, Mohammed Danish of Indian law firm Fintech Lawyers sent a letter to Finance Secretary Ajay Bhushan Pandey and two RBI officers.
Since the case has been ostensibly closed, “the banks (RBI regulated entities) must comply with the order of the supreme court and start providing banking services for sale/purchase of crypto assets impartially as they provide services for all other legitimate transactions,” Danish wrote.
However, Danish acknowledged that “it is pertinent to mention that the order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court has given no specific direction to RBI for issuing a separate notification to the banks for compliance of the said order.” In other words, RBI has not officially instructed banks to re-open services to crypto platforms, even though the court has made its official decision.
Still, Danish argued in his letter that “Banks’ refusal to provide services for sale/purchase of crypto assets is absolutely illegal, unjust and arbitrary in the eyes of [the] law and the same amounts to wilful disobedience to the order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.”
But some banks are still refusing to act until they hear directly from RBI. “We will be guided by RBI’s directions on the matter and once we get clarity we will act appropriately,” an unnamed senior banker told the Economic Times.
This is allegedly because the banks still feel as though their concerns regarding the usage of cryptocurrency have not been addressed: “as banks, some of the concerns we had on cryptocurrencies were around security, use of money and traceability,” the banker said.
And indeed, while the overturning of the ban was a big victory for India’s cryptocurrency industry, the country still has not passed any more general legislation regarding the regulation of cryptocurrencies.
In fact, some analysts have argued that this lack of legislation–in spite of the overturning of the ban–has left the industry vulnerable. In fact, Business Insider India reported shortly after the ban was overturned that the “ Banning of Cryptocurrency and Regulation of Official Digital Currency Bill ,” which is currently making its way through the Indian legislative system, has the potential to hinder the industry.
Indeed, the bill currently proposes the creation of unique regulatory frameworks for virtual currencies, utility tokens, and commodity-backed tokens. However, the bill has been said to likely create a complex and exclusionary legislative apparatus that would be difficult for Indian blockchain businesses to navigate.
Siddarth Mahajan, a partner at law firm Athena Legal, told the publication that “it remains to be seen if the government will rethink the proposed bill in light of the Supreme Court judgment. This regulatory uncertainty in India is probably the biggest concern for the government.”
“[…] It remains to be seen if the cryptocurrency business in India is positioned as a financial instrument or commodity with underlying value,” Mahajan explained. “The biggest fear of the RBI is the proliferation of unregulated financial instruments which are not backed by the state.”
India’s number of cryptocurrency users is still relatively low, but that could quickly change
And if “proliferation” of these as-yet unregulated currencies is a serious concern for Indian banks, it seems that there’s still a long way to go before cryptocurrency becomes anything close to ubiquitous.
Indeed, the estimated number of cryptocurrency users in India ranges quite a bit, depending on who you ask. “I’ve seen experts’ estimations of crypto adoption in India ranging from .02% to .06%,” Kataria told Finance Magnates.
Similarly, Artur Schaback said that “Some official figures state that India has 1.7 million crypto investors, while others indicate over 5 million.”
On the other hand, the industry in the rest of the world does seem to be growing at a rapid pace. Data from German-based statistics company Statista shows that in Q1 of 2016, there were roughly 8.95 million blockchain wallet users worldwide; by Q1 of 2018, that figure had climbed to 25.76 million. By the end of 2019, there were 44.69 million.
“Meanwhile, the global industry–from DeFi and lending to payments and commerce–has continued maturing, so we could see adoption accelerate at an even faster pace in India than before the ban.” This could lead to increased anxiety from already-skeptical banks in the country.
Is India waiting to regulate until the industry is better understood?
Alternatively, however, the fact that a concrete set of regulations for crypto in India doesn’t exist yet could also mean that the government is willing to observe the growth of the industry for a while before making any hard and fast decisions about how appropriate regulation might look in India.
Indeed, Srinivas Katta, partner at IndusLaw, told Business Insider that policymakers should consider how cryptocurrencies could be used to build India’s economy before acting.
“Cryptocurrency and tokens are an important development and can enable further formalization of the economy if properly implemented,” he said. “They can also promote new industries and bring in a lot of investment [as well as] promote the ease of doing business, which is very important.”
And even if there isn’t a concrete set of regulations for India’s crypto industry just yet, the government is still taking steps toward improving the hygiene of the space. On Monday, a filing submitted to the country’s lower parliament revealed investigations into two bitcoin companies, Zeb IT Services, and Unocoin Technologies, for a number of allegedly fraudulent practices.
What do you think about the current legal situation surrounding cryptocurrency in India? Let us know in the comments below.
