Apex Legends Lost Treasures update patch notes: Crypto event & buffs
The next update in Apex Legends Season 5 is bringing a swarm of new content, starting with the new Lost Treasures Collection Event, changes to almost every Legend, and the long-awaited Town Takeover for Crypto.
As explained in the patch notes, these changes will give the battle royale a bit more longevity when it drops June 23 at 8 AM PST / 11 AM EST / 4 PM BST, as it will also implement a revised version of fan-favorite Limited Time Mode (LTM) Armed and Dangerous, with Evo armor only.
The Respawn Entertainment team are also giving Mirage players the heirloom they’ve been waiting for with a specially made trophy, perfect for the Arena’s most ornate Legend.
Almost every Legend has been touched by the balancing team as the devs work to tweak some that have been problematic, and some that need a boost.
As such, characters like Revenant are now going to be more disruptive to other Legend’s abilities while Lifeline gets a helping hand to revive downed allies.
Mirage's new heirloom will debut in the Lost Treasures Collection event update.
Lifeline’s tweaks are going to be a point of contention, since technically she’s getting better at healing with D.O.C’s new ability, but at the cost of her Fast Heal passive.
Meanwhile, teams holed up in a building with Wattson’s ultimate and electric fence will be in for a rude awakening now that Respawn are making her ability to fortify a position more easily countered.
That’s only a fraction of the Legend updates that are coming packaged in Lost Treasures Collection Event update, including a bevy of changes to Wraith’s kit.
Lifeline's healing capabilities are going to change after the new patch.
Players have been using Ziplines in Apex for a ton of creative movement techs in the game, though that’s about to change. The devs are adding a new cooldown to re-grabbing Ziplines which will increase every time a person disconnects and reattaches to the line.
Meanwhile, there are now friendly Caustic Trap pings that the community has been asking to implement for quite some time.
The Lost Treasures Collection update is bringing more content to Apex Legends.
Although not the color-changing update that some might have hoped for, this will certainly go a long way to differentiating the traps in the middle of a fight.
There are myriad updates revolving around different aspects of the battle royale, so don’t forget to get a rundown of the entire patch down below, courtesy of Respawn Entertainment .
We’re bringing a ton of exciting changes to the game along with the Lost Treasures Collection Event. In addition to the event, we’ll be making a host of tweaks to various Legend abilities and weapons. Get all the intel here so you’re fully prepared when you drop in.
The Armed & Dangerous Limited time mode has evolved. In this LTM, only Shotguns and Snipers are allowed. You’ll also start with a Mozambique and Evo armor. All other armor has been removed from the loot pool. But that’s not all. Respawn beacons will also be removed and all players will start with the Mobile Respawn Beacon in their inventory.
Need to Respawn on the go? Use the new Mobile Respawn Beacons! In the Armed and Dangerous LTM, players will start the match with one in their inventory. Then from the inventory screen, deploy it anywhere on the map and save your fallen teammates. But beware, calling in a Respawn Beacon takes time, giving your enemies time to find you, take you out, and use that Beacon you just deployed. So find that safe spot before you call it in.
Crypto is taking over and providing some recon to Kings Canyon. Located at the south-east of the map (under Repulsor), lies Crypto’s Map Room. Use his tech to get the location of all Legends on the map and check the screens scattered around the room to see how many enemy squads are nearby.
Isn’t that a handsome guy! Yes, it’s true, your man Mirage is getting his Heirloom! The gorgeous statue is one of a kind (sort of) and will ensure you look good in the arena.
Combat Revive now replaces Combat Medic.
Deploy D.O.C to revive teammates. D.O.C. will deploy a shield and revive Lifeline’s teammate, leaving Lifeline free to defend or revive someone else.
This fully replaces Lifeline’s old passive, including Fast Heal
Care Package will contain 3x more small healing items, when it decides to spawn small healing items
Care Package will contain 2x more attachments, when it decides to spawn attachments
Upon activation, Stim will remove movement impairing effects.
Players can change direction easily from the double jump.
