Tezos holders, if their funds are stored in certain wallets, can "stake" their XTZ and receive additional tokens as a reward for creating and verifying new blocks in the chain.
The tezos rally, which began in November last year, has been pushed on by major partnerships with the financial world and the so-called Tezos Foundation’s Faucet, that awards users up to 0.01 XTZ every 12 hours.
Last year, Brazil's BTG Pactual bank and Dalma Capital, a Dubai-based asset manager, announced they would use the tezos blockchain for security tokens. Meanwhile, Elevated Returns said it would use tezos to tokenize its real estate in Aspen.
The tezos price has outperformed bitcoin and most other cryptocurrencies over the last 12-months.
Tezos’ XTZ tokens began trading in late 2017 at the height of global bitcoin and crypto mania after the Switzerland-based non-profit Tezos Foundation raised $232 million in an initial coin offering.
At its peak, tezos was worth a little over $10 per XTZ token but lost over 95% of its value throughout the dire so-called crypto winter of 2018-2019.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
