Blockchain technology, the use of digital time stamps for ordering transactions, has been around since 1991. Researchers W. Scott Stornetta and Stuart Haber were looking for a way to create better document timestamps, but blockchain first produced a widespread real world utility as the underlying framework for Bitcoin in 2009. Not too long later, as an objectively better way to record transactions and prevent fraud, the concept of the blockchain is already a part of many mainstream companies behind the scenes.
Identifying when the first blockchain stock appeared is difficult. As Bitcoin began to expand, many small tech companies already on exchanges simply slid over into researching and producing blockchain technology. It is also true that many penny stocks who claim blockchain are using the lexicon strictly for marketing purposes. Speculative tech is a relatively unregulated business space that many government regulators don’t even have the training to understand.
The first well-publicized blockchain stock offering was conducted by Overstock (NASDAQ: OSTK) in 2016. The first blockchain ETFs showed up in the U.S. in early 2018 following the Q4 2017 Bitcoin mania (1 BTC ≈ $20,000). Since 2018, the crypto securities market continues to expand as crypto’s market cap consolidates between a range of $150 billion and $330 billion.
Today, blockchain stocks tend to rise and fall in tandem with the volatility in Bitcoin and other major cryptocurrencies. Some experts have guessed that the connection is because low-information casual investors are making their way into the market. Others think that “blockchain” is being used more like a marketing catch-all to attract new investors.
The overlap of these theories may be the most interesting point: They both benefit from nontechnical investors who may not be interested in blockchain as anything more than a framework for a method of currency exchange. They are less interested in anonymity or security, and they may not need to know that companies like IBM, Oracle and Amazon are already using blockchain in their digital transformations. Smart investors, however, follow the implementation of the technology in companies large and small. Blockchain has implications for how businesses will conduct daily commerce in the next few years.
The tools and execution you receive from a good broker can make all the difference in penny stock trading . Here’s what you need to know about top brokers in this space.
