Hong Kong-based cryptocurrency derivatives exchange Bex500 is giving away 1000 BTC in bonuses – here’s how to claim yours.
Established in 2018, Bex500 offers double contracts with 200x leverage and perpetual contracts with 100x leverage on a wide range of cryptocurrencies, including BTC, ETH, LTC, and XRP.
Bex500 has an average trading volume of US$448 million per day and accepts global traders from 150+ countries in the world, reaching America, Europe, Russia, Japan, South Korea, and Southeast Asia.
No matter you are a professional trader or just stepping into the crypto world, you can create an account with NO KYC and enjoy free BTC bonuses on the Bex500 exchange.
To claim your $15 in either Bitcoin (BTC) or Tether (USDT) bonus, you just need to sign up for an account on Bex500. The $15 registration bonus is useful, especially to inexperienced traders and beginners in the cryptocurrency futures market.
Traders can use the $15 bonus as margin in perpetual contracts trading . In this way, you don’t need to worry about losing money for lack of futures trading experience and strategies.
In addition, if you get profits in trading with your bonus, you can withdraw those profits as well. Bex500 Trading Academy also introduces some useful trading strategies which may help traders make a profit easily in crypto leverage futures trading.
Note: $15 worth BTC or USDT will be credited in your account based on your selected settlement cryptocurrency during registration. Once chosen, it cannot be changed.
Bex500 has also launched an attractive deposit bonus program that gives traders can get a 20% bonus for the first deposit.
For example, if you deposit 1 BTC in, you will get 1.2 BTC credited to your account. The more you deposit, the more bonuses you will get. With a 20% extra deposit bonus , you can open a larger position and get bigger gains.
Note: If you did multiple deposits before the bonus being activated, the bonus calculation is based on the amount of the last deposit.
Bex500 is giving away a total of 1000 BTC in bonuses. Join today to claim yours!
