Binance, the world’s largest crypto exchange, has announced 100 new hires despite the ongoing economic downturn.
While global unemployment continues hitting new highs amid the coronavirus pandemic, the cryptocurrency industry is stepping in to shelter job losses, with some of the biggest companies in the space announcing their intention to hire new employees.
Binance, the world’s largest cryptocurrency exchange, has just announced that it is seeking to hire more than 100 new employees, despite the ongoing economic downturn.
In an April 3 tweet , Binance invited people around the world to build a career in the Blockchain space, offering a crucial opportunity to “work from home” as global jurisdictions continue strengthening quarantine measures.
Binance CEO and founder, Changpeng Zhao , subsequently brought further attention to Binance’s hiring spree by tweeting:
“Getting used to work from home, but hate your job? Good at what you do and passionate about crypto? You know what to do.”
While the official announcement says that Binance is willing to employ at least 100 people, the job listing page accounts for nearly 180 open positions, including potential hires. As reported by Cointelegraph, Binance has at least 800 employees on its team to date. The company’s open job listings cover diverse areas like business development, marketing, communications, customer service, finance, analytics, and frontend.
As a global crypto company, Binance is hiring talent all over the world. The listings include a wide number of locations in Europe, Asia, and Latin America. Cointelegraph reached out to Binance to find out more information about the announcement, but did not receive an immediate response. This story will be updated should they respond.
Binance’s job postings are crucial amid as unemployment numbers continue to skyrocket globally. As reported by Cointelegraph, 6.6 million people in the U.S. filed for unemployment last week; a number which is more than double official estimates.
Binance is not the only company that is apparently expanding its staff during this difficult social climate. In late March, major United States-based cryptocurrency exchange, Kraken, reportedly announced it was expanding its team of 800 with an additional 67 hires.
The news comes amid the general uptick on crypto markets, with Bitcoin ( BTC ) steadily recovering over the past two weeks following a plunge below $4,000 in mid-March. On March 16, Catherine Coley, the CEO of Binance US, revealed that the coronavirus quarantine in Asia drove a significant surge in trade volume.
Yesterday, Binance officially announced its historic acquisition of major crypto data website, CoinMarketCap, or CMC. While both Binance and CMC ensured that the website will continue to operate independently, CMC’s interim CEO said that the company doesn’t expect any changes to the team in the near future.
