By joining the association, Binance will lend its efforts to develop the crypto space in India.
Binance announced this Thursday that it has joined the crypto-asset exchange committee at the Internet and Mobile Association of India (IAMAI), to help develop the crypto and blockchain industry in the country.
The IAMAI is the leading trade body of digital businesses within India. With Binance joining the fold, the association will put its efforts behind implementing industry best practices that are currently followed by international exchanges.
Commenting on the new member, Gaurav Chopra, Vice President of IAMAI, said in the statement: “We warmly welcome Binance as a member of the Crypto Asset Committee of IAMAI.
Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
“Given their hands-on experience of regulatory compliance in various countries, we are excited to work with Binance and other industry players in developing a constructive policy framework for crypto assets in India, helping other exchanges operate in India compliantly and developing a strong framework to foster innovation while managing potential risks.”
Is India heading for a crypto ban or boom?
Based on trading volume, Binance is currently the largest crypto exchange in the world, according to CoinMarketCap. The move from Binance follows on from rumours surfacing late last week that a second wave of efforts to ban cryptocurrency in India might be coming. This led to Finance Magnates looking into whether India might be on the bring of a crypto ban or boom.
“Binance is honoured and excited to join IAMAI and contribute our part in shaping the Indian blockchain industry for sustainable growth and development. Binance has been dedicated to and supportive of the Indian projects and entrepreneurs who are solving social or industrial problems through blockchain technology, including the launch of our ‘Blockchain for India Fund’ supporting the development of India’s blockchain ecosystem,” added Changpeng Zhao (CZ), Binance CEO in the statement.
