Binance's new Twitter emoji is being used to celebrate its upcoming third birthday. But will it be worth it?
Binance gets its own emoji on Twitter. Image: Shutterstock.
Binance Coin (BNB) is now the third cryptocurrency with a branded emoji on Twitter.
The Bitcoin (BTC) emoji was added back in February and Crypto.com Coin (CRO) got its emoji last month.
Binance likely paid between $50,000 and $1 million for the emoji.
Binance, the world's largest cryptocurrency spot exchange, now has its own emoji on Twitter. Anyone who tweets #BNB, #Binance, and several other hashtags will now see the Binance logo next to their tweet.
Binance is one of the biggest crypto exchanges. Image: Shutterstock.
The Twitter emoji comes as the exchange plans to celebrate its third birthday on July 14. The exchange is giving out its own branded, non-fungible tokens to those who promote the exchange on social media.
Binance's new emoji was first spotted in the wild earlier today, when Binance CEO Changpeng Zhao simply tweeted #BNB. Now, the emoji is present in practically all of Binance's recent tweets. Binance Coin (BNB) is now one of just three cryptocurrencies with its own Twitter emoji.
Binance's CEO tweets to show off the emoji. Image: Twitter.
Bitcoin (BTC) was the first cryptocurrency to get an emoji on Twitter, and was added to the platform back in February. Crypto.com Coin (CRO) was the second cryptocurrency to get its own branded emoji and was revealed last month as part of a competition.
Since the emoji went live, the price of Binance Coin has risen slightly from $15.37 to $15.75, up 2.4%. Not a huge pump, but a minor gain in an otherwise flat market.
Binance has not stated how much it spent on the emoji. But the Block's director of research Larry Cermak recently stated that any company that commits more than $50,000 in Twitter ad spend may be eligible for an emoji. And brands, such as PepsiCo and Anheuser-Busch, have reportedly paid as much as $1 million for branded emojis in the past.
The crypto community is now speculating which project will be next to launch its emoji, and both Bitcoin Cash (BCH) and Tron (TRX) are two particularly common picks.
Get the best of Decrypt where you want it most.
