Just recently BTC prices surpassed the $10,000 zone and held above that region for around 24 hours. Some speculators believe the price of BTC dipped below the $10k range on Monday, after the price aligned with the price gap on CME Group’s global market exchange. During the course of 2019, crypto traders have noticed that BTC spot market prices have seen quick surges and drops that leave a gap unfilled on BTC futures charts.
After BTC ’s Quick Surge Over $10k, Spot Prices Dip Filling the Gap on CME Bitcoin Futures Charts
BTC jumped over the $10,000 price point on Saturday and touched a 2020 high of $10,180 on Sunday. The value dropped to $9,790 per BTC during the early morning trading sessions on Monday. Traders, analysts, and speculators have been noticing a trend that’s happened a few times since early last year and it may be the reason behind this quick price drop.
February 2020’s $10k drop to the $9,800 range follows the unfilled price gap that took place on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) Bitcoin Futures chart. The gap appeared when CME’s bitcoin futures closed at $9,850 on Friday and when CME’s global markets opened again at $10,000 the negative action, or unfilled gap, brought prices down $300 in the blink of an eye.
This type of market action is called “filling the gap” or “closing the gap” when people analyze charts and price movements. Spot market and futures market prices can be different as derivatives investors are betting on the future value of an asset, while spot market traders are swapping assets in real-time. Cryptocurrency markets are rare because they operate 24 hours a day and seven days a week. The derivatives markets should grow mature with time and many people think that each market can affect each other by placing different types of wagers on each other.
$BTC still has a CME gap opened in the 8Ks which means we could see a correction.
I'm sharing this in-case anyone was thinking of fomo-ing into the #Bitcoin markets now.
High chance we fill this gap soon! 📉🎯 pic.twitter.com/iOkMGMC1S8
— Mr. Whale 🐋 (@CryptoWhale) February 10, 2020
So a gap forms when the price of an asset like BTC surges faster than usual and it leaves a gap on derivatives market charts while trading hours are closed. Because of this cryptocurrency markets can see a “close the gap” scenario because of the underlying cash markets that are running 24/7. Not only is this done with CME Group’s bitcoin futures but unregulated derivatives markets can be used to close the gap as well. For instance, the Twitter account Whale Trades noticed $2 million worth of BTC bought on Bitmex by a whale and wrote : “Wait for the bounce, then short the corn.”
BTC price on February 10, 2020, at 9 a.m. ET.
Monday’s action is not the first ‘close the gap’ scenario with BTC and the asset has seen a few unfilled gaps in 2019 as well. During the rally in June 2019, a few gaps were left behind but there were many gaps filled with price corrections following. At the time, traders didn’t know what to expect as gap closures could be bullish or bearish depending on market sentiment.
This breakout is the real deal. Fundamental investment activity is backing this $10k breakout. pic.twitter.com/IDWmhXX2Mj
— Willy Woo (@woonomic) February 9, 2020
This time around, unlike the surge in June, traders and analysts believe the $10k BTC price surge is the “real deal.” Onchain analyst and Adaptive Fund partner Willy Woo tweeted about breaking the psychological $10k zone on Sunday. “This breakout is the real deal — Fundamental investment activity is backing this $10k breakout,” Woo tweeted . Besides Woo, a slew of other traders believe this breakout is quite different than the spike last summer as well.
— RJ (@RJ_Killmex) June 23, 2019
Price gaps usually get filled but that’s not always the case and there can be a few forgotten gaps over a long period of time. There were plenty of gaps in 2017 when BTC ’s price rose exponentially as the value jumped $1,000 in a single day and continued to do this for a couple of days in a row. Looking at the long term cycles of an asset, traders typically visualize forgotten unfilled gaps as strong areas of support or resistance. The gaps still exist, they were just never filled. Long periods of time doesn’t mean they can’t be eventually, as bears and crypto traders who love to short always focus on specific bottom targets.
Is that CME gap filled? Asking for a friend
— Ninja (@Ninjascalp) February 10, 2020
Right now spot markets and futures contracts on CME Group and other crypto derivatives markets charts indicate that prices are near equal. However, CME’s price quotes show that in March, April, and May predictions are in the $10,100 range.
What do you think about the gap closure yesterday and traders leveraging price gaps between derivatives and spot markets? Let us know what you think about this subject in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Price articles and market updates are intended for informational purposes only and should not be considered as trading advice. Neither Bitcoin.com nor the author is responsible for any losses or gains, as the ultimate decision to conduct a trade is made by the reader. Always remember that only those in possession of the private keys are in control of the “money.” Cryptocurrency prices referenced in this article were recorded at 9 a.m. on February 10, 2020.
Did you know you can buy and sell BCH privately using our noncustodial, peer-to-peer Local Bitcoin Cash trading platform? The local.Bitcoin.com marketplace has thousands of participants from all around the world trading BCH right now. And if you need a bitcoin wallet to securely store your coins, you can download one from us here .
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
On Friday, June 26, the China-based Zhejiang Ebang Communication, often referred to as Ebang, will be listed on Nasdaq, according to various reports. Ebang’s initial public offering (IPO) will be the second U.S.-based IPO for an ASIC mining manufacturer joining ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
KPMG has launched a cryptocurrency management platform designed to accelerate institutional crypto adoption. KPMG's patent-pending tool aims to bridge traditional data and crypto systems, integrating key use cases of cryptocurrency, including custody, wallets, and anti-money laundering (AML) transaction monitoring. KPMG's ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Self-Proclaimed Satoshi Claims He's Autistic, Judge Tosses Out Sanctions Against Craig Wright
The Kleiman v. Wright case is seemingly headed to trial on July 6, 2020, after Judge Beth Bloom ruled against the Kleiman’s attempt to levy sanctions against Craig Wright, the man who claims to be Satoshi Nakamoto. It seems Wright ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
US Real Estate Market Crisis: 4.3 Million Mortgage Delinquencies, Commercial Properties Sink in Value
The U.S. economy continues to look bleak as the American citizens and small businesses nationwide struggle to keep up with the government’s rules toward Covid-19 guidelines. In just 13 weeks, over 45 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits and many ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
Final Judgment: Telegram to Pay Crypto Investors Back $1.2 Billion, US Court Orders
The dispute between Telegram and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is coming to a close as the final judgment has been filed. Telegram has been ordered to pay back $1.2 billion. The company must also pay the SEC ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have recently published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
