"History teaches us that after this post-halving drop in price, there is a subsequent bull run," CEO and founder of deVere Group Nigel Green said.
"Previous Bitcoin halving events have prompted impressive price climbs. The 2016 halving triggered a 300 per cent jump in the value of Bitcoin.
Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency and worldwide payment system. (AAP)
Currently Bitcoin is trading at just under A$13,500 per coin. If Mr Green's forecast of a 300 per cent rise comes true that value could skyrocket up to more than $40,000 per coin.
"Traditional currencies are devalued and inflation fears rise on the back of the mass printing of money, the likes of which we have recently seen in the US, where the nation's central bank has added trillions of dollars to the money supply," Mr Green said.
"Such measures will inevitably encourage even more investors to consider decentralised, non-sovereign digital currencies.
"Looking ahead beyond the halving event, cryptocurrencies are increasingly becoming regarded as the future of money due to the real-world issues they address and growing mass adoption."
Bitcoin lost a great deal of value in 2018. (AAP)
Bitcoin is a form of online cryptocurrency that allows money to be transferred electronically. It's decentralised, which means no-one regulates or controls it except for market demand.
It was created by a group (or a single person) of programmers under the pseudonym "Satoshi Nakamoto" in 2009.
Bitcoins are "mined" by computers that solve incredibly complex mathematical equations. Like coal or oil, there is a limited number of Bitcoins available to be mined, estimated to be in the ballpark of 21 million.
You cannot mine Bitcoin on your home computer, it requires specialised programs and hardware that have increased the difficulty of mining a Bitcoin.
Bitcoin experienced a dramatic explosion in value in late 2017, before it experienced one of the most catastrophic value crashes ever seen in currency.
For breaking news alerts and livestreams straight to your smartphone sign up to the 9News app and set notifications to on at the App Store or Google Play.
You can also get up-to-date information from the Federal Government's Coronavirus Australia app, available on the App Store , Google Play and the Government's WhatsApp channel .
