The coronacoin team currently counts seven developers, mostly in Europe, according to Reuters, with Kemp indicating more are about to come on board.
Coronacoin is being traded on the allegedly decentralized cryptocurrency exchange Saturn Network, with coronacoin making up almost 60% of its meager volume.
An investigation by cryptocurrency news and analysis website Decrypt found Saturn Network to fall well short of common standards and recommended against using it.
Coronacoin claims that as tokens are burnt when the number of people infected with the coronavirus ... [+] or killed by it rises means it is likely the token will increase in value.
The number of coronavirus infections worldwide is now more than 111,000, with about 3,890 deaths, however the spread of the virus appears to be slowing in China, where it originated.
Italy yesterday extended its coronavirus quarantine measures, which include a ban on public gatherings, to the entire country, while in the U.S. the number of confirmed cases now exceeds 500.
Despite the virus spreading around the world in recent weeks, governments are working hard to contain and minimize it.
Coronacoin is a macabre gimmick, designed to make its developers a quick buck—not to serve as a long-term store of value.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
