The XRP tether contract offers leverage of up to 75 times, according to Binance, and is the exchange's fourth tether-tied futures trading pair, along with bitcoin, bitcoin cash, and ethereum.
Ripple has said it expects to grow its customer base by 30% to 40% this year, from 300 currently, and boasted transaction volume on the Ripple network will rise more than 600% .
"Ripple owns a lot of XRP, we’re very interested in the success of XRP, but the accusations of us dumping, that’s not in our best interests to do that," Garlinghouse told U.S. television network CNN last month, adding "we would never do that and in fact, we’ve taken steps to lock up most of the XRP we own in escrows so we can’t touch it."
Garlinghouse also denied that Ripple, which owns some 60% of XRP tokens, could move the XRP price.
The price of Ripple's XRP has been on a long-term downward trend as the company works to sign up ... [+] banks and other financial service companies to its technology.
The price of Ripple's XRP is down some 45% over the last 12 months, with many in the  Ripple community decrying the company's practice of selling XRP tokens to boost its financial performance .
Bitcoin has outperformed almost all of its peers over the last year or so. The bitcoin price is around double where it began 2019 while most other major cryptocurrencies, including Ripple's XRP, ethereum, bitcoin cash, and litecoin have struggled to break out of their now two-year long bear market.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
