The Bitcoin market has, like stock markets, behaved extremely wildly in recent weeks. The virtual currency collapsed to one-year lows around $4,600 in mid-March as the Covid-19 crisis shook investor confidence. But its recovery since has been remarkable, the asset charging back to within a whisker of $10,000 on Friday.
There’s some who believe that Bitcoin could be about to embark on a fresh surge towards the stars too. The ‘halving’ is a process that cuts the number of tokens awarded to currency miners by half. This third instalment, scheduled for this evening, clearly threatens to have a serious supply side-effect for the cryptocurrency.
Previous price patterns certainly suggest that Bitcoin could accelerate away following this upcoming episode. One crypto expert, Jaan Lainurm, notes that Bitcoin’s came within spitting distance of $20,000 the last time halving occurred in 2016.
But don‘t break out your chequebook just yet. Lainurm, the chief investment officer of venture capital firm Vereeni Investments, isn’t totally convinced that the digital asset will spring higher. He notes that Bitcoin has struggled to gain traction alongside other more established assets due to coronavirus-related uncertainty, commenting that the asset was “at one point losing half of its value in the space of a few hours.”
That said, Lairnum doesn’t rule out the possibility of a renewed appetite for Bitcoin, particularly as “investors will be buoyed to have seen it recover most of those losses over the past few weeks.” He notes that investors “may find Bitcoin’s fixed supply appealing” during a period when central banks across the globe ramp up quantitative easing programmes to support the global economy.
The upcoming halving procedure doesn’t impact my personal view of Bitcoin. I’d much rather put my money to work on share markets. Why? Well I don’t consider an asset class that remains as volatile as this to be an attractive investment target. The long-term future of cryptocurrencies remains up in the air and the Securities and Exchange Commission continues to rebut proposals for a Bitcoin-backed Exchange Traded Fund.
I’d much rather continue to use my money to invest in share markets. For one, study after study shows long-term investors can expect to make returns of up to 10% per year. This is even when periods of extreme volatility (like recent coronavirus-related turbulence) are taken into account.
Finally, I believe that the recent sell-off leaves plenty of brilliant bargains that are too good to ignore. Of course, further bouts of selling could be just around the corner. The Covid-19 crisis continues to evolve and the economic implications remain broadly unknown. Remember though, stocks should be bought and sold on their profits outlooks for 10, 20, maybe 30 years ahead. Not on the basis of what their share prices might do in the short- to medium-term. And there are plenty of great buys just on the FTSE 100 alone.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Royston Wild has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
