Bitcoin briefly jumped to almost $6,000 per bitcoin before falling back almost immediately—losing almost 10% over the last 24-hour trading period.
Elsewhere on crypto markets , other major digital tokens fell alongside bitcoin with the likes of ethereum, Ripple's XRP, litecoin and bitcoin cash all losing between 5% and 12% over the same period .
"Crypto-asset markets again seem to be mirroring the actions of the traditional markets," said Simon Peters, analyst and bitcoin expert at brokerage eToro.
"However, fear is arguably a more dominant emotion than greed at the moment, because even with this stimulus, investors are still very worried about global economies grinding to a halt due to COVID-19."
U.S. equity futures and global stocks tumbled after the Fed made its historic move, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average and S&P 500 futures each dropping to their out-of-hours trading limits of about 5% in out-of-hours trading.
"There can be no denying the Fed’s commitment to action but its dramatic move will initially stoke further debate as to whether the monetary medicine will work, on the economy or markets or both," said Russ Mould, investment director at stock broker AJ Bell.
Many senior figures in the bitcoin and cryptocurrency community have argued the Fed's bond-buying and interest rate cuts highlight bitcoin's superiority to traditional markets.
"The Fed just cut rates to zero and entered into QE again. Bitcoin was built for this moment," said Dan Held, U.S.-based bitcoin and crypto exchange Kraken's head of businesses development, via Twitter .
"Bitcoin is a hedge to this," cofounder of the U.S.-based Gemini bitcoin and crypto exchange, Tyler Winklevoss, said via Twitter .
The bitcoin price failed to be supported by the latest central bank measures to prop up the economy. ... [+]
"Bitcoin doesn’t have a 'limit down' or 'circuit breakers' because it is a real market with a real clearing price," bitcoin and cryptocurrency expert and cofounder of the Satoshi Nakamoto Institute, Pierre Rochard, tweeted .
"Stocks and bonds are not real markets, they are Potemkin villages, their prices are highly manipulated and political."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
