2,681 took part in the survey, which was conducted by YouGov.
Around 1.9 million consumers are estimated to still be holding the crypto that they bought. Of those more than half have holdings valued at more £260.
The research note published by the FCA found an overwhelming majority to be highly knowledgeable about the asset class.
89% are aware that their cryptoassets do not have the same protection as that afforded to regulated investments.  A further 92% were able to correctly define what a cryptoasset is.
Buyers were also well aware of the issue of price volatility.
The survey estimates that 80% of the cryptoasset wealth is held by just 1% of the population.
The breakdown of crypto holders skewed heavily towards higher earners and the better educated – The ABC1 social stratification categories account for 73% of crypto owners.
An overwhelming majority bought their crypto offshore, on non-UK based exchanges (83%).
In term of custody, most stored on exchanges (46%), followed by online wallets (34%) and 24% holding their crypto offline.
Encouragingly for the health of the industry, a surprisingly large number  said they had used their crypto to purchase goods and services, coming in at 27%.
Not surprisingly, 77% bought cryptoassets through exchanges and only 8% have used borrowed money to finance purchases of crypto.
Sheldon Mills, the FCA’s Interim Executive Director of Strategy and Competition, commenting on the research findings said: “This FCA report reveals the increasing popularity of cryptoassets among the UK consumer population and underlines the importance of our work to gain a deeper understanding of this market and how people interact with these assets.
The FCA is aprt  of the UK’s Crypto TaskForce along with the Bank of England and HM Treasury.
In its last tax and spending statement – the March 2020 Budget – the UK government  said it would be looking to bring crypto fully under existing financial promotions regulation rules.
In the press release issued on the findings of the research, the regulator provided further detail on how the survey was designed and conducted:
“Of the 2,188 consumers who have heard of cryptoassets and completed the questionnaire, 165 had purchased cryptoassets. We boosted the sample of cryptoasset owners with a further 493 consumers and a total of 2,681 proceeded with answering a number of follow-up questions about their experiences .”
Disclaimer: This article is not meant to give financial advice. Any additional opinion herein is purely the author’s and does not represent the opinion of EWN or any of its other writers. Please carry out your own research before investing in any of the numerous cryptocurrencies available. Thank you.
Gary is a cryptocurrency analyst at interactive investor, the UK’s second-largest stockbroker. He has been writing professionally about cryptocurrency since 2013, when he initiated bitcoin coverage at Money Observer, one of the UK’s most respected investment magazines. Gary writes for EWN in a personal capacity and his contributions should not be taken as investment advice.
