Let me unpack that. An example of the idea that correlation is not causation is the correlation between levels of cheese consumption and people who die strangled by their bedsheets. It’s a darkly humorous example, but to me I say everyone knows cheese gives you nightmares and if you are thrashing about in bed asleep your chances of coming unstuck in your bedsheets goes up! As such, when you see correlation you would do well to find the hidden link rather than dismiss it.
You don’t have to look far to find the link. It is of course liquidity and the giant ejaculations of it by the market nationalizing Federal Reserve. Both the stock market and bitcoin are responding to it and the inflationary impact of these monetary stimuli.
The only way stocks are going to keep ascending is if the market thinks large scale inflation is coming because there are no buybacks coming and a certainty of a slump in earnings universally baked in. If inflation is coming then stocks will nominally be fine, even though the money they represent will be devalued. Bitcoin (BTC) will as I have said before, go off the dial.
Others will argue that the world will stash this new cash and it will entombed like gold bars in a wreck at the bottom of the sea. It could happen.
What is by far and away more interesting however, is that bitcoin leads moves in the S&P 500:
Until stocks and BTC decouple, bitcoin is going to be a valuable leading indicator for stocks. That will happen when the spigots of liquidity are turned off and if they are not then inflation has to follow.
Clem Chambers is the CEO of private investors website ADVFN.com and author of 101 Ways to Pick Stock Market Winners and Trading Cryptocurrencies: A Beginner’s Guide .
Chambers won Journalist of the Year in the Business Market Commentary category in the State Street U.K. Institutional Press Awards in 2018.
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I wrote a stock column for WIRED – which described me as a ‘Market Maven’ - and am a regular columnist for numerous financial publications around the world. I have written for titles including:  Working Money, Active Trader, SFO and Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities in the US and have written for pretty much every UK national newspaper.  In the last few years I have become a financial thriller writer and have just had my first non-fiction title published: 101 ways to pick stock market winners. Find me here on US Amazon.
You’ll also see me regularly on CNBC, CNN, SKY, Business News Network and the BBC giving my take on the markets.
