Blockchain / Cryptocurrency Stock News Bites: Marathon Patent Group (NASDAQ: $MARA) Announces Installation of 700 M30s+ Asic Miners and Company is Debt Free
LAS VEGAS - June 3, 2020 (Investorideas.com Newswire) Blockchain / Cryptocurrency Stock News Bites - Marathon Patent Group, Inc. ( NASDAQ:MARA ) ("Marathon" or "Company"), one of the few Nasdaq listed cryptocurrency mining companies in the United States, today announced the completed installation of 700 M30S+ ASIC Bitcoin Miners that were purchased on May 11, 2020. The company is awaiting delivery of 1,160 Bitmain S19 Pro ASIC Miners in the next 60 days.
On May 19, 2020, Marathon announced the reduction of the conversion price of Convertible Note originally issued on August 31, 2017. The entire principal balance of $999,105.60 and $215,411.30 of accrued interest has been fully converted by the Note holder to Marathon Common stock, reducing the company's Long-Term Debt to zero. This reduction in Debt results in a substantial improvement in the company's Balance Sheet and increases our Stockholders Equity.
Read the company's full news and disclaimer here: https://www.marathonpg.com/news/press-releases/detail/1200/marathon-patent-group-announces-installation-of-700-m30s
About Investorideas.com - News that Inspires Big Investing Ideas Investorideas.com is a recognized news source publishing third party news, research and original financial content. Learn about investing in stocks and sector trends with our news alerts, articles, podcasts and videos, looking at cannabis, crypto, AI and IoT, mining, sports biotech, water, renewable energy and more. Investor Idea's original branded content includes the following podcasts and columns : Crypto Corner , Play by Play sports and stock news column, Investor Ideas Potcasts Cannabis News and Stocks on the Move podcast and column, Cleantech and Climate Change , Exploring Mining the AI Eye .
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions. This stock bites news release publication is available as a paid for service on Investorideas.com https://www.investorideas.com/News-Upload/
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
