Singapore-based Broctagon Fintech Group has announced its AXIS (Affiliate Expansion Integrated System) CRM upgrade to reward clients with greater flexibility when depositing cryptocurrencies.
The update has added more than 40 new cryptocurrencies for brokers to accept deposits in, which means traders can now fund their accounts directly and trade a variety of financial instruments while brokers naturally expand their client base.
Currently, the majority of brokers receive deposits through fiat, meaning crypto traders would have to exchange their cryptocurrencies before transferring into a broker system.
Broctagon’s update eliminates the current outdated process while providing a more efficient way for traders to deposit funds with the use of cryptocurrencies.
To add to this, the company’s AXIS has been specifically built for brokers to easily integrate and tailor software. Its use of APIs allows for smooth integration with existing business systems and can easily handle specific requirements, such as managing commission tiers and referral rewards.
Broctagon is now LIVE at our virtual booth at #VirtualVisionFinance by @iFXEXPO ! Find out more about our leading technology in #crypto #liquidity and how to get the best bid/ask price quotes from global feeds for your crypto exchange! Speak to us at https://t.co/OvSnABKQCk pic.twitter.com/wqABhZ4H9E
— Broctagon Group (@BroctagonGroup) June 10, 2020
Ted Quek, Chief Technology Officer of Broctagon Fintech Group, said: “We’re fully committed to giving our clients the tools they need to extend their market reach. We’ve worked closely with brokers who have custom needs, so flexibility and easy integration is a core component of how we have designed our platform. It’s built for purpose.
“We anticipate all our existing clients will want to take up this upgrade. Conveniently, it only requires one simple configuration to connect to all of the benefits.
“The timing of expanding these capabilities and increasing accessibility is significant. The market is more mature and seeing an uptake as investors seek to hedge their positions in the current market. It is significant that there are now many more crypto holders than when the market boomed in 2017. Where prices go from here has yet to be seen, but this will help improve efficiency in the market and is another example of cryptocurrency trading closing the gap with traditional financial markets.”
