Singapore-based Broctagon Fintech Group has provided its brokers with greater flexibility to manage client lifecycles though its AXIS (Affiliate Expansion Integrated System) CRM.
The update adds more than 40 new cryptocurrencies for brokers to accept deposits in. Traders can now easily fund their accounts directly and trade all the different instruments available quickly whilst brokers can open all their markets to cryptocurrency holders with the goal of expanding their client base.
The majority of brokers receive deposits through fiat, meaning crypto traders would have to exchange their cryptocurrencies before transferring into a broker system. This eliminates that process and provides a much more convenient way for traders to deposit money than via bank transfer, which can take around 24 hours compared to about 15 minutes when deposited via a cryptocurrency – or under a minute in the case of bitcoin. With brokers being able to accept these deposits, the traditional financial markets will be more open to crypto holders who might be looking to diversify their assets.
To add to this, Broctagon’s AXIS has been specifically built for brokers to easily integrate and tailor software. Its use of APIs allows for smooth integration with existing business systems and can easily handle specific requirements, such as managing commission tiers and referral rewards.
Ted Quek, Chief Technology Officer of Broctagon Fintech Group, says: “We’re fully committed to giving our clients the tools they need to extend their market reach. We’ve worked closely with brokers who have custom needs, so flexibility and easy integration is a core component of how we have designed our platform. It’s built for purpose. We anticipate all our existing clients will want to take up this upgrade. Conveniently, it only requires one simple configuration to connect to all of the benefits.
“The timing of expanding these capabilities and increasing accessibility is significant. The market is more mature and seeing an uptake as investors seek to hedge their positions in the current market. It is significant that there are now many more crypto holders than when the market boomed in 2017. Where prices go from here has yet to be seen, but this will help improve efficiency in the market and is another example of cryptocurrency trading closing the gap with traditional financial markets.”
