With China still in the lead, other countries are advancing their projects to develop payment systems around central bank digital currencies (CBDCs). Cambodia, for example, has recently revealed it will mint its own coin within months. The news comes as more details about the digital Chinese yuan indicate its main purpose will be to substitute cash in a system that provides “controlled anonymity.”
Cambodia will issue the government-backed crypto to fuel what has been presented as “a blockchain-based, peer-to-peer payment and money transfer platform.” Named ‘Project Bakong,’ the system is supposed to go live in the next few months, Phnom Penh Post reported, as it already has the support of 11 banks and more are expected to join in the near future.
Chea Serey, director-general of the National Bank of Cambodia (NBC), told the daily that the Bakong commenced in July, 2019. She insisted that the scheme will be operational within the current fiscal quarter. While the newspaper describes it as “a quasi-form of a central bank digital currency,” the central bank official stated that it will be the “national payment gateway for Cambodia.” Serey elaborated:
Bakong will play a central role in bringing all players in the payment space in Cambodia under the same platform, making it easy for end-users to pay each other regardless of the institutions they bank with. Eventually, we hope to allow cross border payment through the Bakong system too.
One of the private banks helping the project, Phnom Penh Commercial Bank (PPCB), has been working to deploy the new system at all of its branches. In comparison with traditional payment and money transfer options such as credit cards and mobile platforms, Bakong is cheaper and more convenient, PPCB President Shin Chang Moo noted.
The banker also commented on concerns that financial institutions like his might lose market share to Bakong. He believes that in the long run the project will facilitate the establishment of more inclusive financial ecosystems that will be beneficial for all stakeholders in the industry. Cambodia’s financial sector is still relatively immature in terms of number of service providers and users, he remarked.
Chang Moo made a clear distinction between Bakong and permissionless decentralized cryptocurrencies like bitcoin – the Cambodian digital currency project is a closed system backed by the country’s banks and financial authorities, which leaves no room for speculation. He also revealed that the Bakong wallets will be linked to bank accounts allowing users to exchange their digital coins for the nation’s fiat currency. “All the transactions will be done on a real-time basis with the records stored safely at NBC,” the banker said, adding that other central banks are likely to develop similar systems.
Japan Must Be Ready to Issue CBDC, BOJ Deputy Governor Says
Other governments and regulators have been paying attention to the accelerating developments in the field of CBDCs. These include much more developed economies and financial systems such as Japan. Although Tokyo has no immediate plans to issue a digital currency, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) Deputy Governor Masayoshi Amamiya recently stated that the institution must nevertheless be ready to do so. Amamiya was quoted by Reuters saying:
The speed of technical innovation is very fast. Depending on how things unfold in the world of settlement systems, public demand for CBDCs could soar in Japan.
But if Japan is still on the sidelines and Cambodia has only recently entered the digital currency race, China has been Asia’s leader in terms of progress towards actually issuing a CBDC. It started working on one about five years ago and stepped up its efforts after the announcement of private projects such as Facebook’s Libra. Although no timeframe has been announced for the anticipated launch, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) is preparing to begin trials of the digital yuan with the participation of four state-owned commercial banks and three telecom operators.
The goals of those behind such projects may be quite different. In countries where governments have continued to suppress interest rates as an anti-crisis measure , digital currencies can make it easier for central banks to introduce and maintain negative deposit rates. Limiting cash in circulation may be another prime objective as authorities are targeting tax evasion, money laundering and other illicit activities while limiting financial privacy.
An analysis published by the Chinese company Huatai Securities reveals more details about the Digital Currency Electronic Payment (DCEP) system which China is now finalizing. It’s become obvious that unlike decentralized cryptocurrencies, DCEP will operate in a centralized environment managed by the PBOC. Its “legally encrypted” currency will be a digital form of the renminbi (RMB). Unlike electronic payments based on platforms such as Alipay, which digitize money in the existing commercial bank account system, M1 and M2 money supply, the digital yuan aims to replace banknotes and coins, or the narrowest money supply type, M0. To achieve that, DCEP will also support offline transactions.
The digital yuan will be distributed through a two-tier system. The central bank will issue the currency to commercial banks against their reserves and then provide it to the public. Compared to the traditional fiat system, DCEP will offer the Beijing government and the Chinese central bank greater controls over all transactions, which is impossible with paper cash. As a substitute for cash, the CBDC will share characteristics with both paper currency and digital fiat currency. For example, the digital yuan is supposed to ensure what the report describes as “controlled anonymity of transactions.”
The current electronic payment methods such as bank cards and third-party payment platforms are tightly linked to real-name bank accounts, the authors explain. The DCEP system will transfer value without going through bank accounts. The central bank will have access to transaction data and can trace the digital currency sources using big data analysis, but commercial banks and merchants won’t be able to obtain that information. Individuals and businesses will open digital wallets through commercial banks and deposits and withdrawals will require a corresponding bank account. Similar to paper money, however, transfers between users won’t involve a link between their bank accounts and the network.
Digital yuan transactions will be processed through a centralized ledger. The DCEP consists of a central bank digital currency system which issues the coin and registers ownership, commercial bank digital currency systems performing banking functions, and a system providing authentication for the interaction between the central bank, commercial banks, and payment terminals.
What is your opinion about the race between governments to issue sovereign digital currencies? Share your thoughts on the subject in the comments section below.
You can now easily buy bitcoin with a credit card. Visit our Purchase Bitcoin page where you can buy BCH and BTC securely, and keep your coins secure by storing them in our free bitcoin mobile wallet .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
On Friday, June 26, the China-based Zhejiang Ebang Communication, often referred to as Ebang, will be listed on Nasdaq, according to various reports. Ebang’s initial public offering (IPO) will be the second U.S.-based IPO for an ASIC mining manufacturer joining ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
KPMG has launched a cryptocurrency management platform designed to accelerate institutional crypto adoption. KPMG's patent-pending tool aims to bridge traditional data and crypto systems, integrating key use cases of cryptocurrency, including custody, wallets, and anti-money laundering (AML) transaction monitoring. KPMG's ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Self-Proclaimed Satoshi Claims He's Autistic, Judge Tosses Out Sanctions Against Craig Wright
The Kleiman v. Wright case is seemingly headed to trial on July 6, 2020, after Judge Beth Bloom ruled against the Kleiman’s attempt to levy sanctions against Craig Wright, the man who claims to be Satoshi Nakamoto. It seems Wright ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
US Real Estate Market Crisis: 4.3 Million Mortgage Delinquencies, Commercial Properties Sink in Value
The U.S. economy continues to look bleak as the American citizens and small businesses nationwide struggle to keep up with the government’s rules toward Covid-19 guidelines. In just 13 weeks, over 45 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits and many ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
Final Judgment: Telegram to Pay Crypto Investors Back $1.2 Billion, US Court Orders
The dispute between Telegram and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is coming to a close as the final judgment has been filed. Telegram has been ordered to pay back $1.2 billion. The company must also pay the SEC ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have recently published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
