For traders News and features Analysis Cardano price prediction 2020: time to buckle up for turbulence?
Only a decade ago, no one knew what a cryptocurrency was. Today, this rapidly growing industry has already spanned the globe. There are now hundreds of both well-established and emerging projects using blockchain technology, aiming to replace traditional fiat money and change the way we live.
With the market being very bullish for the future of crypto, there are a few projects that are doing exceptionally well, constantly evolving their technology and drawing the attention of savvy investors and traders. Cardano is one of them.
Launched in September 2017, Cardano has quickly established itself in the list of the top cryptocurrencies. It made headlines in January 2018, when it reached a whopping $33bn in market cap. Presently, this number has dropped to a bit over $1bn, however, the project is still going strong, ranking 13th among all cryptocurrencies available.
Are you also wondering what the future of Cardano looks like? Then, you have come to the right place. In this article, we take a closer look at what this project really is, review its recent performance and check out the latest Cardano price predictions.
What is Cardano and why does it matter to the industry?
Cardano is an ambitious blockchain project introduced on September 29, 2017, by Charles Hoskinson, the former co-founder of Ethereum and BitShares. In the project’s own words, it was designed to “provide a more balanced and sustainable ecosystem” for cryptocurrencies.
Cardano aims to employ breakthroughs and innovations of the blockchain to “build accessible financial services for all.” The project is intended to combine the transactional ease of Bitcoin with Ethereum’s smart contract system and support for decentralised applications, also known as dApps.
The protocol is stated to feature a layered blockchain software stack that is scalable, flexible, and is being developed using the most thorough academic and commercial software standards in the industry. It employs a meticulous peer-review system, reaching out to programmers and scientists to help improve its open-source blockchain.
Cardano states that its native cryptocurrency ADA is the only coin that uses a “scientific philosophy and research-driven approach.”  In fact, ADA is the first third-generation cryptocurrency, created to solve problems related to sustainability, scalability and interoperability in the crypto ecosystem.
Cardano price trend: another story of a shooting star?
Cardano made an incredibly successful entry into the market. To help get funds for the development of the project, Cardano’s team raised more than $63m during its ICO. Over the first week from launch, ADA experienced significant growth, soaring in value and hitting a market cap of over $600m by October 1, 2017. It quickly got listed on a multitude of the top cryptocurrency exchanges.
On November 29, 2017, the coin skyrocketed over 142.4 per cent, boosting its market cap to $3.5bn. In early January 2018, the value of the cryptocurrency hit an all-time high of $1.162, peaking at a market cap of over $33bn.
In regard to the historical Cardano price trend, the cryptocurrency has drawn a rather chaotic trajectory on its chart. ADA started trading in October 2017, at a price of $0.025. During the same day, it dropped to its all-time low of $0.017354. However, in only 3 months, the coin had received a lot of interest from international crypto enthusiasts. Their support led the coin to reach its record high of $1.162 on January 4, 2018, representing a return of over 6,000 per cent.
Things turned sour in the first quarter of 2018, with ADA experiencing a dramatic crash and dropping as low as $0.13 in March.
Following a prolonged bear market of 2018, the crypto industry was finally ready for slow, yet steady growth in 2019. At the end of January, ADA was worth $0.038. In early March, the coin started to rise, climbing from $0.043 to $0.098 by the beginning of April. Such a significant gain of over 100 per cent happened due to the v1.5 Mainnet release, which completed the Byron stage of the project’s roadmap.
After hitting a $0.37 mark in May, ADA has entered a bullish trend once again, trading in the range of $0.0308-$0.1 throughout the rest of the year.
The coin started 2020 at $0.03 and now trades at around $0.042.
Cardano price prediction 2020 and beyond: shining through the darkness
The crypto market moves at a rapid pace, making it rather difficult to predict its future. To bring some clarity, we have decided to gather a number of the latest ADA price predictions 2020 and beyond from various sources.
According to a popular online service Longforecast.com, which makes forecasts using technical analysis, the ADA coin price prediction for December 2020 is $0.054. They prognose a long-term uptrend, estimating the cryptocurrency to trade at $0.092 by January 2024.
Based on the Cardano outlook provided by CoinSwitch, the price of ADA is expected to gradually increase, eventually reaching a $1 mark at some point this year. By 2023, they predict the project to gain more trust and traction from the users, with its value hitting $2.
Adam Web, an author at Smartereum, believes that ADA’s future is rather bright, claiming that the one-year Cardano forecast is around $2.50, with the potential to jump over $10 in five years’ time.
