CMarkets Group is a cryptocurrency trading platform established in 2019 and located in Dominica, we specialize in providing cutting edge trading technologies to our users all around the world.
ROSEAU, Commonwealth of Dominica, June 23, 2020 /PRNewswire-PRWeb/ -- With the cryptocurrency market still one of the top picks for new traders, the need for trading assistance had been on the rise, forcing brokerage brands to find solutions. CMarkets Group is one of the financial trading providers specialized only in cryptocurrencies, which had implemented social trading features into its proprietary trading software.
It is currently one of the few names providing access to a wide range of different tokens, as well as a set of functionalities tailored towards the challenges of the crypto market.
SIRIX is the CMarkets Group trading platform , designed to work via browser, mobile, or desktop. Building a new solution from the ground up had enabled the company to integrate features not seen with other platforms.
The most important one is Social Trading because it enables traders' access to a series of new facilities. Inside the platform, clients will be able to see the top-ranked traders based on P/L and the number of copiers. At the same time, the Social Stream window will display in real-time all the new orders placed.
Having access to trading ideas from professional traders can help beginners gain a more broad perspective of the market state at a given point, and at the same time, copy trades with only a few clicks. The Social Trading program by CMarkets Goup had been designed to help traders to adapt to the crypto world, one of the most fascinating and challenging markets in the world.
Clients working with CMarkets Group will thus benefit from access to professional trading ideas, which can provide them with new ideas and insights. Trading accuracy will be low, especially for beginners, and to counteract this flaw, they can analyze how more experienced traders operate, adapting accordingly.
The usage of Social Trading can be leveraged by using the wide range of trading tools available with CMarkets Group . Clients have access to live webinars, assistance from an account manager, weekly reports, in-depth research, and portfolio construction. At the same time, they can conduct their own technical analysis, thanks to the advanced charting, price indicators, and drawing tools integrated into the platform. With risk management tools, keeping risk under control at all time is ensured, a crucial aspect when dealing with the volatility of the cryptocurrency market.
All the trading options made available by CMarkets Group are designed to democratize the access to the cryptocurrency market. Being specialized only in providing crypto-related services is one of the main strengths of the company since its years of expertise can result in enhanced trading conditions for customers.
As cryptocurrencies continue to be active instruments, traders all around the world can benefit from the Social Trading feature by CMarkets Group, combined with the other trading tools.
CMarkets Group is a cryptocurrency trading platform established in 2019, specialized in providing cutting edge technologies to users all around the world. The brand is specialized in cryptocurrencies only, offering access to tens of different crypto instruments.
