Bridges the Gap Between Directional Perpetual Traders, Spot Traders, Borrowers and Lenders
HONG KONG--(Antara/BUSINESS WIRE)-- CoinFLEX, the world’s first physically delivered cryptocurrency futures exchange, today announced the launch of the industry’s first centrally traded repo market powered by deliverable perpetual futures. CoinFLEX is the first exchange to develop and offer deliverable perpetual futures.
The CoinFLEX Repo Market aims to give investors access to highly liquid lending, borrowing and earning opportunities without the need to work through the channels of the traditional repo market, such as banks or other intermediaries, resulting in more flexible trading and real-time access to yield. CoinFLEX created the Repo Market and perpetual futures for cryptocurrencies to produce a trading environment that benefits market participants by increasing liquidity and significantly lowering capital costs.
Mark Lamb, Chief Executive Officer of CoinFLEX said: “The creation of the repo market is a direct response to market demand for fair, transparent and flexible trading for all market participants. Introducing deliverable perpetual futures gives traders access to highly liquid, leveraged derivatives with the option to choose delivery, which also allows a new risk mitigation tool for investors.”
He continued: “The CoinFLEX Repo Market with CoinFLEX Deliverable Perpetual Futures gives investors the opportunity to have the benefits associated with traditional trading in a new interest-rate market for crypto where they can capture the yield associated with their investments. In today’s uncertain yield environment in traditional finance, the ability to capture yield on cryptocurrencies is a substantial benefit for either dollar- or crypto- based investors.”
Launched in early 2019, CoinFLEX caters to individual traders as well as the commercial hedging market, which includes mining firms, OTC trading desks and global proprietary trading firms and was the first to open an initial futures offering on coins that have not launched including Polkadot and Dfinity tokens. CoinFLEX has traded hundreds of millions of contracts per day over the last twelve months, and its success has led to widespread investor support including over $10 million in funding from Polychain Capital, Digital Currency Group, Dragonfly Capital, B2C2 and Grapefruit Trading.
Founded in 2019, by Mark Lamb and Sudhu Arumugam, CoinFLEX (Coin Futures and Lending Exchange) is the world’s first physically delivered cryptocurrency futures exchange, developed to provide avenues for investors to trade and hedge cryptocurrency exposure with minimal index or price settlement risk.
View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20200629005543/en/
