have been able to flourish to the size they are today thanks to Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act. It seems Senator Graham and others now believe that Big Tech has grown so big and influential, this immunity needs to be weakened fo public policy concerns; however, for blockchain platforms in their nascent growth stages, eliminating this concept would prove a deterrent for the sector.
The highest number of bills in any category covers the regulatory treatment of blockchain and cryptocurrency as well as the tax treatment of crypto.
Facebook’s Libra Project ended up sparking a few bills that followed as a backlash to the prospect of a giant social media company introducing a global currency into the U.S. and the world. Although Facebook argued against the notion that it was a security, the ‘Managed Securities Are Stablecoins Act’ introduced by Congresswoman Sylvia Garcia (D-TX) and Congressman Lance Gooden (R-TX) aimed to ensure the basket of currencies backing the Libra coin would be treated as just that. Recent news reporting how Libra has moved away from the basket of currencies concept might have been influenced by the prospect of unfavorable treatment as a security.
While the prior bill looked to classify the offering of Libra as securities, the ‘Keeping Big Tech Out Of Finance’ Act as introduced by Representative Jesús “Chuy” García (D-IL), is much more direct in simply not allowing a large social media platform from engaging in financial activities. In addition, Garcia introduced another bill called the ‘Protecting Consumers From Market Manipulation Act’, that has an interesting approach to crypto regulation not seen before.
The bill requires the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to consider treatment of digital currencies as a ‘designated financial market utility’. In addition, it would require any non-financial company such as Facebook that enjoys a minimum level of profits from digital currencies, to become a Bank Holding Company supervised by the Federal Reserve. Hypothetically, Libra could then be considered systemically important to the financial system and undergo the highest level of regulatory scrutiny as well as additional regulatory reporting requirements as a result.
The Crypto-Currency Act of 2020 was introduced by Representative Paul Gosar (R-AZ) as a way to regulate crypto by economic function while the Token Taxonomy Act, sponsored by Representative Warren Davidson (R-OH), focuses on a technological approach to regulation. Both of these bills look to divide up the responsibility of regulation amongst a few different agencies, while the bill from Rep. García (D-IL) would essentially make the Federal Reserve as a sole regulator for cryptocurrencies.
Promoting The Use Of Blockchain Technology By The U.S. Government
Congress also looks to support the growth of blockchain technology under the broader consideration of how it may impact other sectors of the economy beyond cryptocurrency. The Blockchain Promotion Act sponsored by Senator Todd Young (R-IN) and Senator Ed Markey (D-MA) is already out of Committee and awaits a vote on the Senate floor. The bill directs the Department of Commerce to establish a Blockchain Working Group to submit a report to Congress which contains a recommended definition of the distributed ledger technology commonly referred to as blockchain technology. Additionally, the Blockchain Working Group is to conduct a study to examine a range of potential applications - including non-financial applications - for blockchain technology.
In addition, bills in this category include how blockchain technology could be used for better hospital data security for endemic fungal disease research to the inclusion of a briefing by the Department of Defense to the Armed Services Committees on potential use of blockchain technology. The required briefing was an amendment in last year’s NDAA by Congressman Darren Soto (D-FL) that became law on December 15, 2019.
Finally, as a new category added with two bills that include a new term called the ‘digital dollar’, the tracking of ‘central bank digital currency’ legislation has been developed. The first bill introduced was the ‘Banking For All Act’ by Senator Sherrod Brown (D-OH) and the second and latest bill concerning digital currency was the ‘Automatic BOOST To Communities Act’ introduced by Representative Rashida Tlaib (D-MI) and Representative Pramila Jayapal (D-WA). Both bills focused on faster delivery of economic stimulus benefits to Americans in light of COVID-19.
It is likely that more legislation on the topic of central bank digital currencies will be a growing area as Congress looks to address this subject. It is also fair to note that as cryptocurrency and blockchain continue to grow in prominence around the world, a similar volume of legislation for the subject matter can be expected in the 117th Congress as well.
I am a former U.S. Regulator with the FDIC, compliance examiner for the Making Home Affordable Program (HAMP) with the Treasury, and have been active in bitcoin and
I am a former U.S. Regulator with the FDIC, compliance examiner for the Making Home Affordable Program (HAMP) with the Treasury, and have been active in bitcoin and blockchain since 2016. I served in in the FDIC’s Capital Markets and Finance Divisions during the Global Financial Crisis of 2008-2009 working on qualitative, quantitative issues covering IndyMac Bank, Washington Mutual, Wachovia, Lehman Brothers, AIG, Citigroup, Merrill Lynch and Bank of America.  I supported the FDIC’s Board at IndyMac bank with deposit run analysis, researched and explained synthetic collateralized debt obligations, credit default swaps, compiled the exposure of net notional derivatives in the financial system, and analyzed new programs by the Federal Reserve Board to stabilize the economy. I became interested in the importance of trust in the financial system and how the U.S. government manages the concept of trust.  With the introduction of bitcoin and blockchain technology by a colleague in 2016, I entered into the blockchain industry, first with the Chamber of Digital Commerce as Director of Operations for Policy and then as the Policy Ambassador for ConsenSys. I am currently the founding CEO and President of a new non-profit called the Value Technology Foundation, with the purpose to conduct exclusively educational and charitable activities with regard to digital assets, blockchain, distributed ledger technologies and other relevant “value” technologies for the public welfare and economic benefits of the citizens of the United States. I hold a degree from Cornell University in Government (BA, 1997) and the Kogod School of Business (MBA, 2009).
