This morning, the Fed promised an open-ended commitment to keep buying assets under its quantitative easing measures—effectively offering to buy the entire market if necessary.
As the COVID-19 crisis rolls on, with some forecasting lockdowns could last well into 2021, people are counting the cost of long-term business closures and unprecedented central bank stimulus.
"Extraordinary times require extraordinary action," Christine Lagarde, the president of the European Central Bank, said last week via Twitter . "There are no limits to our commitment to the euro."
"There’s an infinite amount of cash at the Federal Reserve," Neel Kashkari, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, told CBS over the weekend. "We will do whatever we need to do to make sure that there’s enough cash in the banking system."
Similar comments have been made by other senior central bank and government officials, driving the popularity of the "money printer go brrr" meme and leaving many economists concerned over the long-term consequences of the extreme measures.
The measures put in place to dampen the economic effect of the coronavirus COVID-19 pandemic echo those brought in to offset the 2008 financial crisis—measures designed to make a potentially catastrophic short, sharp, shock milder but at the same time much longer.
In 2008, the Western world broadly decided it would rather spread pain over decades than try to absorb the direct loss of jobs, capital and economic output the crash brought.
The same choice is being made now, though the situation has changed.
Measures enacted in the aftermath of the global financial crisis remain in place, limiting policy-makers effectiveness. The world has become more globalized, hobbling individual government's ability to act. Social networks have digitalized and decentralized the media.
Perhaps most importantly, bitcoin, created in the midst of the last economic crash, has shown there is a possible alternative to the central bank-controlled debt-based economy —an alternative that is yet to be truly tested, however.
The enthusiastic, seen by some as bordering on desperate, spending by governments and central banks has already pushed many toward bitcoin.
“Up to now, gold has been known as the ultimate safe-haven asset, but bitcoin—which shares its key characteristics of being a store of value and scarcity—could potentially dethrone gold in the future as the world becomes increasingly digitized," said Nigel Green, the chief executive of financial advisory group deVere.
Bitcoin searches on Google have risen sharply in recent weeks as the coronavirus crisis forces ... [+] central banks and governments into uncharted territory.
In China, the search engine Baidu has seen a rise in searches for "bitcoin"—up 183% over the past thirty days, according to local reports .
Google searches for bitcoin spiked ahead of the traditional and crypto market crash, more than doubling from the start of the month.
Meanwhile, many bitcoin and crypto exchanges have reported a surge in users and trading volumes.
"Despite the market downturn, Binance.US is seeing unprecedented trading volumes, with especially active trading in bitcoin," said Catherine Coley, chief executive of Binance.US, part of the world's biggest bitcoin and crypto exchange, Binance.
"Bitcoin’s recent jump while the rest of the market tumbles proves that unlike traditional companies, bitcoin can and will survive without bailouts."
The bitcoin price has lost all of its 2020 gains in recent weeks, falling back to around $6,000 per ... [+] bitcoin.
"Bitcoin will continue to be volatile over the next few months but the macro backdrop is why it was created," bitcoin advocate and founder of bitcoin and crypto hedge fund Galaxy Digital, Mike Novogratz, said via Twitter after warning just last week confidence in bitcoin has "evaporated" following its price crash .
"This will be and needs to be bitcoin's year," Novogratz added.
For better or worse, and regardless of whether such measures are justified by the coronavirus crisis, the Western world is heading for the largest crackdown on civil liberties it's ever seen—coupled with the largest ever increase in the Federal Reserve's and central bank's balance sheets.
Bitcoin, a borderless and permissionless substitute to government-sanctioned fiat money, is going to be in high demand in the post-coronavirus world.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
