Cryptocurrencies vs Market noise - Who's winning?
Are cryptocurrencies less affected by market noise?
My noise canceling headphones are working super fine; I can
truly enjoy tuning out the rest of the world to focus on what I'm doing,
without anyone or anything distracting me. I just wish there was something like
pure empirical evidence that markets provide.
market flows and empirical evidence. Yes, those digital currencies are the best
in the markets from time to time.
Ever since Bitcoin's debut approximately a decade ago, an
way into the crypto space, in one form or another. More importantly, the
creator of the highly used technical tool Bollinger Bands, John Bollinger,
expressed his interest in the instrument.
seemed to function much like the stock market of old; before all the noise
Yes! Cryptos are essentially noise-free - as in, they're
analysis. We're not talking big boys here, we'll come to that in a moment, but
essentially almost every single cryptocurrency out there is noise-free.
At the time of this article, bitcoin sits at $9,520 with $175.5 billion market capitalization.
being affected by automated traders and algorithmic trading which, in my
opinion, is a plague on the markets - but that's a topic for another time.
You see, with all of the automated trading, markets have
really hard for traders to truly understand market price movements; whether
from a technical or fundamental indicator point of view. No one really knows
the market moving power these automated traders have anymore.
So with cryptos essentially free from such noise, pure
this instrument wanting to make a pretty penny trading cryptocurrencies.
bitcoin ETF (Exchange-Traded Fund) still eludes regulatory approval.
instruments have affected the overall price level of cryptocurrencies, but they
did make the trading a little noisier; and that's what we'd expect.
Such a situation has already happened in the stock market,
with the introduction of stock index futures. It basically hit those markets
which did not already have futures, and so the noise got louder.
create what is known as non-directional noise. It's noise that is not based on
cryptocurrencies; but it's nowhere near as serious of a problem as it is for,
it comes to market noise and the overall transactional mechanics of trading.
And I personally believe that these markets, due to their unregulated nature,
have been exempted from becoming too mainstream for traders of this world.
article was submitted by OneRoyal.
