Contributed | what does this mean?
This content is contributed or sourced from third parties but has been subject to Finextra editorial review.
The Crypto Finance Group is expanding into Asia, meeting the need for a professional approach and building a bridge between traditional finance and the emerging digital asset markets.
This award-winning Swiss fintech has established regulated, professional asset management, brokerage, and storage solutions in digital assets for top Swiss and European banks and financial institutions. CEO and founder Jan Brzezek and the Board of Directors of Crypto Finance AG are pleased to announce Alisher Tashpulatov as Head of Asia Pacific to drive this business development in Asia.
September 10, 2019, Hong Kong & Zurich, Switzerland. Crypto Finance looks ahead to expansion into Asia Pacific following continued growth and recognition in their home markets of Switzerland and Europe. With recognition as a 2019 Swiss Fintech Award winner, and Top 20 Swiss Startup and Top 50 Crypto Valley ranking in 2018 and 2019, their digital asset management, brokerage, and storage solutions are achieving commercial success with clients among the top Swiss and European banks and other financial intermediaries.
With this announcement, Crypto Finance is dedicating significant expertise to Asia Pacific, a dynamic, vital region that plays a big role in both the traditional financial sector and the emerging digital asset markets. With operations established and growing for professional investors in digital asset management, 24/7 brokerage, and storage infrastructure solutions for over 60 different digital assets, their secure, regulated approach to blockchain and crypto asset investing is a market leading solution chosen by clients in the financial industry.
Alisher takes up this new role, having previously spearheaded key business developments with the Crypto Fund AG asset management business that today is the first and only FINMA-regulated asset manager for crypto assets. Several members of the Crypto Finance team bring experience in Asia from previous roles, including CEO and founder Jan Brzezek.
Regarding the announcement, CEO and founder Jan Brzezek comments, “Our expansion into Asia led by Alisher Tashpulatov gives professional investors access to the digital assets now gaining momentum in traditional financial markets. Our Asian clients can benefit today from our secure, regulated financial services in digital assets that offer Swiss finance sector expertise, best practice, and precision.”
Alisher will be working to develop the business in Asia Pacific effective immediately and is looking forward to the upcoming Invest:Asia event organised by Coindesk on September 11 and 12 in Singapore, as the first activity in strengthening the Crypto Finance Group’s strategic ties to key players in the region and laying the groundwork for an established presence in Asia in 2020.
