Cryptocurrency exchange Binance has announced that it has added Binance USD (BUSD) cross collateral function to its Futures wallet interface.
Borrow $USDT at 0% interest using the #BUSD in your Exchange wallet as collateral, and without having to transfer BUSD to your Futures wallet. https://t.co/WoiZ0xQrtz pic.twitter.com/rFEcEYwwGZ
— Binance (@binance) February 5, 2020
With this, Binance users can trade futures contracts using the assets in their wallet as collateral instead of funding their orders with coins. They can borrow tether (USDT) on their BUSD holdings, eliminating the need to transfer BUSD to their futures wallet.
Aaron Gong, Director of Binance Futures, said that users can expect the new feature to support more tokens in the near future. At present, the Futures platform allows users to trade 13 pairs with high leverage and hedge to mitigate the risks.
“Cross Collateral is a much-anticipated feature for traders on Binance, allowing more flexibility and more choices of deposits to open futures positions,” said Gong, CoinDesk reported.
Meanwhile, Binance just announced that it hired John Goodboy as the new Director of European and Latin American Growth and Institutional Business. Goodboy joined the company after serving the same position at crypto exchange Huobi.
I am a cryptocurrency trader and i make over 200% daily, If you are interested,i can teach you how to trade and also help you achieve your goal in life with crypto i can turn
$4500 into $35000 in less then four weeks,now that bitcoin has low prices...please note that cryptocurrency trading is bitcoin unlike binary and Forex,bitcoin is traded for altcoins also you can reach to me if you are new to bitcoin and to give you more info and guideline on how to invest smartly, this is opportunity life time knocking on your door inbox me for more info....contact me on whatsapp :+12067425358 happy new year to you all .
I am a cryptocurrency trader and i make over 200% daily, If you are interested,i can teach you how to trade and also help you achieve your goal in life with crypto i can turn
$4500 into $35000 in less then four weeks,now that bitcoin has low prices...please note that cryptocurrency trading is bitcoin unlike binary and Forex,bitcoin is traded for altcoins also you can reach to me if you are new to bitcoin and to give you more info and guideline on how to invest smartly, this is opportunity life time knocking on your door inbox me for more info....contact me on whatsapp :+12067425358 happy new year to you all .
