BUX’s offering is a similar concept to commission-free investing app Robinhood, which also has zero brokerage fees.
An Amsterdam-based retail brokerage firm, BUX , announced the soft launch of its service that enables users to trade US shares at no cost, with users who want access to more advanced functionalities paying a small fee for the execution of their transactions.
BUX’s offering is a similar concept to commission-free investing app Robinhood, which also has zero brokerage fees and has reached 13 million users in the US. Robinhood raised this month its latest round of funding, ‎bringing in $280 million at an $8.3 billion valuation. ‎
Recently, the company announced the official launch of BUX Crypto, a platform that allows users to trade cryptocurrencies commission-free. The platform is currently available to customers in 25 European countries, including the Netherlands, Germany, Austria, and France.
Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
Many firms are now using cheap or free trading to attract clients to more profitable businesses. For now, they can keep their free platform afloat through making compromises to some ‎business aspects such as not having many physical locations, a small staff ‎for client service, and not spending on massive promotional campaigns. ‎
Earlier in January, BUX acquired Blockport, a European social cryptocurrency investment platform, in a bid to further expand its service offerings. Blockport was rebranded to BUX Crypto and registered with the Dutch Central Bank (DNB) as a cryptocurrency services provider under the BUX brand.
Users were able to access a variety of digital assets, including Bitcoin, Ethereum, and XRP. The company is expected to scale its development team to support their growth as they start to roll-out its product across Europe.
Founded in 2014 by Nick Bortot in Amsterdam, BUX aims to offer European traders Robinhood-style expertise though it has recently brought its brokering in-house. In addition to cryptos, the company also offers commission-free investing that lets users invest in brands and companies they like via its own app.
