As one of the most significant innovations to come out of the cryptocurrency boom, blockchain technology completely changed the way companies across different industries operate, make transactions, and manage their assets.
According to data gathered by BuyShares.co.nz , the global spending on blockchain solutions is expected to surge by 235% and reach $14.4bn in 2023.
Read: Media, big tech, authenticating and validating transactions via Blockchain!
By allowing digital information to be distributed but not copied, the blockchain technology created the groundwork for the new type of internet. Although initially invented for the cryptocurrency Bitcoin, by improving online security and streamlining fundraising and payment options, the blockchain technology was adopted by many companies across different industries.
In 2017, the global spending on blockchain solutions amounted to $950 million, revealed Statista data and IDC 2020 Worldwide Semiannual Blockchain Spending Report. In the next twelve months, this figure rose to $1.5bn. Statistics show the surge in the global blockchain solutions spending continued in 2019, with the amount rising to $2.7bn, a 185% jump in two years.
Like all technology investments, spending on blockchain projects has also been affected by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the IDC data, the global spending on blockchain solutions is expected to reach $4.3bn in 2020, a 6% drop compared to the pre-COVID-19 forecast. Nevertheless, this figure represents a 57.7% jump compared to 2019 figures.
The IDC report also revealed that all regions are expected to witness double-digit spending growth in the next three years, led by Europe with a combined five-year CAGR of over 63%.
Statistics show hospitality, transportation, and personal and consumer services represent the most-affected industries, expected to witness a 9.5% drop in the blockchain spending in 2020. The financial industry is expected to see a moderate decline in spending this year, as well.
However, the manufacturing and resources sector will witness the most rapid growth in blockchain spending between 2018 and 2023, with a CAGR of 60.5%. The distribution and services sector follows with a CAGR of 58.7%, respectively.
Cross-border payments and settlements represent the leading individual blockchain use case, accounting for nearly 17% of the global blockchain technology market in 2019.
Trade finance and post-trade/transaction settlements ranked as the second-largest use case with a 10.4% market share last year. Lot lineage/provenance, asset/goods management, and identity management follow with 9.7%, 8.4%, and 7.3% share, respectively.
Statistics show that cross-border payments and Lot lineage and provenance use cases are expected to receive the most investment in 2020. On the other hand, loyalty programs and service/parts management will be the most impacted due to the coronavirus pandemic.
AMEinfo staff members report business news and views from across the Middle East and North Africa region, and analyse global events impacting the region today.
