Converting unrealized losses into realized losses allows David to get a deduction when he files his 2020 taxes. In order to realize his losses, he simply  has to sell his positions that are at a loss. He also has an option to buy back into the same positions at a much lower price (without compromising the ability deduct losses) because wash sale rules are not applicable to cryptocurrencies under current guidance. Some crypto tax software helps you harvest tax losses.
Realizing some of your losses is super important to offset unexpected capital gains arising from margin liquidations. If you are a margin trader, it is likely that your initial margin has been liquidated due to large swings in prices. If you are trading on high leverage, even slight market fluctuations can trigger liquidations, and may result in capital gains taxes.
For example, assume Jennet deposited 1 BTC into her margin account on February 10, 2020,  when the price of BTC was $9,000. She originally obtained this BTC in 2010 at a price of $1,000. She sets the leverage to be 5X so her notional buying power is 5 BTC (1 BTC x 5) or $45,000 ($9,000 x 5). Let’s say Jennet  goes long on ether with her full notional value of $45,000. At 5X leverage, if the $45,000 position goes down by 20% (notional value down to $36,000) her initial 1 BTC deposit will be liquidated by the exchange.
Assuming the BTC price is $9,000 at the time of the liquidation, she would end up having to pay taxes on $8,000 ($9,000 - $1,000) of capital gains. This is a tricky situation where Jennet actually owes capital gains taxes despite losing her investment.
Under the tax code, you can claim a maximum of $3,000 of capital losses on your tax return. However, the good news is that losses in excess of $3,000 can be carried forward indefinitely to future years. These losses can be used to offset future gains arising from crypto and stock transactions. To get advantage of this provision you need to realize your losses as explained above.
Knowing these simple tricks and executing them before the end of the year can help you get significant tax relief when you file for taxes. For the most part, the tax code only cares about your realized losses, not your real world loss in economic value. Use this to your advantage to reduce your taxes.
Disclaimer: this post is informational only and is not intended as tax advice. For tax advice, please consult a tax professional.
Shehan is the Head of Tax Strategy at CoinTracker.io ( bitcoin & crypto tax software ). He is one of the handful of CPAs in the country who is recognized as a real-world operator and a conceptual subject matter expert on cryptocurrency taxation.
He is a CPE instructor who has been awarded with various awards: 2019 CPA Practice Advisor 40 under 40 accounting professionals , Outstanding Young CPA of the year & Among 21 accountants mentioned on Accounting Today who will be helping shape (and reshape) accounting in 2020 and beyond by Accounting Today
Shehan is a renowned speaker who has done speaking engagements with many organizations including Google, Coinbase, Lyft, AICPA, American Bar Association, and State CPA Societies.
