India’s finance minister has broken silence and talked about the crypto draft bill and report her department is examining which propose to ban cryptocurrencies. While she views the report as “very futuristic and well-thought-out,” the crypto industry sees it as flawed and incomplete.
The Indian finance and corporate affairs minister, Nirmala Sitharaman, talked about the cryptocurrency report and draft bill her ministry is examining in an interview published by The Economic Times on July 29. The report, which contains a draft bill entitled Banning of Cryptocurrency and Regulation of Official Digital Currency Bill 2019, was made public on July 22. It was submitted by the interministerial committee constituted on Nov. 2, 2017, to study all aspects of cryptocurrency and provide recommendations. The committee has recommended a ban on all “private cryptocurrencies.”
The finance minister was asked during the interview: “When are you proposing to take the legislation to [the] cabinet?” She replied: “I had the presentation done before me. The committee has done extensive work on it. Inputs that have come in; if I compare several other countries where this kind of study has been done on cryptocurrencies, we have done very well.” Sitharaman continued:
They have gone much ahead of all other countries that have thought about it. It’s a very futuristic and well-thought-out report. I have not spent time on it after the presentation.
“Of course, we will look into it soon and come back with a position. That was also reported in court as there is a case going on,” the finance minister concluded.
Several crypto-related writ repetitions are pending at the Supreme Court of India which was scheduled to hear them all on July 23 after repeated delays since last year. At press time, the court still has not heard the case. Some petitions challenge the banking restriction imposed by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). The central bank issued a circular in April last year banning regulated financial institutions from providing services to crypto businesses. The court has also asked the government to submit the interministerial committee’s crypto report.
Varun Sethi, founder of Blockchain Lawyer, shared some thoughts with news.Bitcoin.com on the finance minister’s reply to The Economic Times. The “finance minister has apparently not stated anything negative,” he said. Since her position “falls under the Ministry of Finance, under whom the Department of Economic Affairs also falls, so ideally the report is made under her ministry only,” Sethi added. Noting that the chances of her “commenting publicly against the report don’t stand,” he opined:
There is surely no doubt that Indian report is rather comprehensive however she has reserved her comments about her thoughts post the issuance of report, thereby the reactions by the community are yet to be captured.
Responding to the finance minister’s comments, Nischal Shetty, CEO of local crypto exchange Wazirx, tweeted to Anurag Singh Thakur, Minister of State for Finance and Corporate Affairs. “Misinformation about crypto has reached our FM due to the flawed crypto report. Ban is never a futuristic solution to anything. Report does not even classify crypto correctly. Please give the crypto industry an opportunity to represent,” he emphasized.
This is probably the first time she’s spoken about crypto. It’s a start and while her comment is from only one side, the flawed crypto report, we’re hopeful she gives the crypto community of India a chance to present our view of crypto.
“I’m sure she’ll take an informed decision and change her opinion once true facts are laid down in front of her,” he believes. Convinced that the finance minister has been misinformed, he declared: “We need to campaign harder so that the right information about crypto reaches her. She’s been presented an incomplete idea of crypto.”
The Wazirx CEO has been running a social media campaign calling for the Indian government to introduce positive crypto regulation. It has been 271 days since the launch of his campaign. Ever since the interministerial committee’s report was made public, he has ramped up efforts to engage lawmakers to help them understand how flawed the report is, as news.Bitcoin.com previously reported .
Commenting on the finance minister’s view on the crypto report, Sumit Gupta, CEO of local crypto exchange Coindcx, told news.Bitcoin.com: “I appreciate the comment of the finance minister and I guess her understanding of the global scenario is much wider.” Noting that the finance minister participated in the recent G20 meetings , he remarked: “I believe her interaction with other finance ministers might help in drawing the midway for the crypto industry. There is always a possibility that the government may not be that harsh on cryptocurrency in order to meet global standards and stay par with the developed world as envisioned by our prime minister. Fingers crossed.”
Social media influencer for the Indian crypto community who goes by Twitter handle “Indian Cryptogirl” also shared some thoughts with news.Bitcoin.com. “I ask you, how is a report that encourages a closed private ledger and criminalizes decentralized public cryptocurrency futuristic?” she said. “India is choosing a national currency because they want money to remain within its borders and to give them control over the supply and monetary policy. This isn’t a cryptocurrency, it’s just another e-payment solution by the government which is recorded on a ledger.” She further elaborated:
In her closing remarks, she said that she will be looking at it again and come to a position. This is why the Indian community is coming together and appealing to national leaders in full force.
Both Sitharaman and Thakur have indicated that they are listening to the community. Sitharaman tweeted in June: “Grateful for every thought/idea that’s being shared by scholars, economists and enthusiasts through print, electronic, and on social media. I read many of them; also, my team carefully collates them for me. Value every bit. Thanks. Please keep them coming.”
As for Thakur, he tweeted on July 26: “I have an open glass door policy. We will continue to have a multi-stakeholder approach to policymaking. I am extremely clear and committed towards this as a minister” (in Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government). Thakur recently confirmed in Rajya Sabha, the upper house of India’s parliament, that the government has not banned cryptocurrency in the country.
The Indian National Association of Software and Services Companies (Nasscom) is a non-profit information technology industry association self-described as “the apex body for the 154 billion dollar IT BPM industry in India. Among its initiatives, the group “Liaisons with government and industry to influence a favourable policy framework,” its website states.
The association said Tuesday that, instead of banning, the government should “work towards developing a risk-based framework to regulate and monitor cryptocurrencies and tokens,” Business Standard reported. This recommendation is in line with the recently issued crypto guidance by the financial action task force (FATF). Nasscom detailed:
A ban would inhibit new applications and solutions from being deployed and would discourage tech startups. It would handicap India from participating in new use cases that cryptocurrencies and tokens offer.
The association believes that “a ban is more likely to deter only the legitimate operators as they have no intent to be non-compliant,” the news outlet conveyed.
“To address consumer protection concerns, cryptocurrency-based businesses can be tested in the regulatory sandboxes being launched by the financial sector regulators across the country,” Nasscom recommends. “We should work towards creating a regulatory framework that will constantly monitor and prevent illegal activities. Regulating would allow the law enforcement agencies to be better equipped to understand these new technologies, enable them to gather intelligence on criminal developments and take enforcement actions.”
This is not the first time Nasscom has spoken in favor of regulating crypto assets. In February, it released a report calling for regulatory certainty, particularly in areas such as cryptocurrency.
The report containing the bill to ban cryptocurrencies is dated Feb. 28 even though it was made public on July 22. The interministerial committee drafted the report under the chairmanship of former Secretary of the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) Subhash Chandra Garg. The “Committee is very receptive and supportive of distributed ledger technologies and recommends its widespread use in delivering financial services … Private cryptocurrencies are of no real value. Rightly banned,” he tweeted following the public release of the report.
Three days later, Garg announced that he is no longer the DEA Secretary, due to Prime Minister Narendra Modi reshuffling his top-level bureaucrats. Garg has been moved to the Power Ministry, as news.Bitcoin.com reported.
What do you think of the Indian finance minister’s view on the crypto report? Do you think a plan to ban crypto could be “futuristic”? Let us know in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: Bitcoin.com does not endorse or support claims made by any parties in this article. None of the information in this article is intended as investment advice, as an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or as a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, or companies. Neither Bitcoin.com nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Did you know you can buy and sell BCH privately using our noncustodial, peer-to-peer Local Bitcoin Cash trading platform? The Local.Bitcoin.com marketplace has thousands of participants from all around the world trading BCH right now. And if you need a bitcoin wallet to securely store your coins, you can download one from us here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
On Friday, June 26, the China-based Zhejiang Ebang Communication, often referred to as Ebang, will be listed on Nasdaq, according to various reports. Ebang’s initial public offering (IPO) will be the second U.S.-based IPO for an ASIC mining manufacturer joining ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
KPMG has launched a cryptocurrency management platform designed to accelerate institutional crypto adoption. KPMG's patent-pending tool aims to bridge traditional data and crypto systems, integrating key use cases of cryptocurrency, including custody, wallets, and anti-money laundering (AML) transaction monitoring. KPMG's ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Self-Proclaimed Satoshi Claims He's Autistic, Judge Tosses Out Sanctions Against Craig Wright
The Kleiman v. Wright case is seemingly headed to trial on July 6, 2020, after Judge Beth Bloom ruled against the Kleiman’s attempt to levy sanctions against Craig Wright, the man who claims to be Satoshi Nakamoto. It seems Wright ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
US Real Estate Market Crisis: 4.3 Million Mortgage Delinquencies, Commercial Properties Sink in Value
The U.S. economy continues to look bleak as the American citizens and small businesses nationwide struggle to keep up with the government’s rules toward Covid-19 guidelines. In just 13 weeks, over 45 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits and many ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
Final Judgment: Telegram to Pay Crypto Investors Back $1.2 Billion, US Court Orders
The dispute between Telegram and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is coming to a close as the final judgment has been filed. Telegram has been ordered to pay back $1.2 billion. The company must also pay the SEC ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have recently published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
