NEW DELHI, May 27, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Bintex Futures, an Indian crypto startup, has introduced a brand-new approach to the cryptocurrency exchange.
Bintex Futures is a cryptocurrency exchange project that combines the speed and convenience of a centralized exchange with all the security advantages of a decentralized one. One of the core components of the Bintex Futures ecosystem is the BintexPay payment system, which offers an authentic token, e-wallet, and chip cards - something that the world has never seen before.
The BintexPay coin (BNTX) is the native cryptocurrency of the Bintex Futures ecosystem. BNTX tokens expedite liquidity, a feature that will play a major role in overall platform liquidity maintenance when the trade processes multiple coins.
The most common problem with cryptocurrency ecosystems is that they function properly only within the system itself, drastically limiting the pace of global adoption. The BintexPay wallet has been designed to push the boundaries of the traditional crypto-space and make cryptocurrencies used for everyday purposes.
Every Bintex Futures exchange user receives a unique private wallet to store their assets. This wallet generates a separate individual blockchain address for each type of asset, and stores all information regarding the user's holdings, trade history, and payment information so that the user can easily access all the information at any time.
The BintexPay wallet lets users access all cryptocurrency data and charts directly within its structure. This feature offers full insight into the supported cryptocurrencies.
The BintexPay wallet app will soon be available in the Google Play Store and Apple App Store.
One more thing taps cryptocurrency value into the real world: The BintexPay debit/credit chip card, accepted at millions of locations worldwide and linked to the BintexPay wallet, letting users spend their BNTX tokens with real-time conversion, so there's no need to sell tokens to buy something. Additionally, when buying something with BNTX (even if it is converted into fiat currency), users receive extra bonuses within the Bintex Futures ecosystem.
The BintexPay chip card can be used as a common credit card to make payments in shops, pay bills, or buy anything else you'd pay for with a credit card.
