Tune in now for Markets news, views & cues
Is India heading for a cryptocurrency boom?
12:47 Min | June 12, 2020, 7:59 PM IST
Tune in! We ask Paxful CEO & co-founder Ray Youssef about everything crypto.
Hello, you have tuned into ETMarkets Investors' Guide, a show about asset classes, industrial sectors and market trends. I am Saloni Goel.
Cryptocurrency – most people in India actually use the term bitcoin to refer to this class of asset—is back in focus once again after a two-year lull as the Covid-19 pandemic turned things topsy-turvy across asset classes, forcing investors to explore all kinds of options. In India, while the Supreme Court has quashed an earlier RBI order to pave the way for Indians to use crypto, Economic Times this week reported that a move is afoot in the government now to bring in a bill banning the use of the same, which might again alter the crypto landscape in the country.
Paxful, a Wilmington, North Carolina-based peer-to-peer bitcoin marketplace, claims to run India's largest P2P Bitcoin Exchange. The bourse claims to have recorded at least $1 million in weekly volumes in the first 21 weeks of 2020.
So when Paxful CEO and co-founder Ray Youssef spoke to us, we clearly had a lot to ask. Listen in.
Q1. The regulatory scenario in India with regard to crypto currency is still not very clear. When you launch India operations, what are your reading of the market and the regulatory environment?
Q2. There are two schools of thoughts about the crypto as an asset class and as the currency of the future? Many governments and central banks and large financial institutions have opposed it while many others see prospects in it. How have things evolved globally from the mindset perspective and how is the industry trying to remove the misgivings, if there is any?
Q3. Crypto currencies created quite a storm till about two years back and then went into a major slump. They seem to be back in the game now, but the earlier buoyancy is gone. What explains those behaviours and what’s your long-term and short-term outlook from here on?
Q4. As an asset class, how does crypto currency compare with traditional asset classes like gold, real estate or even equity?
Q5. My last question and I would come back to India. How do you visualise the crypto market to unfold in a five-year kind of time frame in India and who do you look at as potential investors?
How long can the market defy negative macros?
06:24 Min | July 01, 2020, 6:45 PM IST
Tune in! Let’s talk about what happened in the market today.
Welcome to ETMarkets Watch, the show about stocks, market trends and money-making ideas. I am Amritesh Malhan and here are the top headlines at this hour.
·       Manufacturing downturn eases in June, shows PMI
·       India to ban Chinese firms from highway projects, says Gadkari
Let’s start with what happened in the market today.
Domestic stocks entered the second half of the year with more than 1 per cent gains, as investors preferred to add beaten-down financial shares. Brisk buying on the counters of HDFC, HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank and RIL took the indices higher, while selling in L&T, Kotak Mahindra Bank and Infosys capped the upside.
Overall, the BSE Sensex closed nearly 499 points higher at 35,414, while Nifty settled 128 points up at 10,430.
Midcaps and smallcaps underperformed the largecaps. Sectorally, BSE Bankex, Oil & Gas and FMCG indices gained up to 2.50 per cent, while Telecom, Consumer Discretionary and Auto indices settled in the red.
In the broader market, Swan Energy, GIC Housing Finance, Caplin Point and Axis Bank rallied 6 to 11 per cent, while J&K Bank, Jindal Steel and Power and Indian Overseas Bank retreated over 4 per cent each.
The market rally came as the Nikkei PMI survey indicated very slow pace manufacturing activity for June compared with May. Meanwhile, virus infections continued to rise, resulting in extension of lockdowns in many areas, which may also slow down economic recovery. Will the market continue to rise despite these negativities?
We caught up with Mayuresh Joshi of William O'Neil & Co to try and understand the market undercurrent.
Can you highlight the key drivers of Wednesday’s market?
In which segments do you fear possible bubble formation in the recent rally?
In last 10 years, gold and Nifty have given similar kind of returns. What should one opt for at this stage?
On technical charts, Nifty managed to reclaim the 10,400 mark after four days of consolidation. The index formed a bullish candle on the daily chart and made a higher high-low. Can we see a follow up buying going ahead? We have with us Mazhar Mohammad of Chartview India to do the chart reading.
What are the technical charts telling us?
What is your market outlook for the next session?
Globally, Asian peers ended mixed, European markets traded lower in early deals. US stock futures traded lower in early pre-market trade, after posting a rise in the previous session.
That’s all for now. Do check out ETMarkets.com for all the news, market analysis, investment strategies and dozens of stock recommendations. Enjoy your evening. Good bye!
