On Wednesday, the SEC rejected an ETF application from New York-based asset management firm Wilshire Phoenix and options exchange NYSE Arca that wanted to mix bitcoin and short-term Treasuries.
Bitcoin dropped some 6% on Wednesday, taking the bitcoin price below the psychological $9,000 per bitcoin mark and exacerbating a slump in the price.
Bitcoin has now found a temporary floor of around $8,500 after its slide lower this past week.
The SEC has rejected many applications for a bitcoin ETF over recent years, meaning this latest ruling didn't come as a surprise.
However, comments accompanying the ruling have suggested the SEC might not green light a bitcoin ETF for the foreseeable future.
SEC commissioner Hester Peirce, known as "crypto mom" in the bitcoin community due to her support of cryptocurrency products, said the rejection leads her "to conclude that this Commission is unwilling to approve the listing of any product that would provide access to the market for bitcoin and that no filing will meet the ever-shifting standards that this Commission insists on applying to bitcoin-related products—and only to bitcoin-related products."
Wilshire had said it would work to counteract bitcoin's volatility by investing in bonds if the bitcoin price fluctuated too heavily—and reversing that position as the price stabilized.
The bitcoin price has struggled this week after climbing over the last few months, though many are ... [+] still feeling positive for bitcoin's short term prospects.
"We made every effort to get the SEC’s attention on this important issue, including undertaking extensive analysis that was made available to the SEC staff, submitting key data, and offering to provide additional information to facilitate the listing of a much needed regulated bitcoin-related ETP in the United States," Wilshire Phoenix said following the ruling, adding it is "very disappointed."
Earlier this year, bitcoin appeared to be boosted by geopolitical fears surrounding the escalating tensions between the U.S. and Iran and then apparently gaining on fears the coronavirus could knock global trade —leading some to suggest the cryptocurrency had begun performing as a safe haven asset similar to gold or the Japanese yen.
Following bitcoin's crash this week, cryptocurrency market watchers appear to have returned to assessing bitcoin based on its own metrics.
"Bitcoin’s value isn’t derived from the same indicators as fiat, such as interest rates and GDP," said the chief executive of crypto social trading platform HedgeTrade, Dave Waslen. "Bitcoin is purely driven by demand which is why it often remains steady when other markets are teetering."
Looking ahead into 2020, bitcoin traders and investors have a lot to feel bullish about.
Elsewhere, bitcoin is expected to be upgraded in a so-called soft fork later this year, a development that's been called "one of the most innovative additions" that bitcoin's had .
The soft fork, which is a change to a cryptocurrency's protocol that doesn't require all nodes to be updated and is backward-compatible, is expected to improve bitcoin's privacy and scalability.
U.S. coffee chain Starbucks will be its first launch partner, with the company one of the original backers of the crypto project, along with software giant Microsoft and Boston Consulting Group.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
