The bitcoin price has swung from around highs of $14,000 per bitcoin to under $4,000 over the last ... [+] year--though bitcoin now be on course to be one of the best bets of 2020.
Meanwhile, some have accused Coinbase's Armstrong as being "skeptical" of bitcoin while working to promote other blockchain networks and cryptocurrencies such as ethereum.
"I'm sure he would deny it, but it's interesting to me that the CEO of the world's most prominent bitcoin-related company seems so skeptical of bitcoin," said Bloomberg editor and analyst Joe Weisenthal, commenting on a Twitter thread by Armstrong suggesting it might not be bitcoin that pushes the cryptocurrency ecosystem into the mainstream.
Despite JPMorgan's softening attitude toward bitcoin and crypto, the nascent technology is still fighting an uphill battle.
Just this week, Goldman Sachs listed five reasons that "cryptocurrencies including bitcoin are not an asset class" in a much-hyped but ultimately disappointing presentation titled "U.S. Economic Outlook and Implications of Current Policies for Inflation, Gold and Bitcoin."
Ernest Hemingway described going bankrupt as "gradually and then suddenly"—Wall Street's adoption of bitcoin and cryptocurrency could be happening the same way.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
