Discover the highlights of our NY Post Store , from our partner StackCommerce. NY Post may be compensated and/or receive an affiliate commission if you buy through our links.
The best 4th of July furniture sales at Wayfair, Frontgate and more
If you don’t have a formal education in economics or business, then the stock market and cryptocurrency might be, well, cryptic, to you.
Still, just because you aren’t familiar with these concepts now, doesn’t mean they aren’t worth learning. In fact, understanding how to invest wisely can help you make a profit, increase your business analytics skills, and help you join in on dinner party conversations.
If you want to start investing or need help navigating the current volatile state of the US market, then look no further than the Complete Stock & Cryptocurrency Investment Toolkit Bundle.
This training bundle features 11 courses aimed at helping you invest wisely. With more than 54 hours of training included in the bundle, you will learn everything from beginner tips and tricks all the way to trading like a pro. You will learn the most important investing strategies, how to trade penny stocks, the ins and outs of cryptocurrency, technical analysis using Elliot Wave Theory, and even build knowledge around investing in real estate.
Here is a breakdown of all the courses included in the bundle:
The Complete Financial Analyst Training and Investing Course ($200 value): Score an extensive finance education straight from a former Goldman Sachs employee.
Complete Stock Market Starter Toolkit for Beginners ($50 value): Learn the basics before you start investing in the Stock Market.
Cryptocurrency Wealth: How to Trade and Invest Like the Pros ($190 value): Get hands-on experience with cryptocurrency from a skilled trader and investor.
Stock Market Investing Strategies ($99 value): Discover helpful strategies to maximize your return on investment.
Learn How To Trade Penny Stocks: 10 Easy Steps ($200 value): Learn how to make money from penny stocks.
Cryptocurrency Mastery: How to Buy Bitcoin, Ethereum, and More ($197 value): Start buying, storing, and exchanging cryptocurrencies.
Beginner’s Guide to Cryptocurrency Investing ($180 value): Learn how to maximize returns with cryptocurrency.
Technical Analysis Guide for Stock Trading and Forex ($200 value): Become familiar with trading strategies and technical analysis concepts.
Value Investing Strategies for the Stock Market ($200 value): Learn how to evaluate businesses for long term investing.
Technical Analysis Using Elliott Wave Theory ($100 value): Master various technical analysis patterns that you can use to trade profitability.
Pre-Investing: Before Investing in Real Estate ($199 value): Learn everything you need to know before investing in real estate.
If you aren’t sure this is right for you, then just take a look at who is teaching these courses. One of the instructors is Chris Haroun, an award-winning business school professor, venture capitalist, and former Goldman Sachs employee who has raised and managed over $1 billion in his career. Additionally, you will learn from Mubarak Shah, a penny stock trader who founded InPennyStock, one of the fastest-growing educational Penny Stock Trading community sites in the world. You will learn from Symon He, a highly-successful real estate investor, and Jerry Banfield, an entrepreneur with a decade of experience. With teachers like this, it is safe to say you will be in good hands.
