TFUEL/USD was trading about $0.0026 on May 20th. Just 5 days later, it blew the chart by gaining a whopping 630% to about $0.019
The surge of Theta Fuel (TFUEL), which is used to power little transactions and operations on its own type of blockchain designed for sharing video bandwidth, has taken the crypto world by storm.
According to the data obtained from Coinmarketcap, TFUEL was trading at about $0.0026 on May 20th. Just 5 days later, it blew the chart by gaining a whopping 630% at a peak $0.019 before it fell to $0.016229 at about 11 am Nigerian local time on Tuesday.
(READ MORE: Investing in Cryptocurrencies during this economic shutdown; here’s your need to know)
What is Theta Fuel? It is a cryptocurrency with its own type of blockchain. It can also be described as the operational token of the Theta protocol. Individuals use Theta Fuel to complete transactions like interacting with or deploying smart contracts.
How to buy Theta Fuel? Theta fuel can be bought indirectly on most cryptocurrency exchanges like Binance and Coinbase. You will need to already possess an Ethereum or Bitcoin (BTC) to trade with.
The Theta blockchain project recently explained the completion of the Theta Mainnet 2.0 platform upgrade, saying that the network had improved massively. Theta’s statement read:
“Community-run Guardian Nodes will now take a direct role in block production, finalizing blocks at regular 100 block intervals, and making up the second layer of defence after the Validator Nodes that produce each block.
“With Guardian Nodes joining the network and staking, no single group or entity will control the majority of THETA staked, marking a significant milestone toward Theta’s decentralization.”
Meanwhile, America’s elite bank Goldman Sachs has indicated its interest in cryptocurrencies. On May 27th, it will be talking about Bitcoin to clients, teaching them all they need to know about the cryptocurrency.
Sharmin Mossavar-Rahmani, Goldman Sachs’ head of Investment Strategy Group and chief investment officer for Wealth Management, will be the host; she is in charge of overseeing the bank’s asset allocation, overall strategic and tactical investment strategy.
It’s happening. @GoldmanSachs : “Implications of Current Policies for Inflation, Gold and Bitcoin” pic.twitter.com/kjTGYSE9za
— Mike Dudas (@mdudas) May 22, 2020
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
