Boustead will help screen and negotiate potential strategic acquisitions and identify institutional investment for NetCents.
NetCents Technology, a blockchain-based payments company today announced that it has engaged Boustead Securities.
The Vancouver-headquartered firm asked Boustead to help screen and negotiate potential strategic acquisitions for NetCents as well as identify institutional investment for NetCents.
“Boustead Securities has an impressive track record for raising institutional capital for middle market companies,” said Clayton Moore, founder and CEO of NetCents Technology in a statement. “What really attracted me to their platform was their dedication to and deep knowledge of the cryptocurrency landscape, an added benefit is obviously their significant relationships in the Asian markets which may help us increase our investor base and give us increasing exposure to the vibrant Asian Crypto Market.”
Boustead’s team will be tasked with identifying potential revenue streams and technologies that may be combined with the NetCents platform, according to the announcement.
Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
“NetCents is in the process of developing solutions that allow merchants to seamlessly accept all digital assets, in their native format. We believe this will increase global consumption of digital assets and would be valuable to all the stakeholders, manufacturers, merchants, and customers. Boustead Securities seeks to assist NetCents with global strategic acquisitions to further strengthen their service offering portfolio, in addition to capital raising to finance their growth initiatives,” said Eli Jawad Ansari, head of blockchain and digital assets investment banking at Boustead.
Boustead will also use its network to introduce potential institutional investors and business partners. “We are lucky to have a passionate following of individual investors, but as we mature as a company – it is time to broaden the scope of our investor base to institutions that may see the Company’s offering as one way to add a cryptocurrency exposure to their portfolio,” Moore concluded.
NetCents Technology is a transactional hub for all cryptocurrency payments. It aims to equip businesses with the technology to seamlessly integrate cryptocurrency processing into their payment model without taking on the risk or volatility of the crypto market. NetCents Technology is registered as a Money Services Business (MSB) with FINTRAC.
Boustead Securities is a California-based investment banking firm that executes and advises on IPOs, mergers, and acquisitions, capital raises, and restructuring assignments in a wide array of industries, geographies, and transactions, for a broad client base.
