No idea how to invest in stocks or cryptocurrency? Take this cheap online course.
All products featured here are independently selected by our editors and writers.If you buy something through links on our site, Mashable may earn an affiliate commission.
This course will provide a deep dive into stocks and all things crypto.
TL;DR: Grab The Complete Stock and Cryptocurrency Investment Toolkit on sale for $39 in the Mashable Shop and make all your Gordon Gekko dreams come true.
The world of finance has always been complicated, and now there are alternatives like cryptocurrency to make it even more inaccessible. But with celebs like Akon and Paris Hilton getting in on the game, don't count yourself out so easily.
Given that all signs point to crypto becoming more legitimate and accepted, it can quite literally pay to stay on top of the changing world of finance. And The Complete Stock and Cryptocurrency Investment Toolkit is a fantastic starting point. This $39 bundle will take you on a deep dive into all things stock and crypto to help you make smarter financial decisions and grow your wealth.
The Complete Financial Analyst Training and Investing Course ($200 value): Get a comprehensive finance education from a former Goldman Sachs analyst.
Complete Stock Market Starter Toolkit for Beginners ($50 value): Learn investment basics and understand how to put your money to work.
Cryptocurrency Wealth: How to Trade and Invest Like the Pros ($190 value): Get familiar with cryptocurrency and how to trade and invest from an expert.
Stock Market Investing Strategies ($99 value): Learn proven investment strategies and get insight into great stocks to buy.
Learn How To Trade Penny Stocks: 10 Easy Steps ($200 value): This step-by-step guide will show you how to flip penny stocks like a pro.
Cryptocurrency Mastery: How to Buy Bitcoin, Ethereum, and More ($197 value): Understand how to buy Bitcoin, Ethereum, and other leading and emerging cryptocurrencies.
Beginner's Guide to Cryptocurrency Investing ($180 value): Take a nuanced look at a variety of cryptocurrencies and make the right investment choices for you.
Technical Analysis Guide for Stock Trading and Forex ($200 value): Learn technical skills that can help you make smarter investments on the NASDAQ and Foreign Exchange markets.
Value Investing Strategies for the Stock Market ($200 value): Understand how to do financial analysis and make value investments that pay off.
Technical Analysis Using Elliott Wave Theory ($100 value): Take a crash course in advanced financial analysis using proven theories that will work on any market.
Pre-Investing: Before Investing in Real Estate ($199 value): Discover everything you need to know before making real estate investments.
The best way to grow your wealth is by knowing what the heck you're doing, and this is a great place to start. Grab it today while it's on sale for $39 .
