MrGuru is an online trading brand specialized in providing access to cryptocurrency instruments.
LONDON, June 29, 2020 /PRNewswire-PRWeb/ -- The newly launched online trading brand MrGuru is proud to announce that it's now offering access to the cryptocurrency world, via a comprehensive offer designed to meet the challenges of one of the most fascinating and difficult markets.
MrGuru added several important tools and features to their trading platform in order to enable traders with the easiest access alongside familiarity to a broad selection of Crypto instruments.
Cryptocurrency traders now have access to a variety of assets 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, all available through the MrGuru WebTrader , a web-based trading solution compatible with any type of device. The platform is well-optimized for the cryptocurrency market, integrating several important features.
Since charting plays a very important role in the day-to-day trading activity, MrGuru is glad to announce that its platform integrates charts powered by TradingView, one of the most popular providers in the world. This means customers will have access to multiple technical analysis tools like drawing tools, technical indicators, icons, and others.
Aside from the broad range of tools, the WebTrader is also providing access to multiple trading account functionalities. MrGuru made it possible so traders can make deposits and view banking history directly from the platform. For maximum support, the WebTrader is available in 5 different languages, which enables customers from all over the world the option to enjoy the brand's services, in their own native language.
Aware of the activity in the cryptocurrency market, MrGuru aims to make sure that their customers will have access to the platform anytime and anywhere, as long as an internet connection is granted.
WebTrader does not require any installation and can be accessed via a web browser, from any device, including mobile. In this fashion, traders will be able to monitor their positions and stay in close touch with the latest market moves.
Cryptocurrency trading requires a great degree of flexibility and brokers must adjust their trading offer accordingly. MrGuru is proud to say its offer qualifies since it is targeted for the cryptocurrency market only. Traders will have access to Bitcoin, Ether, Litecoin, or XRP, as well as tens of different altcoins like Binance Coin, Stellar, Tron, Dash, or Cardano. They can build a proper portfolio or find day-trading options on a wide range of tokens.
MrGuru aims to become a leading brand specialized in cryptocurrencies and provide opportunities for traders wanting to focus on the crypto market.
MrGuru aims to anticipate all the due developments and make sure traders can benefit from well-suited trading conditions. It's easy and fine-tuned trading software combined with multiple trading functionalities is what makes MrGuru to the rising status of cryptocurrency trading.
MrGuru is an online trading brand specialized in providing access to cryptocurrency instruments. With a focus on the cryptocurrency markets, the broker provides a tailored offer designed to help traders meet the challenges of the cryptocurrency market and succeed in their trading quest.
