Oscar-winning director shares conspiracy theory which claims Microsoft’s recent crypto mining patent is satanic.
Oscar-winning Russian director, Nikita Mikhalkov, has espoused a bizarre conspiracy theory on local television. He claims that Microsoft’s recent patent for a sensor-based cryptocurrency mining system using body activity data comprises the first-step in a satanic plot to microchip the human race.
On an episode of ‘Besogan TV,’ which roughly translates to ‘demon basher TV,’ Mikhalkov claimed the patent number of Microsoft’s cryptocurrency system — WO/2020/060606 — alludes to the occult nature of the technology.
“The 060606 part is somewhat alarming. You probably understand this, right? Is this a coincidence or an intentional selection of such a symbol, which in the Apocalypse of John is called the ‘number of the beast’ – the 666,” he stated.
Mikhalkov claims that the system will manifest as a global program to microchip the population under the guise of the Bill Gates Foundation’s efforts to develop a vaccine for COVID-19.
He claims that the program will be executed by Gates’ global “co-conspirators,” accusing Herman Gref, the head of Russian state-owned bank Sberbank, of being in on the diabolical scheme.
The episode was aired on the Rossiya 24 TV channel on May 1 before being removed from the channels schedule — prompting Mikhalkov to claim “censorship” on the part of the channel. After being posted online, the episode garnered 700,000 views in less than one day.
The conspiracy theory even garnered support from Russian politician and retired Tennis player, Marat Safin.
The theory ignores the absence of any mention of microchips in Microsoft’s patent, obscures Gates' affiliation with the company after having stepped-down from the conglomerate’s board, and provides little explanation of the purpose of the microchipping program advanced by Mikhalkov.
As stated by RT. “Those who fear being forcefully microchipped by an evil corporation should probably first check their own pockets for a little ‘tracking device’ called a smartphone, which they have purchased and carry around voluntarily.”
