BRAZIL - 2019/08/12: In this photo illustration the Overstock logo is seen displayed on a ... [+] smartphone. (Photo Illustration by Rafael Henrique/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images)
Overstock.com announced yesterday via a press release that it is approaching the record date for its Digital Voting Series A-1 Preferred Stock (“OSTKO”) dividend.
“Overstock has long championed a new capital markets system built on trust through technology,” said Overstock CEO Jonathan Johnson. “This innovative dividend issuance is another step in that direction. I’m pleased that the dividend will trade on the tZERO platform.”
Overstock shareholders as of record date April 27, 2020, will receive the dividend, which will be distributed on a 1:10 basis in shares of OSTKO on May 19, 2020.
The company said that its Series A-1 shares had been granted DTC eligibility, allowing them to be eligible for depository and book-entry services at DTC, and the company has filed its prospectus supplement in connection with the dividend.
Overstock.com, an online retailer and technology company based in Salt Lake City, Utah, has been a champion in the blockchain industry, being the parent company of tZERO and other technology start-ups. Overstock, which started as an online retailer, was the first major retailer to accept cryptocurrency in 2014, and in the same year founded Medici Ventures.
As a journalist, I report on cryptocurrency, collateralized tokens and stablecoins. I’ve also written about blockchain projects with the potential to transform finance. My coverage includes entrepreneurs and stories that educate the public about payment systems, transfer payments, and other use-cases that implement distributed ledger technology (DLT). I focus on how business and regulation have the power to transform or disrupt our economy. I have managed blockchain and currency initiatives for the banking sector. My professional experience has been with Wall Street investment banks for over 20 years in securities and trading.  In addition to contributing to Forbes, I am a data scientist and consult for financial institutions managing regulatory, business transformation, and technology programs. I’m a graduate of St. John’s University and Stevens Institute of Technology.
