A Wall St. sign near the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) on May 8, 2020 in New York City. - Wall ... [+] Street stocks gained in opening trading Friday, shrugging off April employment figures that showed an unprecedented spike in job losses and unemployment. Shortly after the opening bell, the Dow Jones Industrial Average stood at 24,209.65, up 1.4 percent. (Photo by Johannes EISELE / AFP) (Photo by JOHANNES EISELE/AFP via Getty Images)
k.com said today that it had completed the issuance of its Digital Voting Series A-1 Preferred Stock ("Series A-1") (OSTKO) digital dividend on May 19, 2020, as expected. This was a first for blockchain-inspired trading because OSTKO will controversially trade only on tZERO's Alternative Trading System (ATS) and not multiple exchanges.
OSTKO will also be measured on tZEROS's blockchain platform. This means that existing systems will be used simultaneously with tZERO's ATS token trading innovation. This dividend is a blockchain first for tracking share ownership.
"I'm pleased we have paid this innovative dividend to our shareholders," said Overstock CEO Jonathan Johnson. "These preferred shares have real value and have been paid a cash dividend in each of the last three years. We believe they will increase participation and long-term liquidity on the tZERO ATS platform. I appreciate the support and cooperation of the investment community and regulators in our efforts to innovate in the capital markets through new technology."
Skeptics have expressed concern over the inability to trade the shares on exchanges other than the Overstock-owned tZERO exchange.
In a statement the company said the dividend was issued in Series A-1 shares on a 1:10 basis to all Overstock shareholders as of the record date of April 27, 2020. Overstock then distributed the dividend shares through its transfer agent, Computershare, to investors' brokerage or other custodial accounts in which they hold Overstock securities. No action by shareholders was necessary for them to receive the dividend.
As a journalist, I report on cryptocurrency, collateralized tokens and stablecoins. I’ve also written about blockchain projects with the potential to transform finance. My coverage includes entrepreneurs and stories that educate the public about payment systems, transfer payments, and other use-cases that implement distributed ledger technology (DLT). I focus on how business and regulation have the power to transform or disrupt our economy. I have managed blockchain and currency initiatives for the banking sector. My professional experience has been with Wall Street investment banks for over 20 years in securities and trading.  In addition to contributing to Forbes, I am a data scientist and consult for financial institutions managing regulatory, business transformation, and technology programs. I’m a graduate of St. John’s University and Stevens Institute of Technology.
