Paypal and venmo to allow users to buy, sell, and store crypto
On June 3rd of this year, Paypal posted a job opening for a Blockchain Research Engineer. The description calls for responsibilities like “Leading discovery for use cases that can further PayPal’s understanding of blockchain and specific blockchain implementations.”
Paypal and Venmo to roll out the ability for users to buy and store crypto.
Bitcoin revenue of Paypal's competitors is too great to ignore.
Hundreds of millions of Paypal and venmo users will now have access to cryptocurrency.
This information caused many to wonder if Paypal, and its payment application Venmo, would soon offer crypto payments and wallets.
In a recent article published by Coindesk, a “well-placed industry source” said this:
The details of how cryptocurrency will be integrated into these platforms, including whether or not they will offer more than just Bitcoin, is still very much unknown. Coindesk’s source also said that Paypal “would be working with multiple exchanges to source liquidity.”
This is not the first time that Paypal has dabbled with cryptocurrency. As far back as 2016 Paypal offered Coinbase users the ability to withdraw their fiat money to Paypal accounts. While Paypal has so far only had one foot in the door, all the while other fintech payments companies are making money in the crypto space, It seems Paypal now wants in.
Square, a payments solution and competitor to Paypal, gave its CashApp users the ability to purchase and store cryptocurrency as far back as 2018. Back in May of this year, CashApp reported quarterly revenue of over 300 million dollars from Bitcoin purchases and transactions.
While It seems Paypal may be interested in the space due to the potential profit to be made, the Bitcoin and wider cryptocurrency community are incredibly bullish on crypto prices following this news.
This year, Paypal hit the milestone of having over 300 million users. Similarly, Venmo’s growing user base can add a great deal more to the number of people that will now have the exposure and opportunity to invest in Bitcoin or other cryptocurrencies.
Influential members of the crypto community took to Twitter to express their feelings. Ivan Liljeqvist, founder of the Ivan On Tech Academy and tech educator, tweet this :
Ivan and other members of crypto-twitter noted how we have come full circle where we started with complete denial of the technology, to acceptance. Alex Saunders, another influential member of crypto-twitter, tweet this :
Slowly. Then all at once. No one wants to be first. Then no one wants to be last. So far this week:
