A "very emotional" Perth Glory owner Tony Sage says he is close to finalising a deal to sell the majority of his stake in the A-League club to a London-based cryptocurrency group, but has assured fans the club's name, colours and "heritage" will be retained.
The millionaire businessman has been the sole owner of the Glory since 2009.
But Mr Sage said he was no longer able to compete with the financial power of other A-League clubs and had been looking for an investment partner for the past 18 months.
"Last year's loss was about $2.9 million, which is a huge loss to take on by myself," he said.
Tony Sage says he was unwilling to sell 100 per cent of the club and wanted to keep a stake.
Mr Sage said he had received four offers for the club over the past 18 months, but each of them came with conditions he could not accept, including changing the club's name or colours.
"One thing I am very big on is the history of Perth Glory, so I've been patient," he said.
Perth Glory are sitting third on the A-League ladder this season.
Mr Sage said he had been negotiating for about four weeks with a new cryptocurrency group, the London Football Exchange, which was looking to buy several football clubs around the world.
He was currently in Dubai, on his way to London, where he hoped to finalise a deal within 48 hours to sell 80 per cent of his stake to the group.
Mr Sage said he would retain the remaining 20 per cent stake and would also become chairman of the London Football Exchange from March 1.
"It's not quite a done deal yet. They wanted 100 per cent of the club, I was unwilling to go to 100 per cent," he said.
The club is likely to continue to post financial losses for another two years, Mr Sage says.
Mr Sage said he was "very emotional" when he told Glory players and staff of his plans at a meeting at the club yesterday.
"I said actually it was a sad day for me, but it's an exciting future for the club," he said.
"We'll be part of a group that has six or seven clubs in it over the next two years.
"From about next season, the owners will own the [A-League] and that's a massive change in itself. The FFA won't be involved.
Mr Sage said he expected Perth Glory would continue to post losses for another two years until a new TV rights deal was negotiated.
What is the London Football Exchange?
According to its website, the London Football Exchange is the world's first football club stock exchange that will allow fans, traders and investors to acquire shares.
But if Glory supporters are offered the opportunity to buy into the club in the form of cryptocurrency it should be done with caution according to Leigh Travers, executive director of blockchain firm Digital X.
