Some of this shows the difference between the ideals and where cryptocurrencies are now in practice. Yet, sparks are coming up. Art collectives are using blockchain to protest in the United States. People are mining monero with the intent of providing funds for bail.
This doesn’t just extend to just individuals who are protesting. Organizations such as the Catalonia government were using bitcoin to finance and fund independence referendums. Declared illegal after it was enacted, the Spanish government alleged that the Catalonia movement was using bitcoin to hide its expenses — but it would have made little sense, in any case, to conduct financial transactions with the ledger of trust that constitutes to the Spanish and European financial system that was going to smash the Catalonian referendum.
Catalonia is also a hub for the decentralized web and mesh networks that exist somewhat independent of centralized telecommunications providers. In many ways, technology is now enabling the underlying democratic and political preferences of people even if the fullest extent of their political aspirations are not permitted under the geographic legal boundaries they live in — something that forms the blunt foundation for protests.
As we live in a world where digital transactions and currencies are increasingly being adopted by the state — from China, to the EU, to the United States and around the world — as a more efficient means of exchange, cryptocurrency’s rare ability to hold value outside of the context of centralized monetary authorities (often aligned in policy with their political peers, or in the case of China, subordinated to them) and private banking systems that must stay utterly loyal to the state is starting to show its value.
We’ve seen governments from Iran to Venezuela to China censor the Internet and the free flow of information whenever it was convenient for them, or wherever would best consolidate the power of these respective states. They are likely to do the same with any digital means of exchange directly under their control, and have much more granular control over rewarding and punishing those who deviate from central state ideology.
As a result, protestors and protest movements around the world are starting to put their faith in cryptocurrencies. The uncensorable nature of cryptocurrencies as well as its decentralized peer-to-peer networks might be seen as weaknesses for institutional investors looking at bitcoin as just another portion of their portfolio — but for protestors, these are central strengths of cryptocurrencies not available in any other means of exchange. There are sparks of cryptocurrency activity as protests increase — examples that might shed the light on how cryptocurrency will co-evolve with different protest movements.
I was one of the first writers in 2014 to write about the intersection of blockchain in remittance payments and drug policy with VentureBeat and TechCrunch. Since then,
I was one of the first writers in 2014 to write about the intersection of blockchain in remittance payments and drug policy with VentureBeat and TechCrunch. Since then, I've been an early long-term HODLer of Ethereum, and I've built several mini-projects with blockchain for fun. I'd like to learn as much as possible about our decentralized future while sharing that knowledge with you.
