For well over a month now, a great number of countries have been living under lockdowns and stay-at-home orders due to the coronavirus outbreak. Meanwhile, central banks like the Fed, Bank of England (BoE), and European Central Bank (ECB) have funneled trillions into the hands of private financial incumbents. Despite the market carnage on March 12, cryptocurrency markets have gone against the trend and remain resilient. Bitcoin and digital currency trade volumes in the first quarter (Q1) of 2020 have outshined Q1 2019’s volumes by 61%.
The coronavirus scare has ravaged the global economy by touching every continent on the planet. The covid-19 virus can lead to severe illness and even death as it has caused the nation state’s politicians to shut down the economy. Bureaucrats have forced the citizenry to stay-at-home with specific lockdown mandates. Bureaucratic leaders have also shut down major industries including services like hotels, restaurants, airlines, cruises, and more. Essentially, depending on your jurisdiction, a shelter-in-place (lockdown) order means residents are asked to stay home and not leave their residence to travel unless it’s an emergency.
Spot gold and gold futures charts on April 9, 2020. Gold prices have gained 5.3% since $1,579 the low on March 12, 2020.
All of these actions have caused the stock market to crumble, real estate markets shudder , and oil has dropped below $20 per barrel of crude. Just like bitcoin and cryptocurrency markets, on ‘Black Thursday’ March 12, gold took a big hit and dropped to a low of $1,579 per Troy ounce. Since then, gold has gained 5.3% in value to-date, as an ounce of fine gold is selling for $1,661 at press time. BTC dropped to a low of $3,800 on March 12 , but prices have since gained 90.78% in value. Even though the global economy has been stumbling, digital assets have surpassed equity and precious metals markets by a long shot.
BTC /USD 6-month chart on April 9, 2020. BTC prices have gained 90% since the $3,800 low on March 12, 2020.
Exchanges reported that ‘Black Thursday’ saw a record $70 billion in global trade volume, as trading platforms were swamped with both buyers and sellers. Bitcoin options skyrocketed to a record $198 million that day as well as crypto derivatives, specifically options and futures, had a landmark month. Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) swapped $347 million worth of bitcoin futures contracts on April 2. Moreover, the derivatives exchange Bitmex has lost dominance to other futures market players like Okex, Huobi, and Binance.
The top digital asset markets on Thursday, April 9, 2020.
The Block’s Steven Zheng reviewed the volumes of 22 major crypto exchanges and discovered a considerable spike in Q1 2020 compared to 2019’s first quarter. Zheng’s statistics indicate that trade volumes jumped to over $154 billion in Q1 2020, which was a 61% increase compared to Q1 2019. Despite the rising volumes, some analysts think that the crypto trade volumes need to continue increasing or adverse trends will crush optimism.
There’s also been an influx of peer-to-peer (P2P) exchange volume in certain countries on platforms like Local.bitcoin.com, Paxful, Mycrypto, Hodlhodl, and Localbitcoins. Regions that are seeing a lot more P2P trade volume in countries like Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Egypt, India, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Mexico, Morocco, South Africa, Sweden, Tanzania, and Venezuela. Additionally, the San Francisco exchange Coinbase saw its best month of trade volumes in March. The blockchain analysis firm Chainalysis recently noted that exchange volumes in mid-March were 9X higher than the usual daily average.
The London fintech firm Mode Banking’s cryptocurrency application saw a 1,000% increase in trade volume at the end of March. Mode detailed that the week after the United Kingdom was placed on official lockdown, the Mode app saw a massive spike in crypto trading activity. 90% of the trades were buyers and most of Mode’s user base stems from the U.K. Mode Banking attributes the massive crypto buying to the coronavirus and stimulus packages being funneled to private banks.
“The impact of Coronavirus aid packages and monetary stimulus programs,” Mode wrote on April 9. “Trillions of dollars have been pumped into economies and stock markets around the world. This has been causing longer-term concerns about the U.S. dollar and other currencies becoming debased, and inflation rising.” Mode further stated:
The nature of Bitcoin means that quantitative easing and other monetary measures do not directly affect its price and thus it can be used to hedge against the impact of these on fiat currencies.
At the time of publication, the crypto economy is hovering around the $210 billion zone and there’s roughly $25 billion worth of global crypto trades right now. Most of the top 20 coins are relatively stable but cryptos like tezos, bitcoinsv, chainlink, and bitcoin gold have seen decent gains on Thursday. A number of lesser-known digital assets are doing well like bora, ethlend, acute angle cloud, hdac, and swftcoin. Overall traders and enthusiasts are positive about the market holding up during all the lockdowns and stimulus injections.
Peer-to-peer cryptocurrency trade volumes in Sweden, Tanzania, Venezuela, Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Egypt, and India have been trending higher. Local.Bitcoin.com is a noncustodial trading platform that allows people to buy or sell bitcoin cash in a P2P fashion. Bitcoin.com’s BCH Marketplace is a simple, transparent and private platform to buy and sell Bitcoin Cash.
Moreover, people will see even more inflation when countries like Spain , Canada, and the U.S. toss out helicopter money to the citizenry. On Wednesday, Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin told U.S. politicians from the House of Representatives that around 60 million Americans will get their stimulus check next week if they used the IRS direct deposit system. Although, Mnuchin recently admitted that those who did not register with direct deposit would not get a check until late August.
What do you think about crypto prices and volumes going against the grain? Let us know in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not a direct offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation or endorsement of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
On Friday, June 26, the China-based Zhejiang Ebang Communication, often referred to as Ebang, will be listed on Nasdaq, according to various reports. Ebang’s initial public offering (IPO) will be the second U.S.-based IPO for an ASIC mining manufacturer joining ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
KPMG has launched a cryptocurrency management platform designed to accelerate institutional crypto adoption. KPMG's patent-pending tool aims to bridge traditional data and crypto systems, integrating key use cases of cryptocurrency, including custody, wallets, and anti-money laundering (AML) transaction monitoring. KPMG's ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Self-Proclaimed Satoshi Claims He's Autistic, Judge Tosses Out Sanctions Against Craig Wright
The Kleiman v. Wright case is seemingly headed to trial on July 6, 2020, after Judge Beth Bloom ruled against the Kleiman’s attempt to levy sanctions against Craig Wright, the man who claims to be Satoshi Nakamoto. It seems Wright ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
US Real Estate Market Crisis: 4.3 Million Mortgage Delinquencies, Commercial Properties Sink in Value
The U.S. economy continues to look bleak as the American citizens and small businesses nationwide struggle to keep up with the government’s rules toward Covid-19 guidelines. In just 13 weeks, over 45 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits and many ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
Final Judgment: Telegram to Pay Crypto Investors Back $1.2 Billion, US Court Orders
The dispute between Telegram and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is coming to a close as the final judgment has been filed. Telegram has been ordered to pay back $1.2 billion. The company must also pay the SEC ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have recently published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
