The four-year-old firm started offering cryptocurrency trading services in 2017 with the addition of bitcoin.
FinTech unicorn Revolut has promoted Edward Cooper to take the role of its newest Head of Crypto. Prior to this elevation, Cooper has been Head of Mobile at the London-based payment firm since 2015.
During his four-year tenure at Revolut , Edward has grown the mobile team to 80 developers, which coincided with expanding the client base to 10 million users in the same time frame.
Having already helped in building the original Revolut crypto products, he will be tasked in the new role with scaling the crypto department and product globally and improve the existing offerings. The four-year-old firm started offering cryptocurrency trading services in 2017 with the addition of bitcoin.
Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
Prior to Revolut, Cooper spent more than three years at European FinTech accelerator Startupbootcamp. He also had a long stint at London-based spread better and trading provider CMC Markets ‎‎(LSE: CMCX). During his time at CMC Markets , he helped the brokerage developing a range of spread betting and CFD financial trading apps for their 80,000 client base.
Revolut was founded in 2015 and claims to be signing up 250 businesses and 9000 customers every day, and projects to reach a 100 million milestone in the next four years. The startup received its European banking license in 2018 as it makes preparations for a shift in Europe’s financial services landscape after Brexit.
Revolut already holds an e-money license by the UK’s FCA, which was a precursor to getting the banking relationship with British banks . The aggregator service also allows Revolut to use Britain’s Faster Payments Scheme, a network used by the traditional financial industry. In addition, it has secured a remittance license from Singapore’s regulators and full authorization from Japan’s FSA, hoping to grab a slice of the region’s mobile payments business.
Revolut firm claims to have nearly two million daily active users who are using its foreign exchange and stock and crypto brokerage as well as peer-to-peer payments.
