Anatoly Aksakov, chairman of the Russian State Duma's Financial Market Committee. You can own ... [+] cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, but you should declare it. Cryptocurrency exchanges? Not welcome. (Photo by Vladimir Gerdo\TASS via Getty Images)
Anatoly Aksakov, a member of the Russian State Duma, says that the country’s new crypto law won’t go into effect until the summer.
Aksakov said on Thursday of last week that people can buy and hold cryptocurrencies, but should declare it on their taxes. By declaring it, they will be given legal protections, since the cryptocurrency will be considered as a property. If they don’t declare it, they will not have any legal protections. Either way, there will be no legal penalties for owning cryptocurrencies, according to a report by RBC Russia .
“For us, at KickEX, this is bad news,” says Anti Danilevski, CEO of the new KickEX, a crypto currency exchange run by the creators of KickICO back in the intial coin offering heyday a whole three years ago now.
“We were initially regulated in the European Union, not in Russia, because we anticipated this,” he says. “It’s a pity that cool technology startups are forced to leave the country and cannot operate in their homeland. We will transfer our team to the EU now,” he says. “It’s painful for me to see that in the field of cryptocurrencies and digitalization, my country is moving backward while the whole world is moving forward.”
Aksakov said “there will be no digital currency platforms operating on the territory of Russia” — meaning no exchanges.
For now, the Russian crypto community is still chewing on the letter of the law, opening it up to interpretation.
The new digital law in Russia is designed to make it harder for tax evasion through ... [+] cryptocurrencies. Photographer: Chris Ratcliffe/Bloomberg
“Digital money” is not necessarily the same as “digital assets”, and the law seems to be concerned with tokens. They will get regulated, and most likely they will be adopted as private securities one day. If so, it will one day be possible to conduct regulated security token offerings in Russia, they believe.
In that case, maybe the hammer has not busted through the crypto piggy bank.
“As far as I can see, this is a fight against cryptocurrencies, not with tokens or blockchain,” Danilevski says.
To newcomers in the crypto space, it’s worth noting that there are distinguished differences between cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, and other digital assets issued by a tech company issuing its own coin. While they all depend on blockchain technology; blockchain technology does not require cryptocurrency.
Waves was building a blockchain trading platform for the National Settlement Depository owned by the Moscow Exchange to see how it would work to trade crypto currencies. But that project was never implemented. They are building blockchain platform pilot program for Rosseti, a Russian electric grid operator.
“That market in Russia is developing steadily now,” says Kalikhov. “The attitude of Russian regulators is that cryptocurrencies are not allowed; and financial assets based on blockchain technology are going to be subject to regulation, but blockchain technology itself is still a go.”
