According to the story, the Senator starting buying and selling stock on January 24, 2020, the same day she received a private Senate briefing that revealed COVID-19 was going to get a lot worse and probably cause an economic downturn. From a legal perspective, if she sold or bought stock on this information, she would be in violation with the STOCK Act, or Stop Trading On Congressional Knowledge Act. The Senator revealed independent advisors conducted the trades for her portfolio without any inputs from her and she received notification after the fact.
The story also revealed how Kelly Loeffler is also the richest Senator in the United States, with a net worth estimated at over $500 million. The perspective of her constituency in Georgia and all Americans, most waiting for a $1,200 stimulus check to be transmitted from the IRS, became less forgiving about a politician who was busy trading stocks to preserve her wealth rather than focused on the broader economy and COVID-19.
Adding fuel to the fire, it was also noted she is married to the Chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, Jeffrey Sprecher. Now she is not only someone who is rich and out of touch, she also looks to be the ultimate Wall Street insider. Many younger people have looked to crypto as an asset class after being turned off by stock investments, particularly in light of the 2008-2009 Financial Crisis and the bank bailouts that ensued. Suddenly, Senator Kelly Loeffler is painted by the media as worse than the bankers in 2008-2009 as she is accused of profiteering off of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Representative Doug Collins, a Republican from Georgia, speaks during a House Rules Committee markup ... [+] meeting on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C., U.S., on Tuesday, Dec. 17, 2019. The House is preparing for an expected vote Wednesday on two articles of impeachment against President Donald Trump. Photographer: Jacquelyn Martin/AP Photo/Bloomberg
Prior to this, the Senator did not even have a contender in the Republican primary in Georgia and was self-financing her campaign. After the story, she now has a competitor in her own party as Representative Doug Collins (R-GA), who is actively looking to unseat her and using this story as a way of portraying her as out of touch with Georgians.
Now that she fights for her political survival, the prospects for how Loeffler might have helped crypto policy in D.C. are greatly diminished. As the crypto industry has been painfully improving its credibility on Capitol Hill, Loeffler may end up being a major liability on its books instead.
I am a former U.S. Regulator with the FDIC, compliance examiner for the Making Home Affordable Program (HAMP) with the Treasury, and have been active in bitcoin and
I am a former U.S. Regulator with the FDIC, compliance examiner for the Making Home Affordable Program (HAMP) with the Treasury, and have been active in bitcoin and blockchain since 2016. I served in in the FDIC’s Capital Markets and Finance Divisions during the Global Financial Crisis of 2008-2009 working on qualitative, quantitative issues covering IndyMac Bank, Washington Mutual, Wachovia, Lehman Brothers, AIG, Citigroup, Merrill Lynch and Bank of America.  I supported the FDIC’s Board at IndyMac bank with deposit run analysis, researched and explained synthetic collateralized debt obligations, credit default swaps, compiled the exposure of net notional derivatives in the financial system, and analyzed new programs by the Federal Reserve Board to stabilize the economy. I became interested in the importance of trust in the financial system and how the U.S. government manages the concept of trust.  With the introduction of bitcoin and blockchain technology by a colleague in 2016, I entered into the blockchain industry, first with the Chamber of Digital Commerce as Director of Operations for Policy and then as the Policy Ambassador for ConsenSys. I am currently the founding CEO and President of a new non-profit called the Value Technology Foundation, with the purpose to conduct exclusively educational and charitable activities with regard to digital assets, blockchain, distributed ledger technologies and other relevant “value” technologies for the public welfare and economic benefits of the citizens of the United States. I hold a degree from Cornell University in Government (BA, 1997) and the Kogod School of Business (MBA, 2009).
