As the Maduro regime has indicated in January of this year that it is selling Venezuelan oil and part of its gold for Petro, I inquired with the State Department to better understand for myself - and Forbes.com readers - what U.S. citizens should be aware of with respect to the White House’s policy on the prohibition against use of the Petro cryptocurrency - and other cryptocurrencies as Maduro is advertising oil and gold for sale in exchange for Petro.
A State Department spokesperson for the Western Hemisphere Affairs bureau told me in an email, ‘E.O. 13827, as amended, prohibits U.S. persons from transacting in any digital currency, digital coin, or digital token, that was issued by, for, or on behalf of the former Maduro regime on or after January 9, 2018. Anyone who transacts with the sanctioned individuals and entities, such as the former Maduro regime or PdVSA and regardless of currency of the transactions, risks exposure to U.S. sanctions.’
The State Department reinforces Executive Order 13827, amended to include Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A (PdVSA) as a complete prohibition by any U.S. citizens in transacting in Petro cryptocurrency. Although not explicitly stated in the President’s Executive Order, the idea that the Maduro regime is announcing oil and gold for sale in return for Petro is a stark reminder that any economic exchange with Venezuela - whether bitcoin, ethereum, or any other cryptocurrency - runs a very close line to sanctions by the U.S. government.
‘Anyone who transacts with the sanctioned individuals and entities, such as the former Maduro regime or PdVSA and regardless of currency of the transactions, risks exposure to U.S. sanctions.’
No more specifics were provided - however, it does appear unclear that if U.S. citizens transact in bitcoin or ethereum over an exchange - and there is no direct identification of with whom you are buying and selling crypto with - what the responsibilities or risks are to those citizens in terms of supporting a dictatorial regime in South America.
For those familiar with the history of the Cold War and the ongoing dynamic of U.S. tensions with Russia, an explanation by U.S. Special Representative Elliot Abrams on sanctioning a Russia-owned oil brokerage company for dealing with Venezuelan oil is fairly straightforward policy and is black and white. However, as our enemies have grown in less obvious locations around the world, the challenge of managing the exchange of new value created and used over the World Wide Web will be one of many gray areas - perhaps for our Government and our citizens - at least in the near future.
US Special Representative for Venezuela Elliott Abrams during a briefing at the US Department of ... [+] State about new sanctions February 18, 2020, in Washington, DC. - The United States on Tuesday announced sanctions against a subsidiary of Russian state-controlled oil giant Rosneft over its continued trade with Venezuela in defiance of Washington's attempt to break leftist President Nicolas Maduro's grip on power. (Photo by Brendan Smialowski / AFP) (Photo by BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI/AFP via Getty Images)
