As the coronavirus spreads around the world, the economic outlook worsens and frantic stock selling has ensued, with some investors looking for safe-haven alternatives.
Does this mean Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are becoming desirable commodities?
I think not. I’ve seen the Bitcoin rampers and scammers out in full force in recent days, enticing prospects with their claims that “Bitcoin doesn’t spread deadly viruses, it spreads freedom! It doesn’t need to be disinfected and quarantined; it’s anonymous; it’s secure, Bitcoin will never rely on a bailout; it’s a truly global currency for all”. Bad taste as well as misleading!
Let’s be clear, Bitcoin mining is finite, it’s not environmentally-friendly, its transaction costs are prohibitively expensive and they’re not instant. It’s also ridiculously volatile.
I don’t object to cryptocurrencies as part of a larger pool of diversified investments, but I don’t think Bitcoin is the answer during a stock market crash . If anything, now is the perfect time to pick up stock market bargains for long-term wealth generation.
Yes, financial markets are in free-fall and the dents in shareholders’ portfolios make us nervous. But equities are based on real-life, tangible businesses. This means they’re worth something. Many of these companies have had their paper value pulled down a notch or two, but most of them can and will recover.
We still don’t know enough about coronavirus to predict how long the downturn will last. This means I’d be reluctant to start buying stocks just yet, for fear of generating instant losses.
Equally, I don’t think it’s a good idea to sell shares right now unless you’ve already made gains and feel confident to do so. And current ‘losses’ are only on paper until you actually sell. Most of these companies will ride out the storm, and their share prices will come back with a vengeance.
For long-term investors, patience, discipline and confidence are key to long-term security. The world’s most successful investors ride out market fluctuations and use the downtime to research companies and find those that can go the distance. I myself like companies with a strong track record and a decent dividend yield.
But with very few companies operating from an exclusively domestic supply chain, I think the coronavirus will affect most FTSE 350 businesses to some extent. How quickly they recover and get back to business-as-usual will determine how swiftly their share prices rebound.
One British stalwart I like is BT Group (LSE:BT-A) , because although it has high debt and the increasing likelihood of a dividend cut, it’s got a lot going for it, I feel. That may surprise some of you. But BT’s current dividend yield is almost 11%, so even a cut will leave a desirable return. Its price-to-earnings ratio is 6 and earnings per share are 22p.
The FTSE 250 firm is also highly involved in cybersecurity solutions and in our progressively vulnerable world, this is a good business to be in.
A recent BT announcement that grabbed my attention was its decision to allow customers to pay for its prime TV offerings on a monthly basis, rather than a contracted package. I imagine this will be popular with Premier League football fans.
All-in-all there’s a lot to like about BT and I think its share price will recover.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Kirsteen has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
