BRIGHTON, UNITED KINGDOM, ENGLAND, June 30, 2020 / EINPresswire.com / -- tap , the world’s first truly unified crypto banking app is pleased to announce it will list its XTP Digital asset on the Bithumb Global GEM Board which will go live on Thursday 2 July 2020.
New listings onto Bithumb Global provide exposure to new traders, which means that the Tap Token $XTP will have more liquidity and higher trading volumes than it previously did and will provide momentum for other exchange listings.
Since launching to the public on the 24 February 2020, tap has organically grown to over 6k customers, is still the only company in Europe currently operating a MasterCard and is regulated to hold customers' crypto assets.
Regulated to trade and store customers' digital assets by the Gibraltar Financial Services Commission, tap is in essence, bridging the gap between traditional and non-traditional currency.
Arsen Torosian (26yrs), tap Founder / CEO, said:
“We are excited to be listed on Bithumb Global which should see an increase in our exposure, especially in Asia, Bithumb Global's main hub.  At Tap, we feel it is important that the value of the token is securely anchored to the success of the project. We believe investors can take confidence from four features we offer: 1. Pay transactions fees in $XTP to receive 25% discount 2. Stake Tap tokens $XTP for better accounts 3. Monthly Tap token $XTP burning 4. Partner staking.
“Currently Tap is the only app with a Mastercard licenced and operating in Europe enabling users to instantly transform digital assets into wealth. What we do is combine the legacy of traditional banking with the allure of the crypto market to allow customers to easily access their crypto and use this as an additional or alternative method of personal finance.”
tap currently supports three cryptocurrencies: BTC, ETH, LTC and three fiat currencies: USD, EUR, GBP. In the future tap will expand these supported currencies to any cryptocurrency with a daily traded volume of $1m+ and the top 14 fiat currencies supported by the card scheme.
For all media enquiries including interviews and image requests, please contact: Nicola Cutler, Citrus Ornge on: nicola@citrusornge.com mob: +44(0)7935 863114
For further information please visit: https://www.tap.global/
