TD Ameritrade Holding Corp- backed digital assets exchange startup ErisX has launched Ethereum futures trading, the first company in the U.S. to do so.
The first of its kind to be authorized by the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the ETH futures contracts allow investors to buy and sell contracts that allow them to acquire Ethereum at a defined price date in the future.
At launch, futures contracts are available on ETH for May through to September with trades taking place through ErisX’s own platform. The futures contracts are physically settled with the delivery of actual tokens rather than a cash equivalent, according to Coindesk.
“We strongly believe that the Ethereum blockchain community and broader capital markets benefit from access to regulated products and we are pleased to be the first U.S. exchange to offer these futures contracts,” Thomas Chippas, chief executive officer of ErisX, said in a statement . “Our contract sizes are accessible for any investor while our technology stack and regulatory framework meet institutional expectations.”
The foray into Ethereum futures isn’t the company’s first foray into cryptocurrency futures having launched bitcoin futures in December. Notably, though, its bitcoin futures have not found an audience with little trading in the product. Trade volume on the ErisX bitcoin futures was a total of two for the day. The ETH futures have yet to find a buyer.
Those numbers could change with time. Bakkt, another provide of bitcoin futures bombed on debut in September but has since grown its audience, now seeing volume of close to 2,000 trades a day.
The approval of the ETH futures by the CTFC doesn’t come as a great surprise. Chairman Heath Tarbert said in October that he considered Ether, the main cryptocurrency on the Ethereum blockchain as a commodity. Classification as a commodity is key to obtaining regulatory approval for futures tradings.
Show your support for our mission with our one-click subscription to our YouTube channel (below). The more subscribers we have, the more YouTube will suggest relevant enterprise and emerging technology content to you. Thanks!
Support our mission: >>>>>>  SUBSCRIBE NOW >>>>>> to our YouTube channel.
… We’d also like to tell you about our mission and how you can help us fulfill it. SiliconANGLE Media Inc.’s business model is based on the intrinsic value of the content, not advertising. Unlike many online publications, we don’t have a paywall or run banner advertising, because we want to keep our journalism open, without influence or the need to chase traffic.The journalism, reporting and commentary on SiliconANGLE — along with live, unscripted video from our Silicon Valley studio and globe-trotting video teams at theCUBE — take a lot of hard work, time and money. Keeping the quality high requires the support of sponsors who are aligned with our vision of ad-free journalism content.
If you like the reporting, video interviews and other ad-free content here, please take a moment to check out a sample of the video content supported by our sponsors, tweet your support , and keep coming back to SiliconANGLE .
