Musk has, however, indicated he won't be getting into cryptocurrency directly. Musk has called bitcoin’s structure "quite brilliant," though at the same time poured cold water on suggestions Tesla could get into the bitcoin businesses .
Last year, Musk surprised the bitcoin and cryptocurrency community by saying that the meme-based dogecoin is his "fav" cryptocurrency , even ahead of original cryptocurrency bitcoin.
When Musk tweeted the word "ethereum" last year he quickly followed it up by tweeting "jk" —thought to be an attempt at preventing Twitter from suspending his account, which has previously been locked after tweeting about cryptocurrencies due to bitcoin and cryptocurrency give-away scammers using his name and likeness.
The bitcoin price has struggled since hitting highs of around $14,000 in early July last year.
Meanwhile, shares in Tesla have soared this week, with its market value now topping the combined value of U.S. rivals Ford and General Motors and landing it the title of the highest-valued automaker of all time.
The sharp rise in Tesla's valuation, which has doubled since October, comes after it revealed a surprise third-quarter profit and delivered a record 367,500 cars in 2019.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
