Tether, the most promising stable coin, now the third most valuable cryptocurrency
Tether has become the third most valuable cryptocurrency trading at $1 at the time this report was drafted, has a market capitalization of $8.803 Billion
Tether has surged past XRP in market capitalization for the second time running, in less than 10 days. It has become the third most valuable cryptocurrency based on the rush for digital coins with more stable prices.
Tether, trading at $1 at the time this report was drafted, has a market capitalization of $8.803 Billion, according to data obtained from coinmarketcap. It is now bigger than XRP, whose market capitalization is roughly $8.58 billion now.
Tether is currently second only to Ethereum (ETH) as the most valuable altcoin in the cryptocurrency market.
What you need to know: Tether is designed as a blockchain-based cryptocurrency whose digital coins in circulation are backed by the same value of traditional fiat currencies, like the U.S dollar, Japanese Yen, or the Euro. It trades under the ticker symbol USDT.
Meanwhile, XRP (the currency of Ripple) dropped to the fourth-largest cryptocurrency by market capitalization, as the price of the digital coin has been a bit unimpressive lately.
The growth of Tether’s market capitalization has largely resulted from tether seeing massive buying surge from countries like China, because of its quality of being a stable coin.
What are Stablecoins?: Stablecoins are cryptocurrencies created to minimize the price swings that occur in a crypto asset. They are usually pegged to fiat currencies and often exchange-traded commodities.
Global Investors and traders are using it to give their investment portfolios exposure to the US Dollar during these times when uncertainty is high as a result of the worst pandemic (COVID-19) known to man.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
Your email address will not be published.
From a macro level, this increase in the number of BTC whales can be considered bullish.
At the BTC market, BTC whales have been increasing at a steady pace after Bitcoin’s recent halving, as data seen from Glassnode show that there are currently more than 1,800 Bitcoin (BTC) whales.
Quick fact about BTC whales: In the Bitcoin world, investors or traders who own a large number of Bitcoins are typically called Bitcoin whales. This means a Bitcoin whale would be an individual or business entity (with a single Bitcoin address) owning around 1000 Bitcoins or more.
Whales could be anticipating a strong medium to long-term Bitcoin price trend, and are choosing to hold on to BTC expecting a bull market. Eichholz explained:
“Where did all these new whales come from? Much of the recent increase can be attributed to wealthy entities withdrawing their BTC from exchanges. Apparently, this is not new wealth – rather, it represents a change in the way Bitcoin whales are choosing to hold their coins.”
From a macro level, this increase in the number of BTC whales can be considered bullish.
As BTC whales accumulate BTCs, Bitcoins circulating supply reduces, and this can weaken any bearish trend BTC finds itself in. Meaning that over time, it’s possible that as Bitcoin approaches its fixed supply of 21 million, the price of BTC will go up, with BTC’s present demand factored in.
“While there is no single explanation of what caused these large holders to withdraw their BTC from exchanges, [Bitcoin exchange outflows] suggests that whales may have used Black Thursday as an opportunity to get in at the bottom and then withdraw their bitcoin to HODL for the longer term in anticipation of the next Bull Run.”
BTCs moving from the investment bucket into the trading bucket could become a crucial source of liquidity.
Data obtained from a crypto analytic firm, Glassnode revealed that 13,000 BTC wallets are now worth at least $1,000,000, showing the numbers of BTC whales are increasing on a daily basis.
Current number of #Bitcoin addresses holding at least:
— glassnode (@glassnode) June 30, 2020
With more people looking to trade bitcoin, which is only becoming scarcer following the recent halving, BTCs moving from the investment bucket into the trading bucket could become a crucial source of liquidity. However, one would expect this will only happen if bitcoin’s price rises to a level at which long-term investors are willing to sell,” Chainalysis researchers wrote.
Chainalysis a leading crypto analytic firm also explained activities in the BTC market for the month of June. The report said;
“As of June 2020, roughly 18.6 million Bitcoin has been mined. We break that 18.6 million Bitcoin down into three buckets based on its movements to date.
“Roughly 60% of that Bitcoin is held by entities — either people or businesses — that have never sold more than 25% of Bitcoin they’ve ever received, and have often held on to that Bitcoin for many years, which we label as Bitcoin held for long-term investment.”
At the time this report was drafted, Bitcoin was still trading below the $9200 resistance levels, as investors, traders keep buying BTCs below these support levels.
READ MORE: BTC whale steps in to buy larger stacks of Bitcoin, at a discount of $8,850
Recall that Glasscode, recently said, “the price of BTC is now more than 20x higher than it was when we first saw this many whales, implying that more wealth is being held by whales.”
“However, the average balance held by each whale has decreased during this period, such that whales actually hold less BTC now than in 2016, and less wealth (in USD terms) than in 2017,” it added.
It’s also important to note that BTC whales tend to sell their huge stacks of BTC on the bitcoin market when crypto exchanges are quiet in order to attract attention, the CEO of on-chain analysis provider, CryptoQuant, Ki Young Ju, who had been studying BTC’s trend had said.
