The cryptocurrency exchange landscape has evolved significantly in 2019. The number, quality and diversity of exchanges has multiplied, giving traders an unprecedented number of venues to choose from. This smorgasbord of options risks leaving traders overwhelmed, however, as exchanges jockey for supremacy, launching new features and products designed to woo the competition and cement their market share. These are the main trends and trading platforms that are changing the face of cryptocurrency trading this year.
Crypto exchanges have long emulated the market leaders, with first Coinbase and then Binance serving as the inspiration for the glut of trading platforms that have followed since. As the exchange ecosystem has matured, however, enterprising newcomers have begun to put real pressure on the incumbents, introducing new features and seeking to differentiate themselves in key benchmarks. The following exchanges provide a snapshot of the formula for success in 2019, and indicate what traders can expect in the months to come.
Integration is one term that crops up a lot across spot, derivatives, and decentralized exchanges. Trading platforms are increasingly trying to improve the on and off-ramps to the world of fiat, and to integrate more products that enable users to have all their needs met under one roof. Bitfoliex typifies this approach: it’s added a crypto portfolio management tool, so cryptocurrency users can track all of their assets, not just those custodied on the exchange. Security is bolstered by the use of multisig and 2FA, while an intuitive layout and clean UX make it easy for new traders to find their way around.
Another exchange that’s placed emphasis on integration and user-friendliness is Bybit . It has a reputation as one of the more welcoming derivatives exchanges on the market, aided by round-the-clock customer service and a beginner’s section that’s stocked with tutorials, a detailed FAQ, and links to articles on trading indicators and derivatives contracts. The exchange’s latest integration is a crypto switching tool that allows users to swap between coins at spot prices, without needing to place an order on-exchange. Bybit claims to be the first exchange to offer a service of this kind, which allows traders to obtain currency conversion quickly and cheaply, with average fees of around $5. It’s by no means the only derivatives exchange trying to make a name for itself, though, as the following examples show.
Margin trading, which once had a reputation of being the preserve of degenerate traders craving Las Vegas-esque thrills, has had a makeover this year. This is thanks in part to the efforts of Binance and, to a lesser extent, Kucoin, whose margin trading platforms are onboarding retail investors who fancy trying their hand at derivatives trading. The limited leverage offered by the likes of Binance provides a safer environment for getting to grips with using margin, compared to the more mercurial Bitmex.
Meanwhile, Huobi DM (HBDM) has upped the ante by introducing real-time settlement for BTC contracts. This seemingly minor move has significant ramifications for users of the exchange, as well as the broader derivatives market. Bitcoin futures contracts normally settle daily or weekly on derivatives exchanges for reasons that include security and providing a window in which to check the legitimacy of trades before paying out. Thanks to real-time settlement, HBDM traders can now access their funds instantly, and deploy this liquidity elsewhere upon closing out a profitable position. To prevent the risk of clawbacks, Huobi DM has put up an insurance fund of over 1,000 BTC , with another 20,000 BTC held jointly with Huobi’s spot exchange, for added protection.
As if the derivatives market wasn’t already competitive enough, a handful of highly anticipated new exchanges are poised to enter the fray. This includes zero-fee trading platform Digitex , which has finally confirmed its beta launch on November 30. Following two months of testing to 10,000 users, it will open to the wider public. The USP that has garnered so much interest in Digitex is its promise of BTC-USD perpetual contracts without the usual maker and taker fees. Instead, a slow release of the native DGTX token will be used to fund the platform’s operations.
Despite the significant technical challenges that must be overcome to realize this goal, Digitex CEO Adam Todd is confident his team can succeed, telling news.Bitcoin.com: “Zero-fee futures trading has been a dream of mine for years and it’s finally going to become a reality. As the world’s first and only zero-fee futures exchange, traders from all over the world will soon be paying no transaction costs on any of their trades, creating massive liquidity.”
Coinflex is the other derivatives exchange that’s gotten heads turning, partly on account of its physically delivered crypto futures, which it claims to be an industry first. It also operates a large market-making scheme designed to incentivize monied bitcoin investors seeking to profit from providing liquidity. Coinflex has promised liquidity providers a $250K rebate should it achieve daily volumes of $500 million for its BTC-USD futures. Having recently closed a $10M funding round, the exchange has its sights set on the lucrative Asian market, and appears to have the industry support to make good on its goal.
FTX is another derivatives exchange being touted as a close competitor to Coinflex. It promises up to 101x leverage and a unique trio of altcoin indexes, which allow traders to speculate on the fortunes of a basket of assets. The ALT index covers major altcoins, MID covers medium cap coins such as ADA and NEO , and SHIT is an index devoted entirely to low-cap shitcoins. Finally, Xfutures exchange has gotten meta by creating futures markets on as yet unreleased tokens. It allows traders to speculate on the launch price of assets such as Perlin and Polkadot.
As the cryptocurrency landscape matures and solidifies, the majority of the volume will be absorbed by a handful of dominant spot and futures exchanges, with the long tail of contenders soaking up the remainder. Due to the highly competitive nature of the industry, and the need to be constantly innovating, expect to see the following trends surface through H2 2019 and into 2020:
Integration of CEXs and DEXs, sometimes through direct acquisition
New indexes for trading baskets of cryptos filtered by sector, allowing traders to speculate on entire ecosystems (lending, exchange tokens, dApps, layer two)
With Bitcoin.com’s new cryptocurrency exchange , featuring support for SLP tokens, set to launch in under a week, traders have more options than ever.
Which features do you want to see cryptocurrency exchanges introduce? Let us know in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: Readers should do their own due diligence before taking any actions related to the mentioned companies, domains, domain vendors, and websites associated with this article. Bitcoin.com or the author is not responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services, domain products and website vendors mentioned in this article. This editorial review is for informational purposes only.
You can now purchase bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH directly from our trusted seller and, if you need a bitcoin wallet to securely store it, you can download one from us here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
On Friday, June 26, the China-based Zhejiang Ebang Communication, often referred to as Ebang, will be listed on Nasdaq, according to various reports. Ebang’s initial public offering (IPO) will be the second U.S.-based IPO for an ASIC mining manufacturer joining ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
KPMG has launched a cryptocurrency management platform designed to accelerate institutional crypto adoption. KPMG's patent-pending tool aims to bridge traditional data and crypto systems, integrating key use cases of cryptocurrency, including custody, wallets, and anti-money laundering (AML) transaction monitoring. KPMG's ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Self-Proclaimed Satoshi Claims He's Autistic, Judge Tosses Out Sanctions Against Craig Wright
The Kleiman v. Wright case is seemingly headed to trial on July 6, 2020, after Judge Beth Bloom ruled against the Kleiman’s attempt to levy sanctions against Craig Wright, the man who claims to be Satoshi Nakamoto. It seems Wright ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
US Real Estate Market Crisis: 4.3 Million Mortgage Delinquencies, Commercial Properties Sink in Value
The U.S. economy continues to look bleak as the American citizens and small businesses nationwide struggle to keep up with the government’s rules toward Covid-19 guidelines. In just 13 weeks, over 45 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits and many ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
Final Judgment: Telegram to Pay Crypto Investors Back $1.2 Billion, US Court Orders
The dispute between Telegram and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is coming to a close as the final judgment has been filed. Telegram has been ordered to pay back $1.2 billion. The company must also pay the SEC ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have recently published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
