Defying fears of a market bubble, bitcoin and other leading cryptocurrencies offer opportunities on discount
By Josh Enomoto , InvestorPlace Contributor Dec 4, 2019, 1:51 pm EDT
It has been over a decade since the bitcoin network first breathed its digital life, bringing with it the blockchain concept. Since then, the search for the best cryptocurrency has riveted both blockchain advocates as well as the mainstream media. No matter what your opinion about cryptocurrencies, they undoubtedly represent a bold vision of our financial future.
More importantly for those who are considering the best cryptocurrency for their portfolio, the virtual currency market has staying power. Not surprisingly, most crypto critics have blasted bitcoin and other blockchain reward tokens as modern day tulip mania. Admittedly, while bitcoin has certainly enjoyed periods of manic investor sentiment, it has one clear distinguishing point: it’s still trading.
Historians generally agree that Holland’s tulip mania occurred between 1633 and 1637 . And when the tulip market finally crashed in February of 1637, many investors were “left penniless.” You simply cannot say that about bitcoin investors. Bitcoin, at the current market price of over $7,000, has a single-unit entry point substantially larger than most blue-chip stocks.
Nevertheless, I agree with the idea that searching for the best cryptocurrency has become much more complicated today. Lately, cryptocurrencies have seen substantial red ink, with the volatility having some fundamental justification.
Largely, I believe the wildness in crypto pricing stems from mismanaged expectations. For example, many had high hopes for Facebook (NASDAQ: FB ) and its Libra cryptocurrency. However, political backlash against the virtual currency project was severe. Furthermore, China’s crackdown against cryptocurrencies have plummeted almost every single blockchain token.
Still, for contrarian investors, this may be an ideal time to either start or resume your search for the best cryptocurrency. Here are seven proven cryptocurrencies from which to choose:
Of course, no discussion about the best cryptocurrency is complete without mentioning bitcoin. For most mainstream observers, bitcoin is synonymous with cryptocurrencies, and for good reason: it’s the first blockchain reward token that emerged. It also continues to capture broad attention, even if its market value has fallen considerably since its highs.
After all, at one magical point, a single bitcoin traded hands for nearly $20,000. Now, with each unit trading at the time of writing for $7,200, the king of cryptocurrencies has taken a 64% haircut. While it’s possible that further downside lies ahead, you can make the argument that the token is oversold.
I’m not just talking from a technical standpoint either.
One of the biggest hurdles for any virtual currency to overcome is credibility. No matter how useful its underlying blockchain may be, people must be convinced that the target asset will have future tradable value. And that’s where bitcoin always wins out in terms of the best cryptocurrency argument: bitcoin has achieved unprecedented mainstream adoption .
