But a regulatory gap remains. Although the BSA covers most of the cryptocurrency activity around today, such as buying and selling tokens at crypto exchanges, the BSA may not be sufficient for other cryptocurrency use-cases that may increase. These regulatory loopholes come from unhosted wallets and retail merchant payments.
The travel rule requires crypto exchanges to record and transmit personal ID data when transferring $1,000 or more, but only when the two parties’ wallets are both hosted by an exchange. If a customer at an exchange sends $1,000 worth of Bitcoin to an unhosted wallet (that is owned exclusively by an individual, with no personal ID attached to an exchange), the transfer does not trigger the travel rule.
Unhosted wallets remain a way to move money outside the reach of regulators. Some industry advocates may argue that this is not a major law enforcement problem, because such transfers can always be traced back to the original wallet hosted at an exchange. Blockchain transparency increases risk for criminals who want to move tokens between pseudonymous wallets and hosted, regulated wallets. But the industry must come to terms with the development that unhosted wallets are likely to become the preferred way to hold illicit crypto, just as criminals prefer to hold physical, anonymous cash over money in regulated bank accounts. Thus, the AML compliance departments at exchanges will soon begin to view transfers to unhosted wallets as riskier, due to their anonymity. This will impact law-abiding customers who transfer between hosted and unhosted wallets for perfectly innocuous and legal reasons. Exchanges will come to view such customers as less attractive from an AML compliance perspective. A bifurcated ecosystem around perceived "good crypto" vs. "bad crypto" is likely to evolve.
Unhosted wallets are inevitable on permissionless blockchains. But the scope of the current risk is mitigated by the fact that most cryptocurrency transfers today probably occur through hosted wallets. But if cryptocurrency adoption matures, there may be a greater need to satisfy regulators as well as users who prefer to secure their own private cryptocurrency keys. One possibility would be a voluntary system where owners of unhosted wallets could register their wallets with some third party, such as an exchange. Users could still keep custody of their private keys, but would connect their crypto addresses to their real world identity that could be uncovered by a court ordered subpoena. None of this is required under the BSA, but the competing forces of criminal activity and AML risk mitigation could push this outcome into the market.
Exchanges get most of the attention from regulators trying to clamp down on cryptocurrency illicit finance. That is because most crypto transactions today are price speculation , happening on exchanges. However, if a world unfolds where a large percentage of businesses accept crypto for payment, there will be a whole new set of risks and money laundering concerns that the BSA currently does not address.
There are multiple efforts to build new blockchain ecosystems where a mass of consumers theoretically could pay merchants in digital tokens for a wide range of goods and services, even across borders. These efforts are in a test tube phase, and their widespread adoption is not a given. If they do advance, however, few blockchain developers are thinking about how illicit actors will take advantage of such an ecosystem. For example, instead of needing to cash out to fiat currency at an exchange, criminals in a crypto-friendly retail world could simply use illicit crypto to purchase their needs directly. And one would imagine that they would only use unhosted wallets for this activity.
This raises a question: Should a merchant have to identify whether a customer’s wallet is using cryptocurrencies that come from ransomware, the darknet, or terrorist fundraising? Should the merchant deny such wallets? In conventional e-commerce, online payments are connected to a real-world identity and can be reversed by a financial intermediary, mitigating (though not eliminating) criminal transactions. Just as exchanges view unhosted wallets as riskier counterparties, some merchants may categorize customers using such self-custodied wallets as potentially problematic if law enforcement shows up at their store after following a trail of illicit crypto transfers.
Some might say that merchants should not scrutinize their customers’ crypto payments any more than businesses do when accepting physical, anonymous cash. But physics and geography limit the flow of physical cash. To spend large amounts of illicit hard currency, criminals must transport it and transact in person. To spend illicitly gained “electronic cash,” one would be able to transact with hundreds, if not thousands, of merchants around the world, all while sitting behind a solitary desk, a laptop, and a VPN.
Before a cryptocurrency commerce ecosystem emerges, there need to be guidelines for how retail activity should operate. Merchants might consider accepting only crypto from hosted (or registered) wallets. Perhaps businesses will hold “point-of-sale” wallets built on smart contracts that reject unhosted wallet payments. It is also plausible that merchants will simply use cryptocurrency payment processing companies to handle these purchases. Some already exist and they are likely already grappling with these risks even though cryptocurrency retail transactions are relatively small.
These risks make two things clear about the future. First, the crypto space is going to have to grow a cadre of cryptocurrency experts who understand cryptocurrency money laundering typologies and who will help the industry account for it in new platforms. Some laundering methods will mimic what occurs in fiat currency, but many will be more innovative.
Second, free societies must think about how to balance the tension between privacy and crime-fighting if cryptocurrency payments gain mass adoption. The capitalist banking system actually provides a suitable model , where private financial companies have access to people’s identities and transactions, but governments can only access that information through a legal process. And although privacy coins bring serious money laundering concerns, some technical features that allow users to shield and unshield transaction details might help mitigate AML risks if adapted into a regulated system.
The crypto space is just starting to get comfortable with global anti-money laundering standards. But those standards are just the beginning. The industry should prepare for new rules that will become necessary only as the crypto space widens.
Disclosure: The author, in his private consulting work, provides advisory services to multiple cryptocurrency technology firms, including some that offer AML compliance solutions.
I spent seven years as an economic analyst and counterterrorism analyst for the CIA. I’m an adjunct senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security, a bipartisan
I spent seven years as an economic analyst and counterterrorism analyst for the CIA. I’m an adjunct senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security, a bipartisan national security think tank. I’ve been following the crypto space closely after analyzing the first publicly verifiable example of a terrorist Bitcoin fundraising campaign in 2016. Since then, I’ve been investigating how illicit actors exploit cryptocurrencies and watching the broader geopolitical and national security implications of the growth of blockchain technology. I see crypto/blockchain as a game-changing development bringing potentially immense social and economic benefits as well as unique illicit financing risks that must be addressed if the technology is to scale.
