A new age of banking is imminent. Legacy models will be forced to follow suit or become obsolete in the eyes of value holders worldwide, as new bitcoin and crypto services take over, seeking to implement blockchain systems with an eye on convenience and financial inclusion. Announcements of stablecoins and exchange services from giants Binance, Coinbase, and others, signal the age of the ‘Bitcoin Bank’ is just beginning. Whether this shift brings about the immense positive change it promises, or simply becomes a new centrally regulated banking system with competing digital monies, the transition is nevertheless underway.
On a global scale, a few basic trends are emerging rapidly where crypto exchanges and banking are concerned. The proliferation of crypto/fiat on and off-ramps, ever wider arrays of crypto financial services, and development of competing stablecoins are being witnessed more than ever. Major players seek to secure market capitalization in the context of security-oriented, compliance-based crypto competition which fosters financial inclusion.
On Monday, Binance announced “plans to initiate an open blockchain project, Venus, an initiative to develop localized stablecoins and digital assets pegged to fiat currencies across the globe.” The $1 billion+ daily trading volume behemoth is supporting over 150 cryptocurrencies and already actively involved in stablecoin development “including a BTC-pegged stablecoin (BTCB) and the Binance BGBP Stable Coin (BGBP) pegged to the British Pound.”
The Chinese version of the announcement stressed the need to embrace change, and for groups like itself and Libra to be developed in an “orderly manner” under regulatory guidelines. The announcement goes on to suggest three specific courses of action including government establishing the strategic position of blockchain and stablecoin enterprise in the financial sector, establishing regulatory sandbox mechanisms, and the allowance of private enterprise creation of stablecoins and cross-border payment settlement systems.
Another giant in the industry serving as a significant crypto on-ramp since 2012, is Coinbase, whose custody business has recently acquired crypto asset storage group Xapo’s Institutional Custody Business. In an announcement on August 16, Coinbase detailed: “Through the acquisition of Xapo’s institutional businesses, we’re now proud to act not only as the gateway for millions of people to cryptocurrency, but also as the world’s largest and most trusted steward of digital assets.”
Coinbase Assets Under Custody (AUC) growth chart. Source: https://blog.coinbase.com
Coinbase currently provides crypto services supporting 42 countries worldwide, with over 20 million customers globally. The group’s main service is facilitating the buying and selling of bitcoin via bank account, credit and debit card. Like Binance, Coinbase has its own stablecoin, USD coin (USDC). The overarching selling point of all of stablecoins across the industry is strikingly similar: a focus on convenience and reliability. As Coinbase claims, emphasizing financial inclusion:
Unlike regular US dollars, USD Coin doesn’t require a bank account. It doesn’t require that you live in a particular geography. And you can send USD Coin around the world at an extremely low cost in just a few minutes. This opens a lot of possibilities.
Headquartered in Singapore, the Chinese exchange Huobi was forced to adapt via unorthodox means due to encroaching Chinese regulatory restraints in 2017. The exchange is currently doing a daily volume of over $1.1 billion and serves as an active hub for crypto and fiat trading, with leveraged spot trading, fiat withdrawals, and the HUSD stablecoin being key selling points. Multisig cold wallets with “24/7 security monitoring” and a “Dedicated 20,000 BTC Security Reserve Fund,” enable users to store funds. Like Binance and Coinbase, Huobi is exemplary of crypto exchanges now moving out of mere trading to offering what are basically crypto banking services to their users.
After a $534 million NEM hack in January, 2018, Tokyo finance giant Monex acquired the exchange, soon after announcing submission of an application to join the Libra Association, as well.
Allowing users to earn interest via crypto lending, payment of utility bills, and business payment services, Japan’s Coincheck was acquired by mainstream Tokyo brokerage firm Monex Group in April, 2018, for $33.6 million. In the wake of a $534 million NEM heist in January, 2018, and ensuing regulatory overhaul, the exchange has once again become profitable, according to Monex. Monex Managing Director and Chairman Oki Matsumoto recently created even more of a stir when he announced that Monex had applied to join the Libra Association , expressing emphatic interest in the project. The Libra announcement solidified the growing impressions of many that a global synergy toward bitcoin banking is indeed developing more rapidly than ever across the industry.
Other major players include groups like Bitcoin Suisse , founded in 2013 and marketed by the company as “Switzerland’s oldest, regulated, professional company for crypto-financial services.” Bitcoin Suisse offers trading and brokerage, storage, collateralized lending, staking, and the Cryptofranc (XCHF) stablecoin. As an amusing aside, a recent publicity stunt brought the group even more attention, finding them conducting the “highest bitcoin trade ever publicly recorded” on the wind-whipped, snowy summit of Breithorn, Switzerland, at 4,164 meters above sea level.
Exchange.bitcoin.com will launch on Sept. 2, 2019.
Bitcoin.com’s upcoming exchange (to launch September 2) viewed in combination with the already available non-KYC, P2P local.bitcoin.com trading platform are aiming for mass onboarding of crypto users seeking banking-type services through Exchange.bitcoin.com, while simultaneously providing a clear route for private, permissionless exchange of crypto via the P2P platform.
The exchange is set to offer features such as crypto/fiat on and off-ramps, security via “2FA, IP whitelisting, cold storage,” dozens of trading pairs against BCH , and an SLP token exchange. Bitcoin.com is conscious of financial inclusion as well, including financial sovereignty as the critical element of transaction. As the developer site states:
Money is critical to the Human Condition. Bitcoin Cash and Blockchain technology enable financial sovereignty in a way which is unique in history…As a developer you can make it [Bitcoin Cash] available to all people, whatever their age, gender, nationality or financial status.
As the trend toward a new generation of Bitcoin Banks continues to evolve, market demand is likely to force legacy institutions to adapt or die, and inspire renewed focus industry-wide on convenience and transparency. As evidenced by cases like 87-year-old private bank Maerki Bauman in Switzerland, which has seen revived interest after hinting at crypto offerings, the new paradigm is one which is digital asset-friendly.
With major crypto service providers and exchanges taking unique roles in their offerings to the market, currency competition among stablecoins is – at least to some degree – now being encouraged. It will no doubt be evident in years to come which Bitcoin Banks are serious about financial inclusion and bringing about a true revolution in the banking industry, and the unfolding promises to be an exciting spectacle.
What are your thoughts on the new Bitcoin Banks? Let us know in the comments section below.
Did you know you can buy and sell BCH privately using our noncustodial, peer-to-peer Local Bitcoin Cash trading platform? The Local.Bitcoin.com marketplace has thousands of participants from all around the world trading BCH right now. And if you need a bitcoin wallet to securely store your coins, you can download one from us here .
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
On Friday, June 26, the China-based Zhejiang Ebang Communication, often referred to as Ebang, will be listed on Nasdaq, according to various reports. Ebang’s initial public offering (IPO) will be the second U.S.-based IPO for an ASIC mining manufacturer joining ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
KPMG has launched a cryptocurrency management platform designed to accelerate institutional crypto adoption. KPMG's patent-pending tool aims to bridge traditional data and crypto systems, integrating key use cases of cryptocurrency, including custody, wallets, and anti-money laundering (AML) transaction monitoring. KPMG's ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Self-Proclaimed Satoshi Claims He's Autistic, Judge Tosses Out Sanctions Against Craig Wright
The Kleiman v. Wright case is seemingly headed to trial on July 6, 2020, after Judge Beth Bloom ruled against the Kleiman’s attempt to levy sanctions against Craig Wright, the man who claims to be Satoshi Nakamoto. It seems Wright ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
US Real Estate Market Crisis: 4.3 Million Mortgage Delinquencies, Commercial Properties Sink in Value
The U.S. economy continues to look bleak as the American citizens and small businesses nationwide struggle to keep up with the government’s rules toward Covid-19 guidelines. In just 13 weeks, over 45 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits and many ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
Final Judgment: Telegram to Pay Crypto Investors Back $1.2 Billion, US Court Orders
The dispute between Telegram and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is coming to a close as the final judgment has been filed. Telegram has been ordered to pay back $1.2 billion. The company must also pay the SEC ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have recently published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
