The cryptocurrency influencer suggested to his 14,000 Twitter followers, many times, that the pandemic is being used to impose “totalitarian tyranny” on America. As the CTO of CoinText, he was worried that his outspoken views and links to the crypto industry meant he could be “disappeared” by the “Gestapo”. He now lives in Saipan , population 50,000.
“This isn’t the end of what’s happening,” he says, citing the historical precedent of the Jewish people fleeing Germany before World War II. “Our ability to travel is going to be greatly restricted and you’re going to be trapped. And it’s going to be at the points of transit … where the undesirables get mopped up. The people who are on the list.”
While many in the crypto community share his fears about the erosion of civil liberties during the pandemic, Armani has gone further than most. Six thousands miles further.
He doesn’t see himself as a conspiracy theorist – just someone questioning society’s assumptions about money and power. Armani says the Bitcoin White Paper is often the catalyst that “wakes” people up and sets them on a journey of discovery.
“I hate conspiracy theories,” he says. “Because you don’t need a conspiracy, all you need is a perverse incentive. The world just works in a certain way. People act in their own self-interest. Lord Acton (said): ‘Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely’. I think that what you see in the crypto community is people who have read economic texts… you see people who recognize what the government is, what the state is and who the people are in pursuit of state power.”
Armani appears to have embraced what some call ‘ the paranoid style ’ in American politics. He is a big fan of notorious English conspiracy theorist David Icke and interviewed him twice on his YouTube show. He credits Icke with “ waking me up when I first came across his work 15 years ago… David has been absolutely spot on for 30 years.”
Icke believes the world is run by a bunch of shape-shifting blood-drinking reptilian aliens from Alpha Draconis, one of whom is masquerading as the Queen.
Armani says Icke’s views have “evolved” — though Icke was recently booted off Facebook and YouTube for spreading 5G coronavirus conspiracy theories.
Another Bitcoiner interested in …. ‘unorthodox hypotheses’ is Caleb Chen, who works in content marketing for a popular VPN provider. Although he’s “undecided” about most conspiracy theories, he still spends part of each day trawling through conspiracy forums on Reddit looking for “alternative explanations” for what’s really going on in the world.
He says the crypto community was where he first encountered conspiracy theorists in the wild. “The first Bitcoin meetup I went to was in 2013. And yeah, it’s right around there when I started running into these people,” he says.
“I’d never met someone who didn’t believe that the moon landing happened, or that believed in the flat earth conspiracy, until I started going to Bitcoin conferences and Bitcoin meetups.”
Kirby Ferguson, the writer/director of documentary This Is Not A Conspiracy Theory says there’s a definite strand of conspiratorial thinking within the crypto community, although price speculation and gossip are the major preoccupations.
“There certainly is that subculture of conspiracy theory in there,” he says. “I feel like it’s a combination of anti-establishment spirit, that spirit of dissent that is in cryptocurrency, and the dubious media sources that are mixed in there.”
The subculture is big enough to be noticeable.
When Bitcoin Ben isn’t pumping the BTC price on YouTube and Twitter, he likes to post about QAnon — which The Washington Post described as the idea “there is a worldwide cabal of Satan-worshiping pedophiles who rule the world”.
And that 5G stuff that one in eight people apparently now believe? You know, how the pandemic was faked to cover up the health impacts of 5G so that Bill Gates can microchip everyone with his vaccine? That whole story was dreamed up by a crypto-loving pastor from the small town of Luton in the UK; a guy who has advised African central banks on digital currencies.
Crypto publication Trustnodes has run with the theme, devoting large amounts of space in recent months to stories with headlines like “ America on the Verge of a Dictatorship ” that suggest lockdowns are about “keeping humanity down, chained and enslaved.”
One possible reason the cryptocurrency space is so conducive to conspiracy theories is that there really are bad actors doing shady stuff in the space. There are whales out there manipulating the markets, which is why the SEC keeps knocking back Bitcoin ETFs.
The theory that Tether isn’t actually backed 1:1 with US dollars has been shown in court to be correct . Many ICOs were elaborate fictions, constructed to fleece gullible investors of their cash. And there is so much doubt over the circumstances surrounding the death of Quadriga’s CEO — which left the exchange ‘unable’ to access $145 million in crypto —  that there have been legal moves to exhume the body of Gerald Cotten. (Or ‘Gerald Cotten’, if you prefer.)
“Every conspiracy theory, there’s always some sort of truth behind it, some sort of fact hidden in it which makes it easier to believe,” says filmmaker Torsten Hoffman, who covers the conspiracy theory swirling around Bitcoin development company Blockstream (replete with cartoon Lizard People) in his new documentary Cryptopia .
Subscribe for thoughtful explorations and leisurely reads from Magazine.
Leave this field empty if you're human:
There are people in the Bitcoin Cash community who genuinely believe that Blockstream deliberately hobbled Bitcoin with a small block size limit as part of a grand plan to push people towards its scaling solutions, Lightning and Liquid. A sample post from Redditor BitAlien : “It’s not a conspiracy theory, it’s a conspiracy. Blockstream exists to cripple Bitcoin and allow the legacy banks to retain control over us. Seriously, WAKE UP SHEEPLE!”
And for their part, some in the Bitcoin community believe that big block proponent Roger Ver set out to destroy Bitcoin to pump up the price of Bitcoin Cash.
Hoffman admits he disappeared down the rabbit hole on this conspiracy theory and spent far too long investigating “inside information” about Blockstream allegedly bribing various parties to get its own way. But in the end the truth appears to a lot more humdrum: the two communities just have genuine ideological differences about scaling the blockchain. In reality he says, it comes down to the question: “Is it digital cash or is it digital gold? If you believe in one of those two then you have two different technical solutions.”
Occam’s Razor, the idea that the simplest explanation is often the right one, helps explain away some of the theories. But it doesn’t explain how some people arrive at the really ‘out there’ conclusions, like Redditor ShadowOfHarbinger who suggested in r/btc this week that Blockstream is really a front for the CIA.
The “CIA has been meddling in Bitcoin affairs since 2012-2013,” he wrote blithely as if everyone knows that. “It is all a government operation and government-sponsored opposition.” He received 12 upvotes.
It’s a riff on the theory the CIA invented Bitcoin . After all, the NSA created the SHA-256 hashing algorithm that Bitcoin uses and Satoshi Nakamoto means something vaguely like “Central Intelligence” in Japanese…
Hoffman says it’s really not that surprising that some Bitcoiners hold unorthodox views.
“Bitcoin started at the fringe and started to question the establishment, the economic rules and capitalism and everything — the whole world. So these people question other things as well in our society and that’s where maybe these conspiracy theories kind of slip in.”
Crypto fans and conspiracy theorists share similar motivations: Both groups see themselves as warriors fighting against a corrupt elite – whether it’s bankers or the Illuminati. Both groups are suspicious of institutions and are more open minded than most when it comes to leftfield ideas.
And given how opaque and incredibly complex the financial system is, it’s probably not surprising that some people go down some blind alleyways in their pursuit of the truth. David Golumbia, the author of The Politics of Bitcoin: Software as Right Wing Extremism , says that even the question “what is money?” defies easy answers.
“It’s very hard to get your head around… even the experts can’t really provide you with a terrific understanding,” he says. “I think a lot of people want a simple explanation. They want something that makes sense to them. I understand it’s frustrating when reality just doesn’t conform to our desire to have things be simple.” In this view, a conspiracy theory in this view is a neat and simple wrong answer to a complicated question.
In a similar vein, Horizen founder Rob Viglione says he’s observed that some people, especially in the privacy coin sphere, are drawn to big ideas and grand narratives.
“There’s this assumption of agency in the world, like big forces are being driven by some higher agent … big forces, mystical forces are driving things,” he said. “And I think there’s a lot of that for some people who come into Bitcoin. It’s like ‘we’re changing the world’. There are really big ideas here you know and it’s easy to sometimes think there’s agency behind just a whole bunch of random events.”
A similar phenomenon has been observed in other parts of the financial world. Time Magazine’s Justin Fox wrote that Wall Street traders also love conspiracy theories, in a piece on ‘alternative’ financial news source Zero Hedge (which was also recently banned from Twitter for spreading coronavirus misinformation).
“Wall Street traders are among the most conspiracy-minded groups of people on the planet,” he wrote. “That’s because (a) some financial market conspiracies are real and (b) without theories of some sort to grasp on to, you’re going to get completely lost in the chaos of the market’s day-to-day movements.”
The US Federal Reserve has long been an object of suspicion for Bitcoiners. It gives five unelected officials the power to change policies on the world’s reserve currency with impunity. And as Hoffman points out, the whole concept is weird: “I mean, the Fed isn’t a government body, it’s owned by private banks,” he says (which is sort of true). “And if you tell that to someone who doesn’t know, it sounds like a conspiracy theory.”
While they may be seen as a bunch of conspirators devaluing the currency and carrying out various schemes for nefarious reasons, Viglione says it’s much more likely they’re just blundering about, pulling levers in the hope that it’ll help the economy.
“My background is in academic finance,” Viglione says (he analyzed the Fed’s actions in detail for his PhD). “I can say quite confidently: I don’t think that they have any idea what they’re doing.”
The further some people go down the rabbit hole of ‘greedy bankers’ the more likely it is to lead them somewhere nasty.
“A lot of that Anti-Fed stuff leads back to the Rothschilds and Jewish conspiracy theories and the Protocols of the Elders of Zion and all that crap,” says Ferguson. “Once you start questioning the Fed and where money comes from and all that stuff you can fall into a gravity well that leads you to thinking the Jews did it.”
