Algorithms are at the heart of 21st century life, invisibly controlling many of the systems we use and take for granted on a daily basis. Pervasive algorithms determine the entertainment we consume (Netflix, Spotify), the information we read (Google), and the chatter we hear (Facebook, Twitter). It’s no different in crypto, where complex and ever-evolving algorithms silently govern core processes.
Algorithmic stablecoin projects have come to the fore in recent years, although fiat-backed stablecoins such as Tether ( USDT ), USD Coin (USDC), and True USD (TUSD) capture most of the volume. While the concept of dollar-pegged stablecoins is easy to grasp, algorithmic stablecoins are a little more complex. Essentially, they are cryptocurrencies which attain price stability by algorithmically expanding the coin’s circulating supply to reflect market behavior.
Take Timvi (TMV), for example, an ERC20 token whose algorithm and collateralized algo-stablecoin targets a $1 price to mitigate volatility and breed investor confidence. The security token relies on ETH deposits by participants in the ecosystem, and proprietary financial instruments such as Tbox (an analogue of an interest-free collateral loan), Tbond and Leverage let users earn interest during both bull and bear markets. Timvi’s algorithm “is designed so that the creation of a new Tbox (a blockchain-based account which converts ETH to TMV) does not cause a decrease of the global collateral below the target value.”
What if ETH ’s price drops and impacts the collateral in Tbox, you might wonder. In this circumstance, the Tbox owner must recapitalize by depositing ETH or TMV. If they fail to do so, the Tbox is deemed toxic and other users can step in and do the honors, recapitalizing while earning an ETH commission of 1-6% of the pledged amount.
Reserve is another much-hyped algorithmic stablecoin, backed by high-profile investors such as Coinbase, Peter Thiel and DCG. Messari dubbed Reserve one of their “top projects to watch in 2020.” Like Timvi, the stablecoin system employs algorithms to manipulate supply and maintain its price ($1), striking a neat balance between stability, decentralization and profitability. Reserve is staffed by a team of 20 including Google and OpenAI veterans, and is advised by Patomak Global Advisors, led by former SEC Commissioner Paul Atkins. Algorithms can also be seen at work regulating ecosystems such as Makerdao, to control its dai issuance and collateralization, and to adjust the supply of Saga’s SGA token.
In the old days, traders congregated on the floor of exchanges, barking into phone receivers and making elaborate hand signals. With the advent of electronic markets, however, trades could be executed with algorithms rather than humans, taking much emotion and impulse out of the equation. Such algorithms enabled traders to trigger trades at the optimal price, accounting for factors such as trade size, time of day and market status.
High-frequency trading (HFT) is as popular a strategy in the cryptosphere as it is on the stock market. A subset of algorithmic trading, this high-speed process sees traders utilize algorithmic programs to exploit modest price discrepancies in the markets. Oftentimes, HFT firms will go so far as to situate their trading servers in close proximity to exchanges’ matching engines to win an edge in speed and make off with handsome profits on arbitrage. This can even be facilitated by the exchange in question, at no extra charge; last year, Singapore platform Huobi began offering this arrangement – known as colocation – to high-frequency traders, who could expect to make trades 70 to 100 times faster than other users. Gemini and Erisx also offer colocation, hoping it will mean traders choose to do business with them rather than competitors.
Of course, algorithmic trading encompasses a vast range of strategies – from time-weighted average price ( TWAP ), wherein crypto traders seek to buy or sell a fixed amount of an asset gradually over a period of time, to iceberg, where they buy/sell large orders of an asset without revealing the order’s true size to the rest of the market. It is difficult to imagine a modern financial market operating without algorithms.
Crypto forensics firms such as Chainalysis utilize proprietary algorithms to monitor and flag suspicious or fraudulent transactions on exchanges, as well as to identify certain individuals operating in the cryptosphere on behalf of hawkish lawmakers and legislators. One software, Chainalysis KYT (Know Your Transaction), tracks transactions made on exchanges using digital assets such as bitcoin, litecoin, ethereum, bitcoin cash, and TUSD.
Firms like Chainalysis are increasingly being tapped up to help crypto platforms achieve regulatory compliance, particularly pertaining to Anti-Money Laundering (AML) processes. They are also employed by government agencies including the Department of Homeland Security, the Drug Enforcement Agency, and Europol, all of whom are desperate to de-anonymize crypto users – often with little justification. It’s little wonder pro-privacy advocates are concerned about the long-term effects of such incursions. By all accounts Chainalysis’s algorithms are incredibly effective, which is why you might want to think about using a coin-mixing service to preserve your privacy.
Fittingly, privacy advocates are hitting back with algorithms of their own; Samourai is developing a tool called Solomon, a smart UTXO selection algorithm that takes the past history of UTXOs as well as user initiated tags into account when composing transactions. It will automatically choose the best UTXOs to combine for optimizing each transaction. As privacy proponent and bitcoiner Lauren MT explains:
Solomon is based on the observation that the cat and mouse game between bitcoin wallets and chain analysis tools is highly asymmetric. CA tools have an almost perfect memory (the blockchain) while wallets are mostly amnesic when it comes to coin selection … the first goal of Solomon is to give a “memory” to the UTXOs controlled by the wallet.
To the developers, this memory provides a more formal tool for reasoning about the benefits/limitations of a specific coin selection algorithm. To the users, it provides useful feedback about the wallet (for manual coin selection, etc) and for the wallet itself, it provides information that can be used by the coin selection algorithm.
The future is algorithmically controlled.
What other algorithms control key parts of the cryptosphere? Let us know in the comments section below.
Did you know you can verify any unconfirmed Bitcoin transaction with our Bitcoin Block Explorer tool ? Simply complete a Bitcoin address search to view it on the blockchain. Plus, visit our Bitcoin Charts to see what’s happening in the industry.
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
On Friday, June 26, the China-based Zhejiang Ebang Communication, often referred to as Ebang, will be listed on Nasdaq, according to various reports. Ebang’s initial public offering (IPO) will be the second U.S.-based IPO for an ASIC mining manufacturer joining ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
KPMG has launched a cryptocurrency management platform designed to accelerate institutional crypto adoption. KPMG's patent-pending tool aims to bridge traditional data and crypto systems, integrating key use cases of cryptocurrency, including custody, wallets, and anti-money laundering (AML) transaction monitoring. KPMG's ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Self-Proclaimed Satoshi Claims He's Autistic, Judge Tosses Out Sanctions Against Craig Wright
The Kleiman v. Wright case is seemingly headed to trial on July 6, 2020, after Judge Beth Bloom ruled against the Kleiman’s attempt to levy sanctions against Craig Wright, the man who claims to be Satoshi Nakamoto. It seems Wright ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
US Real Estate Market Crisis: 4.3 Million Mortgage Delinquencies, Commercial Properties Sink in Value
The U.S. economy continues to look bleak as the American citizens and small businesses nationwide struggle to keep up with the government’s rules toward Covid-19 guidelines. In just 13 weeks, over 45 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits and many ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
Final Judgment: Telegram to Pay Crypto Investors Back $1.2 Billion, US Court Orders
The dispute between Telegram and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is coming to a close as the final judgment has been filed. Telegram has been ordered to pay back $1.2 billion. The company must also pay the SEC ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have recently published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
