Twitter has become home to cryptocurrency influencers who use it for evangelism, spreading news, shilling coins, and shaming certain projects. Of course, the more followers a crypto thought leader has on Twitter, the greater their reach and influence. The following is a look at the top crypto Twitter (CT) influencers in 2020 and the number of followers these people have obtained in order to remain a member of crypto’s social media elite.
News.Bitcoin.com has compiled a list of 35 individuals who leverage the Twitter social media platform to create a buzz about cryptocurrency and blockchain solutions. During the last few years, Twitter has outpaced forums like bitcointalk.org and Reddit, and most community members regularly flock to Twitter now. Newcomers to the crypto Twitter scene will swiftly find out who the top CT personalities are and the platform itself recommends these individuals nearly every day. The following 35 personalities have a lot of Twitter reach .
The following list is compiled of crypto influencers with 100,000 Twitter followers or more. Anonymous Twitter accounts are not included in this list and news.Bitcoin.com will be following up with a study that includes Twitter accounts that are anonymous but have a massive following.
The following list represents people within the crypto and blockchain industry with at least 100,000 followers. Our list is also compiled of people who use their real identity and we removed anonymous influencers from the list for now. News.Bitcoin.com plans to follow up with a second study that includes CT influencers who don’t use their real identity. Crypto’s current Twitter elite with 100,000 followers or more are individuals who have significant reach, which is the number of impressions or engagement a tweet holds.
The top of the list belongs to crypto influencers who have 800,000 Twitter followers or more. The amount of reach and engagement is much higher than anyone on this list and these people get thousands of likes and retweets per day. The top crypto Twitter personality is Tron founder Justin Sun who has a whopping 2 million followers. Interestingly, Sun only joined Twitter in August 2017, but since then he’s managed to gather a couple million followers.
The top four most influential on crypto Twitter by follower count. From left to right: Justin Sun (2M), John McAfee (1M), Vitalik Buterin (892.7K) and Charlie Lee (831.3K).
The former antivirus tycoon and now crypto evangelist John McAfee follows behind Sun. McAfee joined Twitter in November 2012, and over the last eight years has amassed 1 million followers. The often candid McAfee has been a crypto proponent for years now speaking at crypto conferences but more recently McAfee has allegedly been living on the run from U.S. law enforcement. Vitalik Buterin , one of the founding members of Ethereum, has 892.7K followers and joined Twitter in 2011. Not too far behind Buterin is Litecoin’s creator Charlie Lee . LTC ’s creator has gathered 831.3K followers since 2008 and both Buterin and Lee are very involved with the crypto community’s discussions.
There’s a bunch more mid-weight CT influencers than the thought-leader heavyweights on Twitter. They may not get as much engagement as the top dogs mentioned above but they still carry significant reach. Behind Charlie Lee is Naval Ravikant otherwise known as the ‘Angel Philosopher.’ Naval has been sharing insights on Twitter about cryptocurrency and blockchain and has gained 776.3K followers. The American entrepreneur and venture capitalist Marc Andreessen has written extensively about Bitcoin and his firm Andreessen Horowitz has invested in numerous blockchain startups. Andreessen joined Twitter in 2007 and has 735.9K followers. Another popular venture capitalist on Twitter is Fred Wilson who has 662.7K followers since registering in 2007. Wilson is the cofounder of VC firm Union Square Ventures and he’s a big believer in cryptocurrency and blockchain solutions.
The eight mid-sized mega influencers on crypto Twitter. From left to right: Naval Ravikant (776.3K), Marc Andreessen (735.9K), Fred Wilson (662.7K), Roger Ver (597K), Chris Dixon (574.2K), Andreas Antonopoulos (507.4K), Changpeng Zhao (490.1K), and Erik Voorhees (362.9K).
Bitcoin.com’s executive chairman Roger Ver follows behind Wilson with 597K Twitter followers. Ver is well known for wholeheartedly believing in bitcoin during the early days and for investing in popular companies in the crypto industry including Blockchain.com, Purse.io, Bitpay, Kraken, Shapeshift, and Safello. Silicon Valley venture capitalist and Andreessen Horowitz partner Chris Dixon has 574.2K followers and he once said bitcoin might reach $100,000 per coin. Andreas Antonopoulos has 507.4K followers on Twitter and joined the platform in 2013. Antonopoulos is a well known bitcoin evangelist who speaks at events and has written books like “Mastering Bitcoin,” “The Internet of Money 1 & 2,” and “Mastering Ethereum.” Behind Antonopoulos is Binance founder Changpeng Zhao (CZ) who currently has around 490.1K followers.
The author who wrote about concepts like smart contracts well before they existed, Nick Szabo, carries 243.4K followers since joining Twitter in 2014. Techcrunch and Arrington XRP Capital founder Michael Arrington has around 239.6K followers to date. The RT talk show host Max Keiser has about 227.7K and Bitcoin Core developer Jameson Lopp has 216.1K followers. Behind Lopp is Luke Martin (215.1K) from the Youtube show Venturecoinist.tv, Tuur Demeester (204.4K) of Adamant Capital, Barry Silbert (200.6K) of Digital Currency Group (DCG) and Grayscale Investments, crypto trader Tone Vays (197K), Blockstream’s Adam Back (187.7K), Civic founder Vinny Lingham (170.1K), former Bitinstant CEO Charlie Shrem (167K), and former Bitcoin Core developer Gavin Andresen (154.6K).
Lightweight Twitter elites in no particular order. From left to right: Michael Arrington (239.6K), Barry Silbert (200.6K), Gavin Andresen (154.6K), and Balaji Srinivasan (149.5K).
So far that covers 27 lightweight, mid-sized, and heavyweight CT mega influencers who capture a lot of engagement and impressions. There’s a number of people between the 100,000 to 150,000 follower count and a lot more below 100K. Other notable lightweight CT luminaries include former Coinbase CTO Balaji Srinivasan (149.5K), Blocktower Capital’s Ari Paul (139.3K), Galaxy Digital’s Michael Novogratz (135.5K), crypto analyst, charter, and Adaptive Capital partner Willy Woo (124.6K), Placeholder VC partner Chris Burniske (121.6K), crypto journalist and host of Unchainedpodcast.com Laura Shin (116.8K), Consensys founder Joseph Lubin (112.8K), and Crypto Trader show host Ran Neuner (111K).
Will the Next Big Name in Crypto Be Artificial?
There are definitely a few others who make it into the lightweight list including Bitmain’s cofounder Jihan Wu (110.1K), Lightning Labs’ Elizabeth Stark (102.6K), crypto-journalist Joseph Young (100.4K), Coinshares’ Meltem Demirors (98.9K) and the Keiser Report cohost Stacy Herbert (95K). Most of the influential women on Twitter have accounts with 100,000 followers or less. Unchainedpodcast.com Laura Shin and Lightning Labs executive Elizabeth Stark have numbers just above the 100K threshold.
Some of the top female CT accounts within or close to the 100K follower range. From left to right: Laura Shin (116.8K), Elizabeth Stark (102.6K), Meltem Demirors (98.9K), and Stacy Herbert (95K).
The top 35 crypto Twitter elite list shows a number of people who have been involved in the crypto scene for over 5-6 years while others have only been around for a few. Some of the newer folks on the CT scene have been accused of paying for engagement , using bots and buying followers to grow their reach.
Just recently The Block analyst Larry Cermak explained how he discovered a crypto industry executive from Okex was allegedly paying $0.50 for comments and retweets. “That’s how they want to make him ‘the next BIG name in crypto,’” Cermak wrote on March 4. During the second week of February, Anthony ‘Pomp’ Pompliano from Morgan Creek Digital was suspended from Twitter and a slew of community members accused him of faking his reach .
“Did Pomp get suspended because of the follow/unfollow bot he was using to juice his follower count?” tweeted Pierre Rochard.
What do you think about the heavyweight, mid-sized, and lightweight Twitter influencers with the most followers? What do you think about those accused of paying for engagement, using bots and buying followers? Let us know what you think about this subject in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Images courtesy of Shutterstock, Twitter, Fair Use, Individual photos from Google images and Twitter, Wiki Commons, Youtube and CNBC’s Squawkbox.
Did you know you can buy and sell BCH privately using our noncustodial, peer-to-peer Local Bitcoin Cash trading platform? The local.Bitcoin.com marketplace has thousands of participants from all around the world trading BCH right now. And if you need a bitcoin wallet to securely store your coins, you can download one from us here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
On Friday, June 26, the China-based Zhejiang Ebang Communication, often referred to as Ebang, will be listed on Nasdaq, according to various reports. Ebang’s initial public offering (IPO) will be the second U.S.-based IPO for an ASIC mining manufacturer joining ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
KPMG has launched a cryptocurrency management platform designed to accelerate institutional crypto adoption. KPMG's patent-pending tool aims to bridge traditional data and crypto systems, integrating key use cases of cryptocurrency, including custody, wallets, and anti-money laundering (AML) transaction monitoring. KPMG's ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Self-Proclaimed Satoshi Claims He's Autistic, Judge Tosses Out Sanctions Against Craig Wright
The Kleiman v. Wright case is seemingly headed to trial on July 6, 2020, after Judge Beth Bloom ruled against the Kleiman’s attempt to levy sanctions against Craig Wright, the man who claims to be Satoshi Nakamoto. It seems Wright ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
US Real Estate Market Crisis: 4.3 Million Mortgage Delinquencies, Commercial Properties Sink in Value
The U.S. economy continues to look bleak as the American citizens and small businesses nationwide struggle to keep up with the government’s rules toward Covid-19 guidelines. In just 13 weeks, over 45 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits and many ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
Final Judgment: Telegram to Pay Crypto Investors Back $1.2 Billion, US Court Orders
The dispute between Telegram and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is coming to a close as the final judgment has been filed. Telegram has been ordered to pay back $1.2 billion. The company must also pay the SEC ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have recently published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
