President Donald Trump has previously criticized bitcoin and cryptocurrencies, warning the U.S. ... [+] dollar will always be the world's most "dominant" currency.
China outlawed crypto exchanges in 2017 and went on to crack down on many bitcoin mining operations. China is now gearing up to launch a digital version of the yuan—something that itself threatens the dollar's dominance if it doesn't catch up .
"The trend for the next few years will likely be national cryptocurrencies, so the American monetary authorities do not need competitors [such as TON and libra] with such a wide audience coverage," said Alex Kuptsikevich, FxPro senior financial analyst, adding the current size of the bitcoin and crypto market "does not pose a threat to the U.S. monetary power."
"The American regulator could very much complicate the conversion of crypto into fiat. This is not happening just because the market is small. That's why the issue is not on the top of the agenda. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out such a scenario after the official digital dollar appears."
Decentralized cryptocurrencies are still reliant on government and company-controlled services and while they can't be shut down they can be stifled.
"We are in a vicious circle: you can’t bring more balance to an overly centralized world exactly because it’s so centralized," Durov wrote, underscoring what he sees as the gravity of the situation.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
