This podcast features leaders in blockchain and titans of other industries, such as Mark Cuban and Chamath Palihapitiya. With over 300+ episodes to choose from, skim the descriptions and pick the topics most interesting to you.
As the title suggests, this series is focused on Bitcoin, the foundational asset of all blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies. My favorite episode is with Plan B, a quantitative trader who built the stock-to-flow model predicting the long term price of Bitcoin. Spoiler - it’s $288k.
Curated by the former Editor of Forbes Crypto, Laura interviews some of the ‘great ones’ in the space like Vitalik Buterin and CZ. This podcast is great if you are just getting started.
Although not entirely crypto focused, a16z is the leading venture capital firm investing in blockchain, and has put out several episodes on the subject. Check out the “From the Internet’s Past to the Future of Crypto” episode with Mark Andreessen.
This show curates discussions with institutional investors such as Dan Tapiero and Mark Yusko. Great listen if you are considering adding digital assets to your investment portfolio.
Co-produced by Coindesk, this one is a little bit different. The Breakdown provides a daily dose of three topics shaping crypto, with each episode 15 minutes or less.
This podcast is more technical and focuses on Bitcoin mining in particular. Great for both beginners and advanced users looking to get the hang of the technical aspect of crypto.
Hosted by Messari's CEO, this podcast features candid, fast-paced interviews with crypto's top builders and investors. The episodes with Charles Hoskinson and Meltem Demirors were some of our favorites.
With so many incredible voices in the space, this list is sure to keep changing. Honorable mentions to a few up and comers in the space - Jason Choi’s Blockcrunch, Camila Russo’s Defiant and Tom Shaughnessy’s Chain Reaction.
Hi there and thanks for reading. If you stumble upon my articles, you will notice that I write about financial innovation, economy and technology.
Hi there and thanks for reading. If you stumble upon my articles, you will notice that I write about financial innovation, economy and technology.
I hold a JD/MBA and spent the formative years of my career in capital markets working across Mergers & Acquisitions, Derivative Products, Early-Stage Venture Capital, and Cryptocurrencies. I believe it is our duty to find solutions for the growing wealth divide and to create equality of opportunity for the next generation. You can tweet me @tatianakoffman .
