Will falling stocks and fiscal stimulus be good for crypto growth?
Stock markets recovered a little earlier this week as the world’s central banks joined forces to keep their respective economies afloat. Crypto markets mirrored that action but could further economic stimulus packages actually be good for crypto growth?
QE and rate cuts good for crypto?
Brian Armstrong, CEO of US crypto exchange Coinbase , recently tweeted on how the fiscal stimulus efforts by the world’s major economies could actually be good for crypto growth.
He stated that a falling stock market, interest rate cuts, and quantitative easing could encourage investors to a move funds into crypto assets that are viewed as a hedge against inflation.
A down stock market and interest rate cuts may lead to growth in crypto this year. Governments around the world are likely to look to stimulate the economy in any way they can, including using quantitative easing and expanding the money supply (printing money).
— Brian Armstrong (@brian_armstrong) March 3, 2020
His reasoning continued adding “This could be the year where the mindset of institutional investors begins to shift, from crypto as a venture bet, to crypto as a reserve currency.”
Yesterday the US Federal Reserve slashed interest rates by half a point for the fourth time since June 2019.
The lower rate is intended to encourage spending, borrowing and money flow through the economy as fears of the Coronavirus outbreak spread.
The reaction was not positive though as stock markets resumed their downward momentum.
Chief investment strategist for State Street Global Advisors, Michael Arone, told MarketWatch , “I think the Fed’s rate cut backfired in many ways. Instead of soothing the market, it’s reignited investors’ worst fears.”
In a statement on Tuesday, the Group of 7 (G7) finance ministers and central bankers raised the possibility as well, stating they “are ready to take actions, including fiscal measures where appropriate,”
China has suffered massively, being the epicenter of the outbreak.
According to reports last week regional authorities have cut or deferred taxes, fees, and social security payments, in addition to providing subsidies and rental assistance.
They have also asked banks to roll over debt at lower interest rates for businesses and individuals.
This massive effort to print more money and inject more liquidity into crumbling economies just shows how fragile the current banking and financial system is.
It is unlikely that retail investors will start pouring money into crypto, especially is their pay is getting cut because they’re quarantined at home.
Institutional investors, who already have deep pockets, will definitely be looking for a hedge however so Armstrong may have a point with his comments on crypto growth this year.
Micky is a news site and does not provide trading, investing, or other financial advice. By using this website, you affirm that you have read and agree to abide by our Terms and Conditions .
Micky readers - you can get a 10% discount on trading fees on FTX and Binance when you sign up using the links above.
