There has been some confusion over whether India will ban cryptocurrency, including bitcoin, following recent reports of a note being circulated by the government. News.Bitcoin.com interviewed executives of five cryptocurrency exchange platforms in India to find out the truth about the news.
Talks of the Indian government banning cryptocurrency have resurfaced following a report by the Economic Times of a note being circulated by the finance ministry regarding a crypto ban. However, the report is unverified and the news outlet only cited an unnamed government official as the source of the news. Nonetheless, it has many people associate the note with the draft bill submitted to the ministry last year by an interministerial committee that proposes a ban on cryptocurrency.
Unocoin CEO Sathvik Vishwanath explained to news.Bitcoin.com on Tuesday that “The movement of the note is the procedural next step after the committee has submitted the report mid last year.” Emphasizing that “This is also the needed step towards regulation for crypto in India,” he said:
A blanket ban is unlikely … Given that the supreme court did hear all aspects of crypto within India and abroad and have taken a stance to support the industry, the old report may be considered outdated. From the information that we have, the industry players will be invited to intervene while forming the regulation for crypto.
Wazirx CEO Nischal Shetty strongly believes that the Indian government will not ban cryptocurrency. He told news.Bitcoin.com Tuesday: “I’m positive that India will not take a regressive stance on crypto by putting a blanket ban. When it comes to regulation, I’m sure that India will follow the footsteps of developed countries like Japan, USA, UK, Australia, and more which have embraced crypto.”
Pointing out that “the news which is based on a note does not clarify whether the finance ministry intends to work upon the old draconian crypto bill or whether they plan to work on bringing a new bill,” he affirmed: “I don’t think there’s anything to worry about the note as of now.”
Another Indian crypto exchange’s CEO, Shivam Thakral of Buyucoin, also does not think the Indian government will take the approach of banning cryptocurrency. “I personally think that the Indian government would come out with certain crypto pro regulations very soon, they won’t ban cryptocurrency since India … is a part of G-20 [which] recommended its members to adopt FATF rules to regulate cryptocurrencies ,” he told our newsdesk.
Giottus cofounder Arjun Vijay also shared with news.Bitcoin.com:
India generally looks for a precedent when it comes to creating complex laws. With none of the developed economies having banned cryptocurrencies, it is going to be very difficult for Indian government to roll out a feasible plan for banning cryptocurrencies completely.
Discussing the likelihood of a crypto ban in India, Vijay stated that the government is faced with two major issues. Firstly, “If India bans crypto, they need to be able to enforce the ban,” he remarked. “Because of the nature of the product, it would be very difficult for our government to track cryptocurrency holders and implement the ban. On the other hand, a regulation will grant them access to data with which they can efficiently govern/track/tax the cryptocurrency usage.” Secondly, he noted that “If India bans crypto, but crypto becomes mainstream, [India will be] missing out on millions of dollars of revenue and job creation opportunities.”
Coinswitch Chief Business Officer Sharan Nair reiterated to news.Bitcoin.com that “The news of a possible crypto ban in India is not a new development. This bill was proposed a year and a half back.” He opined: “What needs to be considered is that a lot of positive developments have happened in the Indian crypto space since then, namely the supreme court lifting the banking ban on crypto and multiple Indian crypto companies raising funds and ever-growing customer enthusiasm. We are hopeful that the authorised bodies would consult all stakeholders in this matter before coming to a decision.”
In March, the Indian supreme court quashed the banking ban by the central bank, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), after many hearings. The RBI subsequently confirmed in a response to a Right to Information (RTI) application by Unocoin cofounder B.V. Harish that there is no ban on cryptocurrency exchanges, businesses, or traders in India. The Indian government and the central bank have independently indicated that cryptocurrency, including bitcoin, is legal in India.
How Are Indians Reacting to the Crypto Ban Rumor?
The five exchange executives also shared with news.Bitcoin.com how Indians are reacting to reports of the possible ban on cryptocurrency and whether they are seeing any change in trading behavior on their platforms.
“There have been speculations about crypto ban in the past as well. There are more than 5 million crypto users in India, and I’m confident that our prime minister won’t let us down,” Wazirx’s CEO stressed, elaborating:
The day the news broke out created a mild panic among the community. However, we have not seen any difference in the trading behaviour on Wazirx since then.
Unocoin also has not seen any changes in trading activities on its platform. “We have not seen any change in the trading behavior but our customer care has received numerous calls asking our comments about the article. We continue to monitor the user activity on the platform since the news broke and now it is already a few days, it is unlikely to cause any noticeable change henceforth,” the CEO told news.Bitcoin.com.
The impact is also minimal at Coinswitch and Buyucoin. “We haven’t seen any changes in the trading behavior as such but there has been a lot of queries. Users want to know what will be the future course of action for them and for us as an exchange,” Coinswitch’s executive revealed.
“We didn’t see any impact of that news in the trading behavior and people on our platform are trading as usual also it was unverified news as the source was not identified and hence people didn’t take it seriously as similar news were out in the past,” Buyucoin’s CEO detailed.
Similar news has come multiple times in the last four years, but nothing concrete has followed.
“So old hands are unfazed with this news and it has been business as usual for them,” the Giottus executive clarified. “For the new users, they are having some doubts regarding this proposal and we had to educate them on how the concept is still in its early stage and there is a long way ahead for this internal cabinet note to be converted into a bill. And in these tough times, the customers also understand that the government has other priorities.”
The exchange executives further shared their thoughts with news.Bitcoin.com on how a ban on cryptocurrency would affect India. Wazirx’s CEO asserted:
We’re in the middle of an economic meltdown, and millions of people have lost their jobs due to covid-19. Crypto is one of the very few sectors that is hiring today. It’s in India’s best interest to encourage such a fast growing sector. A ban would lead to projects and talent to move out of India, and affect the economy adversely.
He additionally described: “It will also discourage venture capitalists to invest in Indian startups. We don’t want that. Wazirx and Binance have a $50M fund exclusively to invest in Indian blockchain and crypto ecosystem. There will be many more funds that will be launched for crypto ecosystem in India. I’m sure our government wouldn’t want to lose out on such large capital investments in the country.”
Buyucoin’s CEO concurred, noting that “crypto adoption in India is increasing at a rapid pace, so banning it would be a complete loss of control over cryptocurrency-related activities and other monetary benefits Indian government could get.”
Unocoin’s CEO chimed in: “I would consider it to be very inefficient. Presently the significant crypto activity is happening through exchanges and every exchange is doing their KYC and AML checks which are forming anchor points on the blockchain. Crypto ban would push all activities underground. It would be like punishing the legitimate business and industry for being afraid of the bad actors.”
Coinswitch’s executive foresees a “drastic” effect. In his opinion, “Many companies will either shut shop or move to other countries with crypto-friendly laws. The whole innovation around public blockchain infra in India will come to a standstill. It will also have a futuristic impact on the global crypto/blockchain industry as India is an important market.”
Giottus’ cofounder outlined the effects of a crypto ban in some detail. “We see India losing out on multiple fronts if a ban is ultimately enforced in India,” he began. Firstly, he expects that “Some of the users will leave crypto forever, while some will continue trading in cash and become untraceable. This will lead to a parallel economy being created that is unregulated. Because of the very nature of crypto, it would be a big headache for law enforcement authorities to track and trade these activities.”
Secondly, he emphasized that “Indians will miss out on the biggest investment opportunity of this century, if bitcoin continues to do what it has been doing so far.” Moreover, he pointed out that “India is one of the major exporters of software services and this forms one of the biggest contributors of foreign exchange and tax revenue for the country. If crypto/dapps were to become mainstream, Indians will be missing out on a huge opportunity in terms of job creation and revenue.”
What do you think the Indian government will do about crypto? Let us know in the comments section below.
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not a direct offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation or endorsement of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Analysts Say Bitcoin Breakout Imminent: Silver-like Suppression, $5 Trillion in Cash Could Flow Into BTC
A number of venture capitalists and macro investors believe bitcoin's price will break out soon following suit with gold’s recent climactic rise. Dan Tapeiro, cofounder of Gold Bullion International, thinks that $4.6 trillion in cash sitting on the sidelines right ... read more.
Bitcoin's Rise Driven by Institutional Trading, Says Research and Investor Sentiment
The cryptocurrency bitcoin is trading at an all-time high relative to its social activity, explains the crypto research firm Tie. The analysts at Tie believe the ratio indicates that bitcoin is being driven by institutional trading. Meanwhile, statistics from Google ... read more.
Ernst & Young (EY) has introduced a new application that helps U.S. cryptocurrency traders calculate and file their taxes with ease. The EY Cryptoprep app, a Software as a Service (SaaS) web-based crypto tax engine, helps users calculate crypto-related gains ... read more.
On June 19, 2020, the massive industrial firm Honeywell told the public the company is now running a quantum computer that effectively leverages six effective quantum bits, or qubits. Honeywell’s machine is two times more powerful than the quantum computers ... read more.
Police in New Zealand confiscated NZ$140 million ($91 million) from Russian bitcoin exchange operator Alexander Vinnik. Vinnik is the alleged owner of the collapsed BTC-e exchange. The funds were seized from bank accounts held by Canton Business Corporation, a New ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Libertyx has expanded its network to include 20,000 7-Eleven, CVS, and Rite Aid Pharmacy stores where customers can buy bitcoin with cash. They can also buy bitcoin using debit cards at one of Libertyx's vast network of ATMs, bringing the ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
Simple Ledger Protocol Universe Is Thriving: Lottery, Mint, ATMs, Over 8,500 SLP Tokens Created
It’s been close to twelve months since we reported on the vast Simple Ledger Protocol (SLP) universe built on top of the Bitcoin Cash chain. At the time, there were 2,700 unique SLP tokens created, and that’s increased by 217% ... read more.
On Friday, June 26, the China-based Zhejiang Ebang Communication, often referred to as Ebang, will be listed on Nasdaq, according to various reports. Ebang’s initial public offering (IPO) will be the second U.S.-based IPO for an ASIC mining manufacturer joining ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
KPMG has launched a cryptocurrency management platform designed to accelerate institutional crypto adoption. KPMG's patent-pending tool aims to bridge traditional data and crypto systems, integrating key use cases of cryptocurrency, including custody, wallets, and anti-money laundering (AML) transaction monitoring. KPMG's ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Self-Proclaimed Satoshi Claims He's Autistic, Judge Tosses Out Sanctions Against Craig Wright
The Kleiman v. Wright case is seemingly headed to trial on July 6, 2020, after Judge Beth Bloom ruled against the Kleiman’s attempt to levy sanctions against Craig Wright, the man who claims to be Satoshi Nakamoto. It seems Wright ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
US Real Estate Market Crisis: 4.3 Million Mortgage Delinquencies, Commercial Properties Sink in Value
The U.S. economy continues to look bleak as the American citizens and small businesses nationwide struggle to keep up with the government’s rules toward Covid-19 guidelines. In just 13 weeks, over 45 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits and many ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
Final Judgment: Telegram to Pay Crypto Investors Back $1.2 Billion, US Court Orders
The dispute between Telegram and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is coming to a close as the final judgment has been filed. Telegram has been ordered to pay back $1.2 billion. The company must also pay the SEC ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have recently published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
