In a busy week for news, here are the standout stories from the forex, fintech and crypto worlds in our best of the week segment.
As Finance Magnates reported on Thursday, Robinhood experienced technical issues that kept clients from trading equities, options and also affected cryptocurrency trades.
Within a few hours, the problem was fixed but there were widespread complaints from customers who could not get into their accounts online. Complaints also included either slowness or lack of access to certain features, as well as problems trading some asset classes on the no-fee app. Others said they could not see their account balances.
It was a crazy end to the week for the German firm Wirecard. First, Finance Magnates reported that Wirecard Shares Nosedive as €1.9 Billion in Cash Goes Missing .
In an official statement published on Thursday, the company revealed that Ernst and Young (EY), the appointed auditor, failed to find 1.9 billion euros ($2.1 billion) in cash deposits kept by the company which is equivalent to a quarter of Wirecard’s balance sheet.
Then, the following day (Friday), Markus Braun, the long-running chief executive of Wirecard, stepped down from the apex position following the revelation of €1.9 billion in missing cash from the company.
Braun’s resignation on Friday has taken an immediate effect and James Freis, the company’s chief compliance officer, is taking the charge of the company as an interim CEO. Freis joined the company on Thursday from Deutsche Börse.
As Finance Magnates reported, South African regulator the Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA) has “provisionally” suspended the licence of FX broker JP Markets SA (Pty) Ltd, citing issues in processing its clients’ withdrawals for quite some time.
The watchdog handed down a temporary suspension on the FSP license of the South Africa based-firm after it received numerous complaints from clients missing to get their deposits back.
Global banking giant, HSBC is planning to slash around 35,000 staff over the medium term to reduce the financial effect due to the prolonged COVID-19 outbreak, the bank mentioned in an internal memo sent to its global workforce.
First reported by Reuters on Wednesday, the news came as the bank continues to plan cutting down on the operational cost.
Is India’s Crypto Industry on the Brink of a Ban or a Boom?
As rumours of another possible blanket ban on crypto in India emerged, Finance Magnates analysed what’s next for the blossoming Indian crypto market.
With valuable insight from Nischal Shetty, founder and CEO of crypto exchange WazirX, Ethan Taub, founder of Loanry and Meher Apuroop, Administrative Manager at crypto asset management company Two Prime, this is a must-read analysis on the state of crypto in India.
Read more on India’s Crypto Industry here.
As Finance Magnates reported, Russian state’s communications watchdog, the Federal Service for Supervision of Communications, Information Technology and Mass Media, said it will lift a ban on Telegram app.
The move comes two years after Russian authorities decided to block the popular encrypted messaging app.
Despite the country-wide prohibition, Telegram continues to pick up even more users in Russia and currently ranks third after WhatsApp and Viber. Its daily users in Russia grew to 4.4 million in February 2019 – the last time Telegram made this stat public. The app users have been able to access the service using VPNs.
American Express, the United States payments giant, has received a networking clearing license from the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) through its local joint subsidiary Express Technology.
The financial company has now become the first foreign company to receive such a license in mainland China to clear RMB transactions.
Crypto Leaders on the Future of Bitcoin: Join Us For a Free, Live Webinar
In what promises an insightful and unforgettable webinar, on Tuesday, June 23rd, at 15:00 CET, Finance Magnates is gathering four leading experts from across the cryptocurrency industry in a live webinar to discuss Bitcoin in a post-COVID-19 world. The pane,
Kyle Samani – co-founder and Managing Partner at Multicoin Capital,
Diogo Monica – co-founder and President of Anchorage,
Nischal Shetty – founder and CEO of crypto exchange WazirX,
Darryn Pollock–chief communications analyst at Huobi. –
Attendance is free but limited, so for more information and to book your place in this unmissable webinar, visit here .
