Yahoo Finance, the U.S.-based financial news giant, has integrated crypto pricing by CoinMarketCap into its website.
Yahoo Finance, the United States-based financial news giant, has integrated its website with cryptocurrency pricing by major crypto data supplier CoinMarketCap (CMC). The website now allows visitors to track prices for major cryptocurrencies, providing CMC-based data including market capitalization, trading volume, circulating supply and others.
Verizon Media-owned Yahoo Finance and CMC confirmed their strategic partnership for cryptocurrency data and content in a press release to Cointelegraph on Nov. 21.
Yahoo Finance’s cryptocurrency screener page provides pricing for a total of 118 digital currencies, including major cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin ( BTC ), Ether ( ETH ), XRP , Bitcoin Cash ( BCH ), Tether ( USDT ) and others.
The pricing incorporates data from more than 200 crypto exchanges and includes cryptos that account for over 90% of the global crypto market cap, as of the index launch date. The number of cryptocurrencies listed on CMC amounts to 4,844 as of press time.
Apart from crypto pricing, CMC will also provide some educational information to develop crypto markets’ adoption on Yahoo Finance, the firms said. As such, CMC’s daily newsletter and blog content will be integrated into the news stream on Yahoo’s crypto screener page as well as individual crypto pages.
Additionally, Yahoo Finance plans to add two CMC crypto indices — Crypto 200 and Crypto 200 EX, the announcement says.
Joanna Lambert, General Manager of Finance, Tech, Autos and Membership, Verizon Media, outlined the need to provide a trusted source of crypto news and data as cryptocurrencies continue to gain attention. She stated:
“By partnering with CoinMarketCap, a trusted global cryptocurrency data provider, we can provide timely and reliable crypto information to meet our audience demand.”
Yahoo Finance has been actively responding to the growing popularity of crypto so far. In August 2018, Yahoo Finance integrated Bitcoin, Ether and Litecoin ( LTC ) trading on its platform. In late 2018, Bitcoin-friendly payments fim Square was named Yahoo Finance company of the year.
