Home » YouTube’s Constant Demonetization threats to Crypto Channels: Bounty0x’s Hypedia with an Answer?
YouTube’s Constant Demonetization threats to Crypto Channels: Bounty0x’s Hypedia with an Answer?
By Ayobami Abiola July 1, 2020 Off
Bounty0x’s Hypedia raised almost three times its minimum goal on Republic to create a platform that connects Brands and micro-influencers. The Republic campaign closed on April 18th, 2020, and the platform is set to launch by the fourth quarter of the year according to words from one of the team members.
One major challenge Crypto content creators are constantly facing on YouTube is unfair demonetization on their channels. And after a lot of words and twitter rally, the issues get settled. This vicious cycle continues almost frequently in recent times and it feels there might be no end for these take-downs. The painful aspect is watching all works you have taken years to build just demonetized because of ‘whatever’ reason, the question is ‘why were these videos not taken down earlier?’
This is one of the major challenges facing small to medium scale influencers today. These groups of influencers, because they have a relatively smaller community around them, know their viewers or readers more than those with a larger community. Apart from demonetization threats, they have the challenge of getting sponsors.
Bounty0x’s Hypedia is envisioned to close this gap to help influencers with community or subscribers of 10-100k get sponsors. Bounty0x is building a platform to connect brands and micro-influencers to enable both to reach their goals easily. Brands looking for reach can choose from a wide range of micro-influencers to achieve their aim of reaching their potential customers and converting sales. Micro-influencers will also be able to finance their dreams and focus more on producing quality content having no need to worry about demonetizations.
Getting paid in cryptocurrency (since influencers will be paid in crypto/fiat) will bring more crypto adoption from micro-influencers, without any knowledge who gets paid in crypto, about blockchain technology.
Hypedia will, according to Bounty0x, cover a wide range of popular content platforms such as YouTube, Dlive, TikTok, etc.
Bounty0x’s has been successful in creating a bounty platform for marketing cryptocurrency projects. It has paid out over five million USD in rewards to more than 70 thousand bounty hunters. COTI , MPG, SafeHaven , etc. are a few of the successful projects that ran their marketing campaigns on the platform.
The coronavirus pandemic has been favorable to the ‘stay at home’ stocks because of the lockdown in most countries. These stocks are mostly entertainment that people consume in the comfort of their homes. Analytics shows that there is an increase in traffics to all most social media and entertainment apps.
Good connection with brands might just be what a creator needs at this time, and getting paid in crypto will eliminate border barriers and waiting times. Do you think crypto might be the long-awaited solution for micro-influencers especially on YouTube who are working under the fear that one day their channels might be demonetized?
