The commission, on Thursday, submitted its report for financial year 2020-21 to the President for further necessary action. The recommendations will be effective from next financial year.
NEW DELHI: The NK Singh-led 15th Finance Commission has recommended performance based incentives in the form of additional grants to states based on the agricultural reforms undertaken by them after a series of efforts by the centre failed because of reluctance at the state level to adopt these laws.
Several persons aware of the deliberations told ET that the proportion of grants for overall transfer to states for specified purposes may go up to 25% against 12-19% now and linked to the adoption and implementation of model the Contract Farming Act, 2018 and the model Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC) Act, 2017 among others.
The commission, on Thursday, submitted its report for financial year 2020-21 to the President for further necessary action. The recommendations will be effective from next financial year.
While the first model legislation facilitates entry of private players into contract with farmers across the value chain, the second model legislation proposes single-point levy of market fee across a state and a united single trading licence for cost-effectiveness of transactions.
Agriculture is a state subject and no matter how much the centre intervenes through model legislations, the states have to adopt them in totality to bring about reforms in the sector. “Agriculture reform is the top priority of the government. We are seized of the fact that in the absence of reforms in the sector with the vision of doubling farmers’ income cannot be achieved,” one of them said, requesting not to be identified, said.
Other proposals in the model APMC Act, 2017, include promotion of national market for agriculture produce through provisioning of inter-State trading licence, grading and standardisation and quality certification, rationalisation of market fee and commission charges, provision for special commodity market yard and promotion of e-trading to increase transparency.
The model Contract Farming Act, 2018, lays special emphasis on protecting the interests of the farmers, considering them as weaker of the two parties entering into a contract. Under the Act, services contracts all along the value chain including pre-production, production and post-production have been included. Besides, it enables providing crop or livestock insurance cover for crops produced under contract and has kept it outside the ambit of APMC Act.
In the past, the 12th Finance Commission had offered evaluated relief to states that enacted the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management laws while the 13th Finance Commission incentivised states to increase forest cover by providing additional grants.
