Victoria Hetherington | October 16, 2019 | More on: VFF NTR NTR VFF
While some investors are looking for yield as a means of return in a volatile market, others are making the most of the momentum caused by oscillating sectors. Is there upside left in the market? The key is to seek out growth areas, wherever they may be. From pot stocks to renewables, from tech to miners, there are still some areas that are climbing beyond the rest of the TSX.
But how about the looming recession that a growing number of pundits are predicting? With so much uncertainty in the markets, finding areas of investment that not only offer growth but also offer safety isn’t straightforward. However, there is one area that investors may be overlooking in the rush to safe havens that still provide growth: Agriculture.
It’s not an obvious area to go for if investing for capital gains is your trading strategy. However, there are two stocks in the agri space that can offer investors both upside and safety: Nutrien (TSX:NTR) (NYSE:NTR) and Village Farms International (TSX:VFF) (NASDAQ:VFF) . Let’s take a look at why these two stocks are a defensive play for consumer staples safety as well as relatively assured capital appreciation.
The summer favourite for cannabis upside, Village Farms, is down this week after announcing a sale of common shares — a move that has put some investors in the mood for harvesting their capital gains . Village Farms also found itself vulnerable to the sell-off caused in part by HEXO, which itself tanked by almost 40% last week, dragging down the legal pot sector.
Still, Village Farms is a frontrunner not only in the marijuana race, but in the TSX index itself. The veggie grower placed third in the inaugural TSX 30, a new initiative to showcase the fastest-appreciating stocks by share price. Village Farms has shot up by a staggering 868% in the last three years. New investors should wait for the current dip — down 18% over the last five days — to bottom out before stacking shares.
As a world leader in essential mineral inputs for crops, Nutrien is a go-to for investors seeking to capitalize on the growing interest in precision farming. Although Nutrien has scaled back its potash production on a weakening market, the outlook for its flagship mineral is strong in the long term, making this popular dividend stock with a 3.63% yield a strong play for agri growth.
Indeed, with a growing emphasis on efficiency and quality in the agri industry, the potash market could explode as essential mineral inputs gain traction, especially in countries with fast-growing populations. In short, precision farming is a strong play on upward momentum.
While some stock market observers may not have Nutrien pinned as a growth stock, the fact that its products are key to the growing trend in precision farming makes it a strong contender for the appellation. Meanwhile, Village Farms stock is a clear buy for capital gains investors looking for a fast and fairly assured route to steep returns in the legal cannabis space as well as the classically defensive consumer staples market.
One little-known Canadian IPO has doubled in value in a matter of months, and renowned Canadian stock picker Iain Butler sees a potential millionaire-maker in waiting...
Because he thinks this fast-growing company looks a lot like Shopify, a stock Iain officially recommended 3 years ago - before it skyrocketed by 1,211%!
Iain and his team just published a detailed report on this tiny TSX stock. Find out how you can access the NEXT Shopify today!
Fool contributor Victoria Hetherington has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool owns shares of Village Farms International, Inc. Village Farms is a recommendation of Hidden Gems Canada. Nurtrien is a recommendation of Stock Advisor Canada.
Two New Stock Picks Every Month!
Not to alarm you, but you’re about to miss an important event.
Iain Butler and the Stock Advisor Canada team only publish their new “buy alerts” twice a month, and only to an exclusively small group.
This is your chance to get in early on what could prove to be very special investment advice.
Enter your email address below to get started now, and join the other thousands of Canadians who have already signed up for their chance to get the market-beating advice from Stock Advisor Canada.
I consent to receiving information from The Motley Fool via email, direct mail, and occasional special offer phone calls. I understand I can unsubscribe from these updates at any time. Please read the Privacy Statement and Terms of Service for more information.
