By Eric Sfiligoj |January 19, 2018
When I first started compiling this roundup of the best agriculture apps 10 years ago, there was no shortage of new introductions to research. Farming apps were all the craze and ag professionals couldn’t wait to try the latest options on their smartphones and tablets. I took it upon myself to sort through the chaos so you didn’t have to, and present what I viewed as the top apps available on the market that year.
In terms of sheer volume, however, the trend toward newly launched apps in agriculture has slowed a bit in recent years. Instead, companies seem to be focusing more on enhancements to existing apps vs. development of new ones. And that makes perfect sense. When you have an app that is downloaded often, used frequently, and rated highly, you want to sink more time and effort into it to make it even better. Once the first version of an app has been released, the next step for developers is to begin to maintain and support it. The most popular apps in the app stores often see updates as frequently as weekly while other release cycles may happen once or twice a month, reports Savy Apps . If you are using an app that doesn’t have frequent bug fixes and performance improvements, then it may not be worth your time.
This year’s list of agriculture apps is a reflection of this trend. While there are a couple of “new” apps in the slideshow above (e.g., launched within the past year), what you’ll find here are mostly updated apps that have new features and improvements and continue to receive positive feedback from users. These apps will help you farm smarter and do your job more efficiently in 2020 and beyond.
Agronote. Agronote is an agriculture app for recordkeeping of expenses, income, livestock, and machinery procedures. Agronote will help you keep your farm records organized, store data, save daily operations, add financial records, and create a personal farm manager on your devices. Android
AkerScout. This directed crop scouting app helps identify and prioritize crop damage to address problem areas needing immediate attention. The application works on standalone mode, but various important features are enabled when you load high-resolution aerial vegetation imagery. Basic features include scout task coordination and assignment of multiple fields and scouts; support for various crop types including corn, soy, and sugarbeet; comprehensive database for identification of pests, diseases, and plant limiting stress; GPS-enabled crop scouting with identification and capture of disease, pests, weather, plant population, damage severity, photos, and notes; and field mapping and comprehensive reporting. iPhone , iPad , Android
Bushel. The Bushel mobile app platform integrates into grain elevators’ accounting systems to provide growers access to their contracts, scale tickets, prepays, cash bids, and markets. With a focus in elevator-to-grower relationships, growers see their elevator’s brand and data through a white-labeling approach. Learn more .
Crop Nutrient Advisor. Nutrient Technologies’ Crop Nutrient Advisor mobile app allows agricultural producers to instantly: identify crop nutrient deficiencies; get product recommendations; check spray tank compatibility; download label and SDS; and much more. User-generated data has been added for 2020 with the ability to upload your own photos. iPad , iPhone , Android
CropRecords. CropRecords is a multi-user crop record-keeping solution for farmers and crop consultants. Create jobs for spraying, seeding, fieldwork, and harvesting. Track when these jobs are completed. Enter data in the field and sync to the croprecords.com servers when internet service is available. iPhone , iPad , Android
FarmLogs. Thousands of farmers use FarmLogs from AgriSight to lower costs and increase profitability. The app helps you create, manage, and execute a profitable grain marketing plan; know when to sell and when to wait with real-time futures prices; monitor your profitability and budgets throughout the season; monitor rainfall on your fields (no special rain gauges required); view specific soil maps so you know where to apply inputs; easily take and share notes while scouting; identify yield threats and management errors with in-season satellite imagery; create quick, comprehensive field records automatically; plan inputs for the season; and more. iPhone , iPad , Android
iSoyl Precision Farming. iSOYL, when used with the iSOYL Controller Cable, can connect with most popular agricultural spreader, sprayer, and seed drill controllers to allow variable rate application of precision farming application data. iSOYL supports SOYL’s data transfer system, OneDrive, and Dropbox allowing SOYL files or shapefiles to be wirelessly and efficiently transferred between field and office. The pre-planned precision farming application map will place fertilizer, seed or agrochemicals at the correct rate for each part of the field. iPhone , iPad
Pollination Network. The Pollination Network app connects beekeepers and growers to provide easily accessible, mutually beneficial, and quality-assured partnerships. It is a simple fact: growers need bees, and beekeepers have bees. In such a seasonally-dependent industry, it can be difficult to find beekeepers for the right price with the right number of bees at the right time. We make it easy for you to get your listings posted to attract the best beekeepers for the job. Then, app manages the listings for you and notify you when an optimized connection is made. Beekeepers have the ability to deliver the healthy bees needed to ensure the thriving of crops in the U.S. iPhone , iPad , Android
Want more agriculture apps? Be sure to check out these other lists:
