Soybeans Jump in Overnight Trading; Investors Raise Net Shorts in Corn to Three-Month High.
Soybeans jumped in overnight trading, following soy meal, as shortages in China have led to crushers to shut their businesses as COVID-19 continues to spread globally, giving traders optimism about future demand.
Port operations in Brazil have slowed due the coronavirus, Reuters reported, leaving crushers without supplies.
Prices also rallied overnight after the USDA last week announced purchases of soybeans by an unknown buyer and corn and wheat sales to China.
An unnamed country bought 110,000 metric tons of soybeans, while China purchased 756,000 tons of corn and 340,000 metric tons of hard red winter wheat, the USDA said on Friday.
Still, traders are watching the coronavirus spread. Globally there are now 343,421 cases and the death toll stands at 14,790, according to Johns Hopkins University. That’s a jump from the 245,484 cases and 10,031 deaths reported on Friday.
In the U.S., there are now almost 36,000 cases of the disease and about 480 deaths, the university reported. Doctors expect the spread of the virus to worsen by far before it begins to get better.
Soybean futures for May delivery jumped 10¾¢ to $8.73¼ a bushel overnight on the Chicago Board of Trade. Soy meal rose $8.10 to $333.30 a short ton, and soy oil added 0.02¢ to 25.66¢ a pound.
Corn futures fell ¼¢ to $3.43½ a bushel overnight.
Wheat futures for May delivery surged 14¾¢ to $5.54 a bushel, while Kansas City futures added 12½ ¢ to $4.81½ a bushel.
Money managers raised their bearish bets on corn and beans last week as the coronavirus continued to decimate global demand for agricultural products.
Investors in the seven days that ended on March 17 raised their net-short positions, or bets on lower prices, in corn futures to 93,839 contracts, according to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
That’s up from 52,348 futures contracts a week earlier and the highest since the week that ended on December 17, the CFTC said in a report.
Speculators raised their net shorts in soybeans to 33,116 futures contracts as of last week, up from 27,535 contracts seven days earlier.
In wheat, money managers turned bearish on soft red winter contracts, pushing their bets on lower prices to a net 3,798 futures contracts. The previous week, investors held 18,196 net-long positions, or bets on higher prices.
Surprisingly, speculative investors lowered their net-short positions on hard red winter wheat to 13,519 futures contracts from 14,984 contracts the previous week, the CFTC said in its report.
The weekly Commitment of Traders Report from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows trader positions in futures markets.
The report provides positions held by commercial traders, or those using futures to hedge their physical assets; noncommercial traders, or money managers (also called large speculators); and nonreportables, or small speculators.
A net-long position indicates more traders are betting on higher prices, while a net-short position means more are betting futures will decline.
Fog seems to be a major problem this morning, as a dense fog advisory has been issued from central Nebraska all the way down into central Texas, according to the National Weather Service.
In central and eastern Kansas, visibility is down to less than ½ mile, the NWS said in its report. The advisory is in effect until 10 a.m. in the area, where driving conditions are hazardous.
Fog also is expected to be a problem in northwestern Minnesota, where flooding also is expected, the agency said.
“River flooding will continue this week with additional rises to near minor flood stage possible,” the NWS said.
The area also has a chance for mixed precipitation starting Tuesday and lasting through Wednesday, though only “minor impacts” are expected, the agency said.
