Corn Futures Higher Overnight; Money Managers Boost Bearish Grain Bets.
Corn futures were higher in overnight trading on speculation that increased demand for oil will boost ethanol use.
Oil futures were up about 1% in overnight trading amid increased use as the summer travel season, though somewhat muted, has officially started.
Ethanol companies are counting on a rebound in demand for motor fuel to give use of the biofuel a boost.
Soybeans were little change overnight despite a purchase by unknown buyers. The USDA said in a report Friday that an unnamed country purchased 60,000 metric tons for delivery in the 2019/2020 season that ends on August 31 and 198,000 tons for delivery in the next marketing year.
The USDA said separately that exporters sold another 330,000 metric tons, also to an unknown buyer, for delivery in the current and next marketing years.
Corn futures rose 2½¢ to $3.33¾ a bushel overnight on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Soybean futures fell ¼¢ to $8.67½ a bushel. Soy meal futures gained 30¢ to $289.40 a short ton, and soy oil rose 0.14¢ to 28.28¢ a pound.
Wheat futures for July delivery gained ¾¢ to $5.16 a bushel, while Kansas City futures added 3¢ to $4.64¼ a bushel.
2. Speculative Investors Bump Net-Short Positions in Corn, Wheat Futures
Speculators increased their net-short positions, or bets on lower prices, in corn while leaving their bullish bets on soybeans little changed, according to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Investors held a net-short position of 286,207 corn futures contracts as of June 2, up from 277,038 contracts a week earlier and the largest bearish position since May 14.
Slack demand and an outlook for large global stockpiles has brought sentiment about corn down in recent months.
Inventories at the end of the 2020/2021 marketing year that starts on September 1 were pegged last month by the USDA at 339.6 million metric tons, up from 314.7 million expected at the end of the current crop year.
Money managers, meanwhile, raised their net-long positions, or bets on higher prices, on soybeans to 7,134 futures contracts last week, up from 7,014 contracts a week earlier, the CFTC said.
In wheat, investors held a net-short position of 9,812 soft red futures contracts as of June 2. That’s up from 8,475 net-short contracts a week earlier.
Speculators raised their bearish bets on hard red winter wheat to 24,281 contracts last week, down slightly from the 25,658 net-short contracts the previous week, according to the CFTC.
The weekly Commitment of Traders Report from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows trader positions in futures markets.
The report provides positions held by commercial traders, or those using futures to hedge their physical assets; noncommercial traders, or money managers (also called large speculators); and nonreportables, or small speculators.
A net-long position indicates more traders are betting on higher prices, while a net-short position means more are betting futures will decline.
Flash flood watches are in effect for a large swath of the Midwest stretching from Wisconsin south to the Gulf of Mexico as Tropical Depression Cristobal hits the Gulf Coast, according to the National Weather Service.
Cristobal will move northwest across Louisiana today, and while the storm’s winds have fallen below tropical storm force, there will still be strong gusts of win at times topping 40 mph, the NWS said in a report early this morning.
Rainfall from 2 to 4 inches is expected in parts of Mississippi and Alabama.
In central Missouri, 1 to 3 inches of precipitation are forecast, which likely will cause flooding in low-lying areas and flash flooding along some streams and rivers, the agency said.
In the Southern Plains, meanwhile, a high-wind warning is in effect.
Northwesterly winds up to 45 mph and gusts up to 65 mph are expected in southwestern Kansas starting about 9 p.m. tonight and lasting until Tuesday morning, the NWS said.
