Wheat Futures Decline Overnight; Former Ag Secretary Vilsack Says There’s No Food Shortage.
Wheat futures plunged in overnight trading after Egypt bought less wheat than expected, leading to concerns about demand.
Egypt, the world’s biggest importer of the grain, bought 120,000 metric tons from Russian supplies. Demand is a concern as it’s still uncertain how much the COVID-19 pandemic will hurt the globacl economy.
About 62% of the U.S. winter wheat crop was in good or excellent condition on Sunday, unchanged from the previous week and up from 60% at this time last year, the Department of Agriculture said in a report.
In Kansas, the biggest wheat grower, 50% of the crop earned top ratings while in Oklahoma, 75% is in good or excellent condition.
The U.S. now has 609,685 cases of COVID-19, and the death toll is now above 26,000, according to Johns Hopkins University. Globally, about 2 million people have contracted the disease and 127,590 have died, the university said.
Wheat futures for May delivery dropped 11¼¢ to $5.38½ a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade, and Kansas City futures fell 8¼¢ to $4.82¾ a bushel.
Soybean futures for May delivery rose 1¼¢ to $8.48¼ a bushel overnight on the Chicago Board of Trade, while soymeal jumped $5.50 to $293 a short ton, and soy oil lost 0.14¢ to 27.02¢ a pound.
Corn futures fell ¾¢ to $3.25¼ a bushel overnight.
Note: This article is now available in audio format. You can subscribe from your favorite podcast provider or listen with an Alexa or Google Home enabled device.
Tom Vilsack, the president of the Dairy Export Council and a former secretary of agriculture, said in an interview with CNN that there’s not a lack of food in the U.S., there’s a lack of coordination “disrupting” the food chain.
Smithfield Foods was forced to shut its plant in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, over the weekend as hundreds of workers tested positive for COVID-19. A JBS meatpacking plant in Greeley, Colorado, closed for two weeks due to an outbreak of the disease.
That’s led to concerns that the supply of not only meat but other agricultural products will run low and lead to food shortages.
Smithfield Chief Executive Kenneth Sullivan said in a statement that the meatpacking plants’ closures are putting the U.S. on the edge of a food shortage.
“The closure of this facility, combined with a growing list of other protein plants that have shuttered across our industry, is pushing our country perilously close to the edge in terms of our meat supply,” he said. “It is impossible to keep our grocery stores stocked if our plants are not running.”
Vilsack, however, said he believes there’s no shortage, instead it’s a logistics problem.
“There’s plenty of food being produced, it’s a question of making sure we meet the supply and the demand at the same point,” he said. “Right now there’s a misalignment.”
A strong winter storm is moving out of Wyoming into western Nebraska today where several inches of snow are forecast, according to the National Weather Service.
In parts of western Nebraska, as much as 9 inches of snow is expected, the NWS said in a report early this morning.
Winds will be gusting up to 30 mph, creating areas of blowing and drifting snow, the agency said. The NWS suggests preparing to protect livestock ahead of the storm.
No corn had been planted in Nebraska at the start of the week, which is pretty normal for this time of year, the USDA said in a weekly report.
Freeze warnings are in effect for much of the Southern U.S. today. In eastern Kansas, temperatures dipped into the mid- to upper-20s overnight, the agency said.
