Soybeans, Wheat Higher Overnight; Money Managers Boost Net-Short Positions in Corn.
Soybeans and wheat were higher overnight amid plans by several countries to limit exports of agricultural products.
Russia said last week it plans to limit grain shipments for the rest of the season on concerns about shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Union officials in Argentina, meanwhile, said workers may strike to ensure their safety amid the spread of the disease. That may mean a shift in demand from Argentina to the U.S., giving soybean futures a boost on the Chicago Board of Trade.
The number of cases globally has jumped to 732,153, and the death toll now stands at 34,686, according to Johns Hopkins University. Those totals are up from the 542,417 cases and 24,353 deaths as of Friday.
In the U.S., the number of cases is now at 143,055, while the death toll topped 2,300, the university said. That’s up from 86,000 cases and 1,300 deaths on Friday.
Soybean futures for May delivery added 8½¢ to $8.90 a bushel overnight on the Chicago Board of Trade. Soy meal gained $4.50 to $327.60 a short ton, and soy oil rose 0.37¢ to 27.22¢ a pound.
Corn futures fell ½¢ to $3.45½ a bushel overnight.
Wheat futures for May delivery gained 9¼¢ to $5.80½ a bushel, while Kansas City futures rose 8¢ to $4.94¾ a bushel.
2. Speculative Investors Increase Their Net-Short Position in Corn, Cut Bearish Bets on Beans
Money managers boosted their net-short positions, or bets on lower prices, in corn to the highest in more than three months while slashing their bearish bet on soybeans, according to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Hedge funds and other large speculators raised their net-shorts in corn to 113,225 futures contracts in the seven days that ended on March 24, the CFTC said in a report.
That’s up from a net-short 93,839 contracts a week earlier and the largest such position since December 10.
For soybeans, investors actually cut their net-short positions to 4,715 futures contracts last week. That’s down from 33,116 contracts the previous week and the smallest such position since the seven days that ended on January 14, government data show.
Investors have been unsure of which way to bet in the past few weeks as they weigh the detrimental effects of COVID-19 against the potential for increased demand for U.S. supplies as ports in competing exporters such as Argentina shut down.
In wheat, speculators again turned bullish on soft red winter futures, bumping their net-long positions, or bets on higher prices, to 20,143 contracts last week.
That’s a shift from a net-short position of 3,798 contracts the previous week and the largest bullish position since February 25.
Speculators also cut their net-short positions in hard red winter wheat to 5,923 futures contracts, down from 13,519 contracts a week earlier and the smallest bearish position for the grain in three weeks, according to the CFTC.
The weekly Commitment of Traders Report from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows trader positions in futures markets.
The report provides positions held by commercial traders, or those using futures to hedge their physical assets; noncommercial traders, or money managers (also called large speculators); and nonreportables, or small speculators.
A net-long position indicates more traders are betting on higher prices, while a net-short position means more are betting futures will decline.
Flood warnings are in effect along several rivers and streams in much of the Midwest, according to the National Weather Service.
In North Dakota, the Red River that runs along the border of North Dakota and Minnesota under one such warning, the NWS said in a report early this morning. Those living in the Red River Basin should keep an eye on water levels, the agency said.
The river at Fargo on Sunday evening was already at 24 feet, well above flood stage of 18 feet, and likely will crest between Thursday and Saturday at 30 to 32 feet.
The Missouri River near Rulo, Nebraska, was at 16.2 feet as of late Sunday, just below flood stage of 17 feet, the NWS said. Minor flooding is possible as the river has the potential to rise to 17.3 feet Thursday morning.
Farther south, the Mississippi River along the Missouri-Illinois border is already well above flood stage in some areas.
At Thebes, Illinois, the river is already at 36.2 feet, topping flood stage of 33 feet, and minor flooding is already occurring. At Cape Girardeau, Missouri, water is already at 37 feet, above the 32-foot flood stage, the agency said.
The river, however, is expected to crest by Tuesday morning and water levels will soon begin falling, the NWS said.
