Wheat Futures Higher Overnight; Money Managers Less Bullish on Beans.
Wheat futures were higher in overnight trading on expectations for smaller crops in the Ukraine and on concerns that Russia will again limit exports.
Producers in Ukraine could harvest 72.2 million metric tons of grain this year, down from 75.1 million metric tons last year, amid lower wheat and barley production, Reuters reported, citing analyst APK-Inform.
Russia has fully reopened exports after limiting shipments of wheat for a short time, but said it’s still keeping an eye on domestic supplies and making decisions on a week-to-week basis.
Last Thursday, the USDA raised its expectations for ending stockpiles for the 2019-2020 marketing year to 970 million bushels from 940 million.
The increase is expected as the amount used for feed and to export overseas is forecast to decline, the USDA said.
Wheat futures for May delivery rose 5¼¢ to $5.61¾ a bushel overnight on the Chicago Board of Trade, and Kansas City futures added 5¾¢ to $5.04¾ a bushel.
Corn futures were down ¾¢ to $3.31 a bushel.
Soybean futures for May delivery fell ½¢ to $8.63 a bushel overnight, while soy meal added 20¢ to $292.70 a short ton and soy oil lost 0.21¢ to 27.20¢ a pound.
Note: This article is now available in audio format. You can subscribe from your favorite podcast provider or listen with an Alexa or Google Home enabled device.
Money managers were still bullish on soybeans last week, though less so that a week earlier, according to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Hedge funds and other large investors held 17,007 net-long positions, or bets on higher prices, on soybean futures contracts in the seven days that ended on April 7, the CFTC said in a report.
That’s down from 22,906 futures contracts seven days earlier.
Investors extended their bearish positions in corn, raising their net-short positions, or bets on lower prices, to 110,220 futures contracts last week, government data show. That’s up from 99,925 net-short positions the previous week.
Speculators also reduced their net-long positions in soft red winter wheat to 27,270 futures contracts from 36,756 contracts seven days earlier, the CFTC said in its report.
In hard red winter wheat, money managers had a net-long positions of 1,969 futures contracts as of April 7, down from 2,292 contracts a week earlier, the agency said.
The weekly Commitment of Traders Report from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows trader positions in futures markets.
The report provides positions held by commercial traders, or those using futures to hedge their physical assets; noncommercial traders, or money managers (also called large speculators); and nonreportables, or small speculators.
A net-long position indicates more traders are betting on higher prices, while a net-short position means more are betting futures will decline.
3. Winter Weather Advisory Issued For Southern Plains, Freeze Expected in Lower Midwest
A winter weather advisory is in place in the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles, according to the National Weather Service.
As much as 2 inches of snow are expected in the area today as the advisory runs for 24 hours starting at 7 a.m. local time, the NWS said in a report early this morning. Roads are expected to be slippery.
Freeze warnings are in effect for a large stretch of land from northwest Texas into southwestern Iowa, the weather maps show.
In northwestern Missouri and northeastern Kansas, temperatures are expected to drop as low as 28˚F. overnight tonight, the agency said.
Wind advisories also are in effect for much of the eastern half of the U.S. as storms rumble through many parts of the country.
