Soybeans, Grains Lower Overnight; Money Managers Reduce Bearish Bets on Corn.
Soybean and grain futures were lower in overnight trading Monday, following a downturn in broader markets amid concerns about the spread of COVID-19.
The number of cases globally is now up to almost 170,000 and the death toll has topped 6,500, according to Johns Hopkins University. About 77,250 people have recovered from the disease.
Officials in the U.S. are taking action as the number of confirmed cases has hit almost 3,500 in 49 states and the District of Columbia. More than 60 people have died.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or CDC, said it recommends banning gathering of 50 or more people to prevent the spread of the disease. Supermarkets over the weekend were overwhelmed in some areas, schools have closed in many states, and some restrictions have been placed on bars and restaurants.
The Federal Reserve slashed its fed funds rate to a range of 0% to 0.25% on Sunday, where it was during the 2008 financial crisis, in a bid to boost the economy. Some restrictions on bank loans also were eliminated.
Still, the major stock indexes were lower in premarket trading, at one point hitting limit down. Dow Jones futures were off by 4.6%, S&P 500 futures lost 4.8%, and Nasdaq futures dropped 4.5%.
Soybean futures for May delivery lost 6½¢ to $8.42¼ a bushel overnight on the Chicago Board of Trade. Soy meal fell $1.70 to $297.80 a short ton, and soy oil dropped 0.43¢ to 25.94¢ a pound.
Corn futures fell 4¼¢ to $3.61½ a bushel overnight.
Wheat futures for May delivery lost 7¼¢ to $4.98¾ a bushel, while Kansas City futures declined 5½¢ to $4.26 a bushel.
Money managers reduced their net-short positions, or bets on lower prices, in both corn and soybeans last week, according to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Investors cut their net-shorts in corn to 52,348 futures contracts in the seven days that ended on March 10 from 77,179 contracts a week earlier, the CFTC said in a report.
That’s the smallest such position since February 4.
Hedge funds and other large speculators also cut their net-long positions in soybeans to 27,535 contracts from 34,988 contracts a week earlier. That’s the smallest bearish position in beans since the week that ended on January 21, government data show.
The reductions in bearish positions in both corn and soybeans come even amid questions about global demand for agricultural products due to the spread of COVID-19.
In wheat, investors increased their net-long positions, or bets on higher prices, to 18,196 soft red futures contracts last week from 17,096 contracts the previous week.
Speculators went the other way on hard red winter wheat futures, raising their net-short positions or 14,984 contracts from 2,064 contracts a week earlier, the CFTC said.
The weekly Commitment of Traders Report from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows trader positions in futures markets.
The report provides positions held by commercial traders, or those using futures to hedge their physical assets; noncommercial traders, or money managers (also called large speculators); and nonreportables, or small speculators.
A net-long position indicates more traders are betting on higher prices, while a net-short position means more are betting futures will decline.
3. Freezing Drizzle is Forecast For Parts of Nebraska, South Dakota, and southern Minnesota
Patchy, freezing drizzle is expected to kick off the week in parts of southern South Dakota, southern Minnesota, northwestern Iowa, and northern Nebraska this morning, according to the National Weather Service.
Snow, freezing rain, and rain showers also are possible in the area, the NWS said in a report early this morning.
“Minor accumulations of snow or ice may result in slick travel,” the agency said.
Starting tomorrow, rain and accumulating snow are in the forecast along with gusty winds the rest of the week, the report said.
In eastern Iowa and western Illinois, meanwhile, scattered rain and snow are likely to move across the area, though only light accumulations are expected, the NWS said.
