Soybeans, Grains Plunge Overnight; Money Managers Reduce Bearish Bets on Corn, Beans.
Soybeans and grains plunged in overnight trading amid increased concerns about the coronavirus, or COVID-19, as the disease spreads outside of China.
The number of cases in China topped 77,000, and almost 2,600 people have died from the disease, according to the country’s government.
It’s the spread of the virus outside of the Asian nation that has some worried. South Korea said it now has 833 cases and that seven people have died.
Italy has reported 130 cases and three deaths. Iran said at least 12 people have died, according to the New York Times, which cited state news agencies.
The U.S. now has 14 confirmed cases, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Additionally, three people who’d tested positive for the coronavirus were repatriated from Wuhan, China, and 18 were aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship that had been quarantined in Yokohama, Japan.
Global equity and commodity markets dropped on concerns about how the disease’s spread would affect trade.
Soybean futures for March delivery dropped 9¼¢ to $8.81¼ a bushel overnight on the Chicago Board of Trade. Soy meal fell $1.90 to $292.90 a short ton, and soy oil lost 0.71¢ to 30.30¢ a pound.
Corn futures fell 3¢ to $3.74 a bushel overnight.
Wheat futures for May delivery dropped 9¾¢ to $5.42¼ a bushel, while Kansas City futures lost 8¢ to $4.67½ a bushel.
2. Money Managers Curb Net-Short Positions in Corn, Beans Slightly
Money managers lowered their net-short positions, or bets on lower prices, in both corn and soybeans in the seven days that ended on February 18, according to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Investors held a net-short position of 56,855 corn futures contracts last week, down from 69,101 contracts a week earlier, the CFTC said in a report. That broke a streak of three straight increases.
Speculators also reduced their bearish positions in soybeans, holding 95,975 net-short positions as of last Tuesday. That’s down from 97,412 contracts the previous week, government data show.
While the number of net-shorts in corn and beans were lower, they were down only slightly amid ongoing concerns about the spread of the coronavirus and its impact on demand globally.
In wheat, meanwhile, speculative investors raised their net-long positions, or bets on higher prices, in soft-red winter wheat to 59,262 contracts, up from 39,482 contracts a week earlier.
Investors raise their bullish bets on hard red winter wheat to a net-long position of 13,687 contracts, up from 9,983 seven days earlier, the CFTC said.
The weekly Commitment of Traders Report from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows trader positions in futures markets.
The report provides positions held by commercial traders, or those using futures to hedge their physical assets; noncommercial traders, or money managers (also called large speculators); and nonreportables, or small speculators.
A net-long position indicates more traders are betting on higher prices, while a net-short position means more are betting futures will decline.
3. Winter Storms Set to Slam Parts of Montana, Dakotas Starting Today; Snow Forecast in Iowa
Winter weather is set to hit parts of Montana, eastern North Dakota, eastern South Dakota, and northern Nebraska this morning.
A winter storm warning is in effect for the Rapid City area where as much as 20 inches of snow are expected in some areas, according to the National Weather Service.
Wind gusts of up to 45 mph are expected. The warning is in effect from 8 a.m. local time this morning until 2 p.m. tomorrow.
A winter weather advisory is in effect for the surrounding areas where up to 5 inches of snow are expected and blowing snow will reduce visibility, the NWS said in a report early this morning. Travel is expected to be difficult.
Farther east, a winter storm watch is in effect in parts of eastern Iowa and northern Illinois.
The watch is in effect starting late tonight and will last through Wednesday morning. Accumulations of as much as 8 inches are forecast for the region, the NWS said.
