By Will Healy , InvestorPlace Contributor Aug 29, 2018, 2:26 pm EDT
Agriculture stocks often find themselves ignored by most stock market investors. They lack the sex appeal of tech or the boom cycles of energy. However, none of us can live without food or the clothing that this sector brings. Also, because farmland serves as a vast American resource, U.S. agriculture goes a long way toward feeding much of the world. In fact, the ag sector finds itself caught in the middle of America’s recent trade war with China.
Despite its importance, the sector has remained out of favor for decades. Due to its unpopularity, another trend has emerged in this sector that could benefit investors but hurt the population at large. In the United States, the average farmer has reached the age of 58.3 years . This trend also appears in other developed countries.
This becomes dangerous as once these farmers retire or pass away, critical food shortages could arise. As such, I will use my soapbox to appeal to the young and the career changers. For those who are looking for a potentially lucrative career in a rural setting, please consider enrolling in a school such as Iowa State or Texas A&M to study agriculture.
Regarding investors, my appeal takes on a similar tone. While we all hope this worst-case scenario does not occur, such shortages will likely send all ag-related stocks higher. These five agriculture stocks to buy trade at lower valuations and offer the potential for growth as the farming sector stages a comeback.
The equipment produced by Deere (NYSE: DE ) makes possible the scale of farming occurring today. Most Americans know Deere tractors and other farm equipment by the shade of green it uses to paint its equipment. However, as the shortage of farmers becomes more acute, equipment will play a more critical role in helping to maintain production levels. This makes DE stock one of the essential agriculture stocks to buy.
After seeing profits fall over the last few years, Deere finds itself growing again. For the year, analysts forecast 43% net income growth this year and 22% the next. Wall Street expects an average growth rate of 27.38% per year over the next five years.
Prospective buyers will also like that the price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio has yet to catch up to this growth. Given predicted earnings of $9.54 per share for 2018, DE stock trades at just over 15 times forward earnings. They will also like that they can buy this stock for over 16% less than the high reached in January.
The stock saw similar pullbacks in 2011 and 2015. Each time, DE stock regained the loss and moved higher. Given the profit growth predicted, the same thing will likely happen again.
Moreover, they will earn a 1.9% dividend yield while they wait for the recovery.
Despite this average yield, investors should know that DE has seen a long history of annual dividend increases in most years. Last quarter, the stock saw its first dividend increase since 2015. Assuming profits continue on the current path, one can expect the dividend increases will continue as well. Given the low P/E, the growth rate and the prospect for dividend increases, DE stock should serve as a lucrative vehicle to profit from the farmer shortage.
