The Asian Development Bank unveiled a $1.5 billion Covid-19 package for India on Tuesday and is in discussions with the government on further aid for specific sectors. It’s also in discussions with the country’s private sector to provide support where needed.
The multilateral lender has begun consultations with India on providing support for micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and infrastructure projects through credit guarantees, vice president Shixin Chen told ET. This will be in addition to the package announced Tuesday.
“ADB is ready to support India’s further needs to cope with and recover from Covid-19 by exploring all financing options available with us,” he said. India is ADB ’s fourth-biggest shareholder and its largest borrower with disbursements nearing $30 billion.
Chen said the ADB is discussing financing needs with the private sector, including trade and supply chain finance besides liquidity support for MSMEs in the areas of healthcare, agribusiness and infrastructure.
The assistance package announced Tuesday was drawn up after intensive talks with the government on the impact of Covid-19 on health, welfare and the economy, which is suffering from demand and supply shocks.
The package will reinforce the much-needed fiscal response and strengthen emergency health measures. It will also support the government’s response to the pandemic, focusing on immediate priorities such as disease containment and prevention, as well as social protection for the poor and economically vulnerable, the finance ministry said in a statement.
Earlier this month, the World Bank had provided a $1 billion package for the healthcare sector.
“If the pandemic is contained in the next couple of months, then the Indian economy will rebound to above 7% in the next fiscal year,” Chen said.
Health experts have warned that the pandemic may reappear in waves and countries need to be cautious about opening up their economies.
“This would mean frequent lockdowns and continued social distancing measures that would impact normal economic activity and, hence, economic recovery,” Chen said. “Yet, I believe the Indian economy will recover once the peak of the pandemic passes and the economy opens gradually.”
On fiscal moves to revive the economy, Chen said additional stimulus measures may be needed to support sectors that have been hit hard by the pandemic and consequent lockdown including MSMEs, agriculture, aviation and hospitality, among others.
However, it will be difficult to predict the extent of the fiscal response needed or to quantify it in an evolving pandemic situation that requires a sequential approach, he said.
In the initial phase, government measures have focused on containment, prevention and cure, while mitigating the pandemic’s adverse socioeconomic consequences on the poor and the vulnerable, aggregating $25 billion or about 1% of GDP, he pointed out. The focus will next shift to measures for economic revival as lockdown restrictions are gradually relaxed, he added.
