African swine fever destroying small pig farms, as factory farming booms – report
China’s long tradition of small-scale pig farming may be coming to an end.
Small farmers across the globe are losing out in the aftermath of the African swine fever (ASF) outbreak that killed a quarter of the world’s pig population, argues a new report.
Nowhere is this more evident than China, where swine fever has hit the country’s nearly 40 million small-scale pig farmers hardest, says the report by non-profit organisation Grain .
China’s long tradition of small-scale pig farming seems to be coming to an end because of a lack of government support to compensate for culled or diseased pigs, to pay for veterinary costs or chemicals for limiting the spread of ASF, and other biosecurity measures in existing facilities, according to Grain.
“Unfortunately, small farmers are getting almost no support, from what we can see,” said Devlin Kuyek, lead author of the report.
After the first notification of the ASF outbreak in China in August 2018, the illness spread rapidly throughout the industry and led to the slaughter of millions of pigs within months.
Just a year later, however, the startling rise in pork prices meant that, despite their losses, many of the biggest industrial pig producers were achieving record profits.
Millions of pigs were killed, many by being buried alive, in China following the 2018 outbreak. Photograph: Reuters
Grain has been unable to determine exactly how many of the ASF outbreaks originated in large factory farms or within contract farming production chains that feed the bigger facilities, because of a lack of information or official figures from authorities.
In a MARA survey of 1,500 Chinese pig farms in mid-2019, 55% said they had abandoned plans to raise pigs after culling due to future risk of disease, while 22% were waiting to see if the situation cleared up. Only 18% had definite plans to continue pig farming.
In the 1990s, small backyard farms supplied around 80% of China’s pork needs. But this has changed rapidly over the past two decades, as the government has steadily industrialised the sector. By 2018, the share of pig farms with more than 500 pigs was around 80% , state-run media reported in November. The government is aiming for at least 65% of pork from industrial farming operations by 2025.
As the government’s focus has shifted towards supporting larger-scale production, smaller operations continue to be squeezed into contract farming operations for larger companies.
“It is the combination of these two changes that has created the conditions for the rise of new epidemics [like ASF and others] in Asia’s pork sector,” Kuyek told the Guardian. Despite the fact that it is supposed to be safer, the huge scale of the industrial pig farming industry has propelled the crisis to a global scale, argues the Grain report. “In our view, this is what explains the scale of the recent outbreak. It would not have taken on such massive proportions if it had not penetrated into the global, industrial pork system.”
China is not the only country where small farmers have been particularly adversely affected. In mountainous northern Vietnam , the virus has had a disastrous impact on indigenous women who use leftover mash from rice-wine processing to feed pigs they raise to pay bills and school fees.
