US Ag stocks look poised for a breakout as US economy braces for reopening.
An improving timeline for potential treatments for Covid-19 is encouraging for stocks but US Treasuries look expensive as expectations grow for a phased reopening of State economies in the US. Poor economic data out of China, coupled with anecdotes that the Chinese are beginning to increase US agricultural purchases could drive a major macro reshuffling. Look to rebalance growth expectations away from Chinese price making towards price taking. US Agricultural sector sensitive stocks could be big winners. For investors trying to protect SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (SPY) put spreads and iShares iBoxx High Yield Corporate Bond ETF (HYG) put strategies look reasonable.
Throughout this note, we discuss the following ETFs:
TLT put strategies look promising with Treasuries seeming to lag in recognizing the good news equities are validating. We see the potential for long treasury rates to float up on states’ reopening, better virus treatment hopes, and the likelihood that the FED will slow down asset purchases as news gets a bit better. With 2m Skew becoming increasingly bullish over the past week (2m is 0.90 std deviations below its mean) one could consider selling a far out-of-money call to finance puts/put spreads.
However, SPY and HYG puts strategies have gotten cheaper and can help keep portfolio correlations and volatility in balance. Use up days in the markets to establish defense.
US Agricultural sensitive stocks look like solid bets here on the potential for Chinese purchases to drive better trade balance with the US. Food security and quality concerns in China as well as the US could make the long beaten down sector a buy. We see solid opportunities in these names (even in DE despite some of the downgrades). Anecdotal evidence of Chinese purchases should not be ignored as local concerns about quality could drive up Chinese demand for US quality product. The agricultural commodity ETFs might also make sense here with DBA looking interesting on a short to medium term basis. The ETF uses a roll yield methodology that can still cost return in a negative market but can spike the value of the ETF when prices move in the right direction. While agricultural commodities have lagged badly, there were significant period spikes in 2010, 2012, and 2014 where DBA outperformed equities for a quarter or longer. Looking at the long-term chart it might be that a health and food security scare might be just what drives value.
Q.ai, a Forbes Company, formerly known as Quantalytics and Quantamize, uses advanced forms of quantitative techniques and artificial intelligence to generate investment
Q.ai, a Forbes Company, formerly known as Quantalytics and Quantamize, uses advanced forms of quantitative techniques and artificial intelligence to generate investment recommendations across all asset classes. When it comes to money, no one should have to settle. We make investing less intimidating, more accessible and a lot of fun for everyone. That’s investing, reimagined.
