Doubling farmers’ income: Are we already there yet? Farm income shoots up this much in ten years
The hopes built up by the markets dashed on the day 1 of the press conference of the finance minister which included announcements of loans, partial credit guarantees and relief measures in contrast to the much expected over-the-board incentives for driving consumption, which would kick start the demand-led investment cycle. It was because of the disappointment on the expectations that the domestic markets ended up lower on both Thursday and Friday. Day 2 and day 3 measures were also more or less on the same lines, except the three governance-related reforms viz., the proposed amendment in Essential Commodities act, reforms in agriculture produce marketing and facilitation of legal framework for agricultural products’ prices and quality assurance. If implemented in letter and spirit, these reforms are going to be the ‘1991 moment for the agriculture and rural economy’; these reforms are going to remove the farmers from the shackles of intermediaries and outdated Indian regulations to establish a free market for agricultural produce, which would have a long-lasting impact on the rural economy over the long run.
Proper implementation of these new reforms would help remove the intermediaries and free the agriculture and allied industry from the so-called ‘license raj’ leading to higher incomes for agriculturists and improve demand in the rural economy. Fund allocations have also been made to create & strengthen the necessary infrastructure for agricultural produce, fisheries, dairy farming, bee-keeping etc which would eventually reduce wastages and enhance supply chain efficiency, thereby improving the yield of the produce.
Over the long term, these measures may aid the long-drawn vision of doubling farmers’ income. With the implementation of these reforms and establishment of farm gate infrastructure, the gap between the farmers, the food processors and the end consumers is largely going to be bridged, thus helping the major chunk of the margins to be retained by the farmers which, so far, is being taken away by the intermediaries. These reforms would pave way for further deregulation of other sectors like fertilizers, and other assistance which is currently subsidized to the farmers.
The markets are not expected to react immediately unless the fruits of the reforms are seen in concrete form in the earnings of India Inc., but a positive start with a hope for further build-up as things get converted cannot be ruled out.
Further, day 4 & day 5 announcements too did not have much to cheer about, except the additional allocation of Rs 40,000 cr for MNREGA to offer work for the labourers who are returning from cities, which would be a booster for rural income in these challenging times. Additional borrowing limits for states, subject to undertaking reforms and enhanced borrowing by the centre would push the sovereign yields in the near term. Overall, the announcements made by the Finance Ministers in a series of 5 press conferences did not live up to the market participant’s expectations that were built up after the honourable PM’s address, making it another case of lost opportunity to address investors’ sagging sentiments.
(Pankaj Bobade is Head of Fundamental Research at Axis Securities Limited. Views expressed are the author’s own.)
Do you know What is Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) , Finance Bill , Fiscal Policy in India , Expenditure Budget , Customs Duty ? FE Knowledge Desk explains each of these and more in detail at Financial Express Explained . Also get Live BSE/NSE Stock Prices , latest NAV of Mutual Funds , Best equity funds , Top Gainers , Top Losers on Financial Express . Don’t forget to try our free Income Tax Calculator tool.
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
