While several states have amended the APMC Act to allow farmers to sell to non-APMC licencees—arhatiyas—the central government has decided to formalise this. As the finance minister said, in no other good—a two-wheeler, for instance—is a producer told to whom he can sell. Yet, that it is what the APMC Act did—ironically, by governments that continued to swear by the farmer.
A central law is to be brought in to change this; it is not clear whether the states will oppose this, or if they will be able to stall it. Indeed, while states still have the right to prevent crops from moving across their borders, this was also a way to ensure farmers never got the right price. The new law will also free farmers to take their produce to the most lucrative market. In order to encourage competition among mandis, though, the government will have to do more. It will have to ensure that private mandis—set up to competition with the APMC mandis—get subsidised credit and land to create critical infrastructural facilities.
Equally important, the government has said it will create a ‘facilitative legal framework’ to allow farmers to enter into contracts with processors, exporters, aggregators, and large retailers, etc, so that a farmer has some certainty over what prices he will receive. In other words, a legal framework will be made to allow contract farming; as a result, a farmer can lock in on a price before the crop is sown instead of being left to the vagaries of the market.
Indeed, to the extent that the middleman can be cut out from the transaction, the farmer should also find it possible to get a greater share of the final retail price. Over time, as farmers start getting better prices, the government can also think of restricting the scope of its MSP policy as well as compulsory procurement by government agencies that distorts markets, and tries to dictate crop choices to farmers.
Given all the changes announced will hurt established interests, it is likely they will try their best to stall it, so the next challenge for the government will be to ensure the proposed reforms actually go through. A good beginning for the agriculture sector, apart from the moves—both today and earlier—is to invest a lot more in creating physical infrastructure like irrigation, cold storages, etc.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
