Agriculture emerges from lockdown relatively unscathed, but coming global recession will bite, says economist
Westpac senior agricultural economist Nathan Penny says the global recession will bite the sector in coming months.
Agricultural incomes are expected to take a hit later this year as the effects of the global recession caused by coronavirus kicks in, says Westpac senior agri-economist Nathan Penny.
The sector was likely to remain profitable, however.
Despite having come through the lockdown and its immediate effects relatively unscathed, due largely to agriculture's classification as an essential service, the forecast 3 per cent hit to global growth over 2020, meant there would be less demand for the forseeable future.
* Analyst predicts marginal price declines for dairy, meat and log exports
As a country that exported over 90 per cent of its agricultural production, New Zealand would be heavily exposed, Penny said.
Because the global recession was likely to lower household incomes, downward pressure would be placed on overall agricultural export prices.
Offsetting factors such as record low interest rates, a weakening New Zealand dollar and low petrol prices would have a mitigating effect.
For exporters, the availability and cost of air freight would squeeze margins , especially for niche and perishable products. Meanwhile, imports of items like palm kernel could tighten due to restrictions, he said.
Playing in the sector's favour was the position of strength it was in prior to the pandemic, Penny said.
Dairy farmers worried their traditional moving day won't go ahead this year.
"Notably, meat prices sat at or near record highs at the end of 2019, kiwifruit export values hit fresh record highs and the farmgate milk price sat at above a healthy $7.00/kg."
Lower wages and increased availability of labour should support higher agricultural production and profits than they normally would, and there may be a new cohort of workers entering farming that come from other backgrounds, Penny said.
Many of these would be tech-savvy workers so farmers may want to introduce new technology at this time, he said.
While meat sector suffered a "triple whammy" of drought, a slowdown in meat processing and a steep drop in prices, which fell between 20 per cent and 30 per cent, farmers could expect a temporary rebound in the post-lockdown phase.
But the outlook longer term was mixed with the ongoing impact of African Swine Flu and the deepening recession. Beef prices were likely to come under more pressure than lamb as United States production recovered, Penny said.
William Beetham says wool prices are an all-time low but thinks the industry could still be an important source of revenue for the country.
Federated Farmers Meat & Wool Industry Group Chairman William Beetham said the hard work the meat sector had done in previous years to position New Zealand red meat as sustainable, healthy and nutritious in international markets would hold exporters in good stead, however.
"That will help the sector move through what is going to be a very difficult phase of decreased market access and decreased demand for high value red meat protein," he said.
Penny said horticulture was currently benefiting from a global demand for fruit high in vitamin C, which included kiwifruit and the season had gotten off to a "flying start with record prices and volumes".
"Zespri has increased its price guidance for the 2020/21 season and even then, we would argue that the new estimate is still on the conservative side given the excellent start to the export season," he said.
Apple and wine had also made a good start to the export season, most likely due to the weakness of the New Zealand dollar. Penny expected apple and wine prices to fall as the recession deepened as a result.
Penny had similar expectations for export fruit and vegetables, especially premium products like sauvignon blanc, cherries and rocket apples.
Dairy was down but not out, Penny said.
Demand and prices had fallen when the pandemic emerged with whole milk powder prices falling about 15 per cent between January and May. Prices had stabilised post-lockdown.
Westpac had revised its milk price forecast up 20 cents to $6.50 a kilogram of for 2020/21 as a result.
Later in the season Penny expected the recession would weigh on food dairy prices again but a wide range of milk prices were possible, he said.
Westpac has revised its milk price forecast up 20 cents to $6.50 a kilogram for 2020/2, economist Nathan Penny says.
"Fonterra’s milk price forecast range is a wide $5.40 to $6.90 a kilo and gives a clear indication of the level of uncertainty, especially considering that Fonterra’s forecast range at this time last season was $1.00 a kilo versus $1.50 a kilo now," he said.
Beetham said Wool exports, were in an “incredibly depressed state” with the lowest prices ever and had been even before coronavirus hit.
Some farmers were struggling to sell their wool, he said.
Because wool could be marketed as environmentally friendly and healthier than synthetic fibres, it represented an opportunity for the country's economic recovery, especially in value added products, he said.
