The Union agriculture minister has equated the promulgation of three recent ordinances on agriculture with farmers gaining ‘independence’. However, farmers did have this freedom before the Agriculture Produce Marketing Committee (APMC) Acts implemented in states the 60s and 70s. Before that the farmer was free to sell. The reality, of course, was that he was at the mercy of the trader. The legislations brought private farmer-trader transactions into public domain . With June 5 ordinances, farmer-trader transactions have receded back from public gaze.
Even without the ordinances, trade in agricultural produce was private. All agents and functionaries in ‘anaj mandis’ are private players. The mandi is regulated by a market committee made up of representatives of all stakeholders.
After release of the model APMC Act, 2007, by the Centre, many states tried to set up private mandis, with little success. To tackle this reluctance of states in de-regulating markets, the Centre has now unilaterally allowed private players to bypass all state regulation.
Even now, there are no restrictions on inter-state or intra-state trade between traders. The restrictions are only on first sale — from the farmer to the trader. Many states allow single licence for the whole state. Restrictions on interstate movement are for two reasons: special bonus above MSP in states, and MSP not being equally effective across states. States rightly feel that massive efforts put into MSP procurement operations and bonus above MSP should benefit their own farmers.
The Electronic National Agriculture Market (eNAM), officially operative in 1,000 mandies, can definitely help overcome market fragmentation. However, if the governments have not been able to do so all its powers, can farmer do it?
Regarding contract farming ordinance , one only needs to look at a recent example. Four potato growers of Gujarat were dragged to court by Pepsi last year. The MNC wanted Rs 1 crore each from them for “violation of contract and bio-piracy” as these farmers had sold their leftover stock, which was not bought by Pepsi because it was not up to contracted standards, in the open market and it was used as seed. Public outrage during election season saved them and the corporate house withdrew the case.
The ordinance is not just about contract farming but can now cover whole range of farm services. The farmer may just be land and labour service provider and not seller of produce.
Often even farmers want to fix their own prices and not go by MSP. Agriculture is unlike industrial production in two respects. Its greater dependence on nature leads to greater variability in production. Secondly, food being a necessity, its demand is more or less invariable. These features have two consequences: huge volatility in food prices, which does not always benefit farmers, and low income elasticity, food prices do not keep pace with the economy. Thus, all over the world there is some sort of state intervention in farming.
Even now, there is no market regulation on fruits and vegetables, yet every year some produce is dumped on the road. What stops private enterprise from entering these commodity markets? What stops private players from ensuring remunerative prices in states like Bihar, where no APMC Act exists?
Rather than do away with it, the government needs to improve market regulations. Primary need is to democratise the functioning of APMC markets rather than have it tun by bureaucrats or nominated persons.
Deregulation of agriculture marketing, would have consequences similar to privatisation of education. Private mandies, direct purchase and contract farming may serve big farmers well, but for smaller farmers APMC yards will become like government schools.
The author is former professor, department of economics, MD University at Rohtak, and adviser, Kudarti Kheti Abhiyan, Haryana
Start Your Daily Mornings with Times of India Newspaper! Order Now
