Adecoagro SA ( NYSE:AGRO ) is a leading agricultural company in South America. Adecoagro owns over 257 thousand hectares of farmland and several industrial facilities spread across the most productive regions of Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, where it produces over 1.3 million tons of agricultural products including corn, wheat, soybeans, rice, dairy products, sugar, ethanol and electricity among others.
AeroGrow International, Inc . ( OTC:AERO ) Headquartered in Boulder, Colorado, AeroGrow International, Inc. is the leader in the rapidly growing indoor gardening category. AeroGardens allow anyone to grow farmer's market fresh herbs, salad greens, tomatoes, chili peppers, flowers and more, indoors, year-round, so simply and easily that no green thumb is required. With an AeroGarden... you can grow anything! In April 2013, AeroGrow entered into a strategic partnership with Scotts Miracle-Gro to continue to expand the indoor gardening market.
AFFINOR GROWERS ( CSE:AFI ; OTC:RSSFF ) is focused on growing high quality crops such as romaine lettuce, spinach, strawberries and high quality medical Marijuana. Affinor is committed to becoming a pre-eminent grower, using exclusive vertical farming techniques.
African Potash Ltd. ( LSE:AFPO.L ) is a company focussed on building a vertically integrated platform for the mining, production and distribution of fertiliser, primarily within Africa. The Company operates the Lac Dinga Project in the Republic of Congo, which is prospective for potash, a key source of potassium fertiliser, and has a trading agreement to supply and deliver fertiliser primarily to the African continent.
AGCO Corporation ( NYSE:AGCO ) is a global leader focused on the design, manufacture and distribution of agricultural machinery. AGCO supports more productive farming through a full line of tractors, combines, hay tools, sprayers, forage equipment, tillage, implements, grain storage and protein production systems, as well as related replacement parts. AGCO products are sold through five core machinery brands, Challenger®, Fendt®, Massey Ferguson®, Valtra® and GSI®, and are distributed globally through 3,100 independent dealers and distributors in more than 140 countries worldwide. Retail financing is available through AGCO Finance for qualified purchasers. Founded in 1990, AGCO is headquartered in Duluth, Georgia, USA.
AgJunction Inc . ( TSX:AJX.TO ) provides innovative hardware and software applications for precision agriculture worldwide. The Company holds more than 140 patents and markets its products and services under leading brand names including Novariant, Outback Guidance® and Satloc®. The Company is headquartered in Hiawatha, Kansas , with executive offices in Fremont, California , and facilities in Scottsdale, Arizona , Winnipeg, Manitoba and Brisbane , Queensland , Australia.
Agria Corporation ( NYSE:GRO ) is a global agricultural company with three principal business segments: Seed & Grain; Crop Protection, Nutrients & Merchandise; and Rural Services. The Seed and Grain segment is engaged in research and development, production and sale of a broad range of seed products and trading of seed and grain products globally. The Crop Protection, Nutrients and Merchandise segment operates an extensive chain of retail stores that supply farm input materials. The Rural Services segment provides livestock trading, wool trading, irrigation and pumping, real estate agency and other agriservices.
Agrios Global Holdings Ltd ( CSE:AGRO ) is a data analytics driven agricultural technology, services and property management company, providing real property and equipment for lease and enhanced ancillary services to the agricultural and cannabis industries in the State of Washington. The Company's mission is to enable licensed cultivators of cannabis and/or other agricultural crops to enhance both crop quality and yields through proprietary knowledge and the use of clean technology and tools.
Agriterra Ltd. ( LSE:AGTA.L ) invests in, develops, and operates agricultural and associated civil engineering projects in Africa. It operates through Grain, Beef, and Cocoa segments. The Grain segment purchases maize from out-growers and processes into corn flour/maize meal, which is used to make various pancakes, flatbreads and porridges, and bran/harmony chop products. This segment markets its products under the DECA brand. The Beef segment is involved in cattle ranching and feedlot production activities. This segment also operates an abattoir at Chimoio; and retail units in Chimoio, Tete, Manica, and Beira. The Cocoa segment holds a 3,200 hectare cocoa plantation located to the south-east of Kenema, Sierra Leone. The company also holds a lease of approximately 45,000 hectares of brownfield agricultural land for palm oil production in the Pujehun District in the Southern Province of Sierra Leone; and provides aviation services
Agrium Inc. ( NYSE:AGU ; TSX:AGU.TO ) is a major producer and distributor of agricultural products and services in North America, South America, Australia and Egypt through its agricultural retail-distribution and wholesale nutrient businesses. Agrium supplies growers with key products and services such as crop nutrients, crop protection, seed, agronomic and application services, thereby helping to meet the ever growing global demand for food and fibre. Agrium produces nitrogen, potash and phosphate fertilizers, with a combined wholesale nutrient capacity of over nine million tonnes and with competitive advantages across all product lines. Agrium retail-distribution has an unmatched network of over 1,300 facilities and over 3,000 crop consultants. We partner with over half a million grower customers globally to help them increase their yields and returns on more than 50 different crops. With a focus on sustainability, the company strives to improve the communities in which it operates through safety, education, environmental improvement and new technologies such as the development of precision agriculture and controlled release nutrient products. Agrium is focused on driving operational excellence across our businesses, pursuing value-enhancing growth opportunities and returning capital to shareholders.
Aguia Resources Limited ( ASX:AGR.AX ) a fertilizer company, mines, explores, and develops phosphate and potash projects in Brazil. Its flagship Rio Grande phosphate assets include the Três Estradas, Joca Tavares, Porteira carbonatite, and Cerro Preto deposits, which cover an area of approximately 78,150 hectares located in the state of Rio Grande do Sul in southern Brazil..
AIR WATER INC .( Tokyo:4088.T ) whose operations are based on gas for industrial and medical applications, has, since its establishment in 1929, expanded its business to a great variety of fields, including chemicals, medical treatment, energy, agriculture, food products, salt, magnesia, logistics, aerosols, and mineral water.
Algae.Tec ( ASX: AEB.AX ) is a specialist producer, focused on developing technology that captures waste carbon dioxide to produce commercial quantities of a range of plant derived products for supply to three key markets: Medicinal cannabis, Algae-based nutraceuticals and Animal feed and aquaculture markets.
Alico, Inc. ( NasdaqGS:ALCO ) is a holding company with assets and related operations in agriculture and natural resources. In addition to its citrus operations, Alico is currently involved in cattle ranching, water management, mining and other natural resources, including approximately 113,400 acres of agricultural assets and 90,000 acres of mineral rights.
Allana Potash Corp . ( TSX:AAA.TO ) is a publicly traded corporation with a focus on the acquisition and development of potash assets internationally with its major focus on its potash property in Ethiopia. Allana has secured financial support from three significant strategic investors: ICL, one of the world's largest potash producers, IFC, a member of World Bank Group, and LMM, a member of Liberty Mutual Group.
Alliance Grain Traders Inc. ( TSX:AGT.TO ) is a processor of value-added pulses, staple foods and ingredients for export and domestic markets as well as a supplier of retail packaged and canned foods to retail and food service sectors. Through its offices and processing facilities located in some of the best agricultural growing regions in Canada, the U.S., Turkey, China, Australia and South Africa, merchandising and sales offices in the U.K., the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland and India and origination offices in Russia, AGT produces a full range of pulses and specialty crops including lentils, peas, chickpeas, beans and canary seed as well as food ingredients such as pulse flours, proteins, starches and fibres. Through its subsidiaries in Turkey, the Arbel Group, AGT also produces staple foods such as Arbella Pasta, rice, and milled wheat products, including bulgur and semolina.
Alterrus Systems Inc . ( OTC:ASIUQ ) engages in the development, manufacture, operation, and integration of VertiCrop, a high density vertical growing system in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Its VertiCrop system grows fresh, nutritious, and leafy green vegetables in closely spaced shelves vertically arranged on trays that are moving on an overhead conveyor system.
American Soil Technologies, Inc. ( OTC:SOYL ) develops, manufactures, markets, and sells polymer and other soil amendments to the agricultural turf and horticulture industries primarily in the United States. The company's products include Agriblend, a soil amendment for agriculture; and Nutrimoist L, a liquid soil enhancer for homes, parks, golf courses, and other turf related applications. It also holds rights to the Agro Tower product that is used for vertical farming. The company's products are used to decrease water usage, increase nutrient retention in soil, enhance seed germination and sprout emergence, clarify ponds, and increase the effectiveness of chemical fertilizers and biological additives.
AMERICAS PETROGAS INC . ( TSX:BOE.V ) is a Canadian company whose shares trade on the TSX Venture Exchange under the symbol "BOE". Americas Petrogas has conventional and unconventional shale oil and gas and tight sands oil and gas interests in numerous blocks in the Neuquén Basin of Argentina. Americas Petrogas and Indian Farmers Fertiliser Co-operative Limited (IFFCO) own GrowMax Agri Corp., a private company involved in the exploration for near-surface phosphates, potash and other minerals, and potential development of a fertilizer project in Peru.
Anpario Plc ( LSE:ANP.L ) is a leader in the manufacturing and marketing of high performance natural feed additives for global agricultural and aquaculture markets with products which improve the health and output of animals, thereby increasing profits for the farmer. The Company is positioned to benefit from the trends in growth of the world's population, the increasing demand for meat and fish protein in developing countries and the tightening of global regulation which favours more natural feed additive solutions. Our strong global brands, which include Kiotechagil, Meriden and Optivite, trade in over 70 countries using a combination of distributors, joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiaries backed up by a centralised manufacturing and research and development centre based in the United Kingdom.
Archer Daniels Midland Company ( NYSE:ADM ) For more than a century, the people of Archer Daniels Midland Company have transformed crops into products that serve the vital needs of a growing world. Today, we're one of the world's largest agricultural processors and food ingredient providers, with more than 33,000 employees serving customers in more than 140 countries. With a global value chain that includes more than 460 crop procurement locations, 300 ingredient manufacturing facilities, 40 innovation centers and the world's premier crop transportation network, we connect the harvest to the home, making products for food, animal feed, chemical and energy uses.
ARK Fund Limited,The ( ASX:ARJ.AX ) is an Australia-based agricultural property and water rights investment company. The Company buys agricultural property upon which reside established, income producing, horticultural, forestry and/or other agricultural businesses and once purchased rents these agricultural assets/businesses. The Company is focused on rural agricultural properties. ARK's Teak properties are located in far north Queensland.
Art's-Way Manufacturing Co., Inc. ( NasdaqCM:ARTW ) manufactures and distributes farm machinery niche products including animal feed processing equipment, sugar beet defoliators and harvesters, land maintenance equipment, crop shredding equipment, round hay balers, plows, hay and forage equipment, manure spreaders, reels for combines and swathers, and top and bottom drive augers, as well as pressurized tanks and vessels, modular animal confinement buildings and laboratories and specialty tools and inserts. After-market service parts are also an important part of the Company's business. The Company has four reporting segments: agricultural products; pressurized tanks and vessels; modular buildings; and tools.
Bee Vectoring Technologies ( TSX: BEE.V ) has developed and owns patent-pending bee vectoring technology that is designed to harmlessly utilize bumblebees and honeybees as natural delivery mechanisms for a variety of powdered mixtures comprised of organic compounds that inhibit or control common crop diseases, while at the same time enhancing crop vigor and productivity. This unique and proprietary process enables a targeted delivery of crop controls using the simple process of bee pollination to replace traditional crop spraying, resulting in better yields, superior quality, and less impact on the environment without the use of water or disruptions to labour.
Bevo Agro Inc. ( TSX:BVO.V ) is North America's leading supplier of propagated agricultural plants, operating 45 acres of greenhouse facilities on 98 acres of land in Langley, BC and 20 acres of land in Pitt Meadows, BC . The Company's main products are the propagation of vegetable plants such as tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers, and other plants such as bedding plants, flowers and grasses. The Company markets its products to established greenhouse growers, nurseries and retail outlets throughout North America.
BHP Billiton Ltd. ( NYSE:BHP ; ASX:BHP.AX ) discovers, acquires, develops, and markets natural resources worldwide. It operates through Petroleum and Potash, Copper, Iron Ore, and Coal segments. The company explores for, develops, produces, and markets oil and gas with operating assets in the deep water Gulf of Mexico, Western Australia, Trinidad and Tobago, the United Kingdom, and Pakistan; and owns the Jansen potash project located in the Saskatchewan potash basin in Canada. It also explores for copper, silver, lead, zinc, molybdenum, uranium, gold, iron ore, and seaborne metallurgical and thermal coal.
BioLargo, Inc . ( OTC:BLGO ) makes life better by delivering sustainable technology-based products that help solve some of the most widespread problems threatening the world's supply of water, food, agriculture, healthcare and energy. More information can be found about the company and its subsidiaries at www.BioLargo.com . Its subsidiary BioLargo Water, Inc. ( www.BioLargoWater.com ) showcases the Advanced Oxidation Systems, including its AOS Filter — a product in development specifically designed to eliminate common, troublesome, and dangerous (toxic) contaminants in water in a fraction of the time and cost of current technologies. It is the winner of the Technology Star award by New Technology Magazine for its breakthrough innovation for the oil industry and is named the Technology Innovation Leader in the water treatment market by Frost & Sullivan. BioLargo also owns a 50% interest in the Isan System, which was honored with a "Top 50 Water Company for the 21st Century" award by the Artemis Project now being commercialized under a license to Clarion Water, Inc. BioLargo's subsidiary Odor-No-More Inc., features award-winning products serving the pet, equine, military supply and consumer markets, including the Nature's Best Solution® and Deodorall® brands ( www.OdorNoMore.com ). BioLargo's subsidiary Clyra Medical Technologies, Inc. ( www.ClyraMedical.com ) focuses on advanced wound care management.
Bird River Resources Inc. ( CSE:BDR ) is a Winnipeg, Manitoba based diversified resource company. BDR holds interests in ten producing oil and gas wells in southwestern Manitoba. BDR also provides various environmental services and markets a line of environmental absorbent products used for oil & industrial spills and farms.
BODISEN BIOTECH ( LSE:BODI.L ; OTC:BBCZ ) is engaged in developing, manufacturing and selling organic fertilizers, liquid fertilizers, pesticides and insecticides in the People's Republic of China, and has developed a product line of over 60 items. The Company manufactures its product lines, which are then marketed and sold to distributors, which distributors in turn sell its products to farmers. In addition to its manufacturing and sales and marketing efforts, the Company conducts research and development to further improve existing products and to develop new formulae and products.
Bunge Limited ( NYSE:BG ) is a leading global agribusiness and food company operating in over 40 countries with approximately 35,000 employees. Bunge buys, sells, stores and transports oilseeds and grains to serve customers worldwide; processes oilseeds to make protein meal for animal feed and edible oil products for commercial customers and consumers; produces sugar and ethanol from sugarcane; mills wheat, corn and rice to make ingredients used by food companies; and sells fertilizer in South America. Founded in 1818, the company is headquartered in White Plains, New York.
Burcon NutraScience Corporation ( TSX:BU.TO ) is a leader in developing functionally and nutritionally valuable plant-based proteins. The company has developed a portfolio of composition, application, and process patents originating from a core protein extraction and purification technology. Burcon's CLARISOY(TM) soy protein offers clarity and high-quality protein nutrition for low pH beverage systems and excellent solubility and exceptionally clean flavor at any pH; Peazazz(R) is a uniquely soluble and clean-tasting pea protein; and Puratein(R), Supertein(TM) and Nutratein(R) are canola protein isolates with unique functional and nutritional attributes.
Cal-Maine Foods Inc. ( NasdaqGS:CALM ) is primarily engaged in the production, grading, packing and sale of fresh shell eggs, including conventional, cage-free, organic and nutritionally-enhanced eggs. The Company, which is headquartered in Jackson, Mississippi, currently is the largest producer and distributor of fresh shell eggs in the United States and sells the majority of its shell eggs in approximately 29 states across the southwestern, southeastern, mid-western and mid-Atlantic regions of the United States.
Calavo Growers Inc. ( NasdaqGS:CVGW ) is a global avocado-industry leader. The company also procures and markets diversified fresh produce items, ranging from tomatoes to tropical produce. An expanding provider of value-added fresh food, the company's Calavo Foods business segment manufactures and distributes guacamole, guacamole hummus, salsa and tortilla chips under the respected Calavo brand name. Calavo's wholly owned subsidiary, Renaissance Food Group, LLC, creates, markets and distributes a portfolio of healthy, high-quality lifestyle products for consumers through fast-growing brands that include Garden Highway and Chef Essentials. Founded in 1924, Calavo serves food distributors, produce wholesalers, supermarket retailers and restaurant chains worldwide.
Calyx Bio-Ventures Inc. ( TSX:CYX.V ) In addition to Calyx's portfolio of proprietary intellectual property with applications in crop enhancement, its wholly-owned subsidiary, Cannigistics Agri-Solutions Corp., is a software development company that has created a software platform tailored to advanced indoor agriculture. The Cannigistics software platform is designed to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of indoor agricultural operations, and positions Cannigistics to be the industry leader in agri-software solutions by providing businesses with advanced controls over all aspects of their operations. Recent upgrades have also generated interest in the software platform from outside the agriculture industry which could potentially provide additional areas of growth for the Company.
Canadian Zeolite Corp . ( TSX:CNZ.V ) is an environmentally friendly Green Tech business well suited to today's economic environment. We are operating and have a competitive advantage in the world of zeolites given our product has been tested, applied and meets and exceeds the standards of specific markets. We are working with dedicated global advisers recognized as leaders in zeolite use. Zeolite is a naturally occurring mineral found in volcanic ash. What makes zeolites notable is their crystalline structure perforated by microscopic pores. These pores allow zeolites to act as natural filters. Zeolite can be used in raw unprocessed form or processed into specific sizes ranging from granular to powder form depending on the application. Uses include agriculture, industry, aquaculture and water treatment.
Capita Verde Industries Ltd. (Formerly Arrowhead Water) ( TSX:VEG-H.V ) is a Canada-based traded bottled water company engaged in the production, sale and distribution of large format 15-litre bottles of drinking water principally in Alberta. The Company's products include Arrowhead Spring 15-litre and Arrowhead Reverse Osmosis 15-litre. The Company is also a farming company. The Company grows organic spinach, kale, lettuce, arugula and various salad mixtures.
CATERPILLAR INC ( NYSE:CAT ) For 90 years, Caterpillar Inc. has been making sustainable progress possible and driving positive change on every continent. Customers turn to Caterpillar to help them develop infrastructure, energy and natural resource assets. With 2014 sales and revenues of $55.184 billion, Caterpillar is the world's leading manufacturer of construction and mining equipment, diesel and natural gas engines, industrial gas turbines and diesel-electric locomotives. The company principally operates through its three product segments - Resource Industries, Construction Industries and Power Systems - and also provides financing and related services through its Financial Products segment. Caterpillar provides a wide range of solutions to help agriculture producers improve productivity and efficiency to maintain profit margins. Turn your Cat® Agricultural Equipment into multi-purpose farm equipment to cut costs and increase efficiency. Caterpillar provides a wide range of solutions to help agriculture producers improve productivity and efficiency to maintain profit margins. In addition to providing reliable, fuel-efficient farm equipment that is more economical for agriculture producers to own and operate, Caterpillar is also committed to the safety of your operators, which also helps keep your insurance costs in check.
Celamin Holdings ( ASX:CNL.AX ) is focused on the exploration and development of resource projects in North Africa initially in Tunisia. Celamin's immediate focus is the Chaketma Phosphate project held by Celamin 51% in partnership with local company Tunisian Mining Services sarl (TMS) 49%. Celamin has also acquired rights to several base metal tailings Projects in Tunisia with TMS.
Century Sunshine Ecological Tech. Hldg. ( HongKong 0509.HK ) operations are conducted in Hong Kong and the People's Republic of China. The Company operates in four segments: ecological fertilizer business, magnesium alloys business, metallurgical flux business and financial services business. Its subsidiaries include Baishan City Tianan Megnesium Resources Company Limited, Bright Stone Group Limited, Capital Idea Investments Limited, Century Sunshine Ecological Technology Limited, Century Sunshine (Jiangxi) Ecological Technology Limited, Century Sunshine (Nan Ping) Biology Engineering Co., Limited and Century Sunshine (Shanghai) Management Company Limited, among others
Ceres, Inc . ( NasdaqCM:CERE ) is an agricultural biotechnology company that develops and markets seeds and traits to produce crops for animal feed, sugar and other markets. The company's advanced plant breeding and biotechnology technology platforms, which can increase crop productivity, improve quality, reduce crop inputs and improve cultivation on marginal land, have broad application across multiple crops, including food, feed, fiber and fuel crops. Ceres markets its seed products under its Blade brand. The company also licenses its biotech traits and technology to other companies and organizations.
Cervus Equipment Corporation ( TSX:CVL.TO ) acquires and operates authorized agricultural, commercial, industrial and transportation equipment dealerships. The Company has interests in 75 dealerships in Canada, New Zealand, and Australia, employing more than 1,700 people. The primary equipment brands represented by Cervus include John Deere agricultural equipment; Bobcat and JCB construction equipment; Clark, Sellick and Doosan material handling equipment; and Peterbilt transportation equipment.
CF Industries Holdings Inc. ( NYSE:CF ) headquartered in Deerfield, Illinois, through its subsidiaries is a global leader in the manufacturing and distribution of nitrogen products, serving both agricultural and industrial customers. CF Industries operates world-class nitrogen manufacturing complexes in the central United States and Canada and distributes plant nutrients through a system of terminals, warehouses, and associated transportation equipment located primarily in the midwestern United States. The company also owns 50 percent interests in GrowHow UK Limited, a plant nutrient manufacturer in the United Kingdom; an ammonia facility in The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago; and KEYTRADE AG, a global plant nutrient trading organization headquartered near Zurich, Switzerland.
Chatham Rock Phosphate Limited ( ASX:CRP.NZ ) aims to be the premier supplier of direct application phosphate to the New Zealand and global agricultural sector. CRP holds a strategic, multi-million tonne organic rock phosphate deposit uniquely positioned to access Asian and Australasian fertiliser markets.
China Agri-Business, Inc. ( OTC:CHBU ) engages in the manufacture and sale of non-toxic fertilizer, bactericide, and fungicide products used for farming in the People's Republic of China. The company offers organic biochemical agricultural application products, including Xinsheng Luyuan, a line of fertilizer products whose primary function is to increase agricultural production; Xinsheng Lufeng, a line of organic soil amendment products that acts as a bactericide; and Xinsheng Huang-jin-gai, a line of amino acid fertilizer products designed to help crops absorb calcium and to enhance their quality. It also provides Xinsheng Jia-tian-xia, a line of humic acid fertilizer products designed to enhance the quality of crops; and Xinsheng Bai-le, a line of amino acid fertilizer products designed to provide supplementary micro-nutrients to crops, and to help crops grow with balanced nutrition. In addition, the company manufactures other agrochemical products, including diafenthiuron, prochloraz, and seed coating agents and preparations. China Agri-Business, Inc. sells its products primarily through wholesale and retail distributors.
China Culiangwang ( HongKong:0904.HK ) is a leading green food provider in China supplying a wide range of agricultural products including fresh produce, processed food to both domestic and international markets, and branded food and beverage products under "Culiangwang" to domestic market in China.
China Green Agriculture ( NYSE: CGA ) produces and distributes humic acid-based compound fertilizers, other varieties of compound fertilizers and agricultural products through its wholly-owned subsidiaries, i.e.: Shaanxi TechTeam Jinong Humic Acid Product Co., Ltd. ("Jinong"), Beijing Gufeng Chemical Products Co., Ltd. ("Gufeng") and a variable interest entity, Xi'an Hu County Yuxing Agriculture Technology Development Co., Ltd. ("Yuxing"). Jinong produced and sold 120 different kinds of fertilizer products as of December 31, 2014, all of which are certified by the government of the People's Republic of China (the "PRC") as Green Food Production Materials, as stated by the China Green Food Development Center. Jinong currently markets its fertilizer products to private wholesalers and retailers of agricultural farm products in 27 provinces, four autonomous regions, and three central-government-controlled municipalities in the PRC. Jinong had 972 distributors in the PRC as of December 31, 2014. Gufeng, and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Beijing Tianjuyuan Fertilizer Co., Ltd., are Beijing-based producers of compound fertilizers, blended fertilizers, organic compound fertilizers, and mixed organic-inorganic compound fertilizers.
Clean Seed Capital Group Ltd. ( TSX:CSX.V ) are a team of innovators and business management professionals with a proven track record of game changing innovation and production of patented agricultural technologies at an incredibly high level. We pride ourselves as progress facilitators that turn solutions for modern agricultural problem into commercially viable products to fulfill new demand. Clean Seed's SMART Seeder™ technologies are revolutionary seeding tools that utilize the unique synergy of sophisticated electronic metering and intuitive software control putting row-by-row variable rate technology at the forefront of agricultural innovation. Our innovations create a new class of highly accurate seeding equipment designed specifically for today's farmer.
Commercial Vehicle Group ( NasdaqGS:CVGI ) and its subsidiaries, is a leading supplier of a full range of cab related products and systems for the global commercial vehicle market, including the medium-and heavy-duty truck market, the medium-and heavy-construction vehicle markets, the military, bus, agriculture, specialty transportation, mining, industrial equipment and off-road recreational (ATV/UTV) markets.
Cosan Limited ( NYSE:CZZ ) together with its subsidiaries, is engaged in sugar and ethanol, fuel, logistics services, lubricants, and piped natural gas businesses primarily in Brazil, rest of South America, Europe, the Middle East, Asia, and North America. The company's Radar segment is involved in buying, managing, selling, and leasing agricultural land. Through state-of-the-art geo-processing technology, Radar buys and adapts rural properties with agricultural potential, strictly following the guidelines established by the Brazilian legislation, especially by the Brazilian Forest Code. All of it so that qualified operators are able to produce efficiently with good results and without compromising the environment. Today, the company manages properties in eight Brazilian states, totaling over 230,000 hectares dedicated to planting sugarcane, soybeans, cotton, corn, among others.
CV Sciences Inc. ( OTC:CVSI ) formerly CannaVest Corp, located in Las Vegas, Nevada, focuses on drug development activities on products containing cannabidiol (CBD) as the active pharmaceutical ingredient, and is engaged in the development, marketing and sale of end consumer products containing CBD, which is refined into its own PlusCBD Oil™ brand.
Darling International Inc. ( NYSE:DAR ) is the world's largest publicly-traded developer and producer of sustainable natural ingredients from edible and inedible bio-nutrients, creating a wide range of ingredients and customized specialty solutions for customers in the pharmaceutical, food, pet food, feed, technical, fuel, bioenergy and fertilizer industries. With operations on five continents, the Company collects and transforms all aspects of animal by-product streams into useable and specialty ingredients, such as gelatin, edible fats, feed-grade fats, animal proteins and meals, plasma, pet food ingredients, organic fertilizers, yellow grease, fuel feedstocks, green energy, natural casings and hides. The Company also recovers and converts used cooking oil and commercial bakery residuals into valuable feed and fuel ingredients.
Deere & Company ( NYSE:DE ) is a world leader in providing advanced products and services and is committed to the success of customers whose work is linked to the land - those who cultivate, harvest, transform, enrich and build upon the land to meet the world's dramatically increasing need for food, fuel, shelter and infrastructure. Since 1837, John Deere has delivered innovative products of superior quality built on a tradition of integrity.
Deveron UAS Corp . ( CSE:DVR ) is an enterprise drone data services company focused on agriculture, offering the opportunity to increase yields and reduce costs using sophisticated Unmanned Aerial Systems ("UAS" or "drones"), sensors, software and analytics. Deveron's drone data service network allows enterprise level customers to obtain on-demand, actionable data without exposure to technology and capital risks. The Company is focused on building a standardized constellation of drones and sensors to provide data in North America.
DSG Global Inc. ( OTC:DSGT ) provides patented electronic tracking systems and fleet management solutions to golf courses that allow for remote management of the course's fleet of golf carts, turf equipment and utility vehicles. Their clients use DSGT's unique technology to significantly reduce operational costs, increase safety, and enhance customer satisfaction. DSGT has grown to become a leader in the category of Fleet Management in the golf industry, with their technology installed in over 15,000 vehicles on more than 250 courses worldwide. DSGT is now aggressively branching into several new streams of revenue, through programmatic advertising, licensing and distribution. DSGT is also expanding into Commercial Fleet Management, and Agricultural applications.
E.S.I. Environmental Sensors Inc. ( TSX:ESV.V ) is a leading manufacturer of patented and proprietary solutions for environments where understanding the presence, movement, and/or amount of water are important. Major market sectors include: agriculture, golf and turf, scientific research, civil engineering and crude oil production. ESI solutions have been successfully introduced into more than 40 countries to enable customers to optimize their operations by monitoring the presence and movement of water, managing irrigation systems, and monitoring the integrity of landfill covers. ESI differentiates itself by translating the best technology and science available into practical, easy to use solutions. Irrigation managers, Reservoir Engineers, and Scientists have adopted ESI's products for their accuracy, ease of use, repeatability, and ability to operate in challenging environments.
Earth Alive Clean Technologies Inc . ( CSE: EAC ) aims to be a key player in world markets of environmentally sustainable industrial solutions. The company works with the latest innovations in microbial technology Co formulate and patent innovative products that can tackle the most difficult industrial challenges, once only reserved to environmentally harmful chemicals and additives. The company is focused on environmental sustainability in 1) dust control for the mining industry, and 2) the agriculture industry.
EAU Technologies, Inc. ( OTC:EAUI ) is the leading provider of EMPOWERED WATER™ - Electrolyzed Oxidative (EO) and Electrolyzed Reductive (ER) water equipment for high-volume, industrial and commercial applications. Our breakthrough technology is revolutionizing food safety and the way businesses think about cleaning and disinfecting with highly effective green technology without toxicity. Application trials in the following areas have validated the effectiveness of Empowered Water™: Meat and Poultry Processing; Produce Processing; Carpet Cleaning; Surface Sanitizing of Food Prep areas; Sanitizing in Hospitals; Mold Remediation; Pathogen Reduction in Greenhouses; Dairy drinking water (improve rumen function); Wound Treatment. EAU continues to explore new applications of our core technology where the application produces a good ROI for customers.
ELANCO ANIMAL HEALTH INC . ( NYSE:ELAN ) is a global animal health company that develops products and knowledge services to prevent and treat disease in food animals and pets in more than 90 countries. With a 64-year heritage, we rigorously innovate to improve the health of animals and benefit our customers, while fostering an inclusive, cause-driven culture for more than 5,800 employees. At Elanco, we're driven by our vision of food and companionship enriching life - all to advance the health of animals, people and the planet.
Encanto Potash Corp. ( TSX:EPO.V ) Is a Canadian resource company engaged in the development of potash properties in the Province of Saskatchewan, Canada , the largest producing potash region in the world. Through a joint venture agreement with Muskowekwan Resources Ltd. ("MFN JV") on our flagship property, Encanto has a project land package which totals approximately 61,000 largely contiguous acres. The Company has an interest in two additional potash properties in Saskatchewan : 20% interest in the 55,000 acre Ochapowace/Chacachas property and 100% interest in the 55,437 acre Spar property. Encanto is currently exploring domestic & international strategic partnerships for the financing, development and sale of potash production from its MFN JV Property.
Epicore BioNetworks Inc. ( TSX:EBN.V ) is a leading producer of environmental biotechnology and animal nutrition products. It manufactures in the USA and markets worldwide to a variety of industries to reduce environmental pollution and increase operational productivity. Product lines are based on natural microbes and enzymes and have applications in aquaculture, agriculture and horticulture, cleaning and sanitation, food processing and nutrition, waste water, pollution control and environmental remediation. Epicore BioNetworks Inc. is a major supplier of products to the aquaculture industry with a strong focus on the shrimp farming industries of Central and South America and Asia.
Evogene Ltd . ( NYSE:EVGN ) is a leading biotechnology company for the improvement of crop productivity for the food, feed and fuel industries. The Company operates in three key market segments: improved seed traits (addressing yield increase, tolerance to environmental stresses and resistance to insects and diseases); innovative ag-chemicals (developing novel herbicide solutions for weed control); and ag-biologicals. Evogene has collaborations with world-leading seed and ag-chemical companies.
FMC Corporation ( NYSE:FMC ) is a diversified chemical company serving agricultural, industrial and consumer markets globally for more than a century with innovative solutions, applications and quality products. The company operates its businesses in three segments: FMC Agricultural Solutions, FMC Health and Nutrition, and FMC Minerals.
Focus Ventures ( TSX:FCV.V ) is developing the Bayovar 12 phosphate deposit located 40 km from the coast in the Sechura District of northern Peru. Bayovar 12 hosts a large resource of highly-reactive sedimentary phosphate rock - a key raw material input for fertilizers and vital to world food production. Reactive phosphate rock from Sechura is a natural, slow-release source of phosphorus that can be applied directly to crops. Focus aims to supply direct application phosphate rock to the nearby agricultural regions of South and Central America, the fastest growing fertilizer market in the world.
FTI Foodtech International Inc. ( TSX:FTI.V ) is a Technology Transfer company, focused in the food industry. The recent signing of the distribution agreement with GlobalEx Global for their chlorine dioxide water purification tablets, has allowed FTI to use its existing expertise and diversify into other sectors such as agriculture, manufacturing and the oil and gas industries.
FusionPharm, Inc . ( OTC:FSPM ) manufactures and sells a line of cultivation containers under the PharmPod brand name in the United States. Its PharmPods cultivation container system is used in the indoor plant cultivation. Fusion Pharm, Inc. also sells its PharmPod cultivation containers for use in cultivating various plants to businesses, universities, and individuals.
Gale Pacific ( ASX:GAP.AX ) manufactures, markets, sells, and distributes screening, shading, and home improvement products for domestic, commercial, and industrial applications primarily in Australasia, China, the Americas, the Middle East, and internationally. The company offers various outdoor retail products, including shade fabrics, exterior window furnishings, gazebos, shade sails, screenings, synthetic turfs, weed mats/garden covers, trellis/gutter guards, market and cantilever umbrellas, and various pet products under the brand name of Coolaroo. It also provides indoor blinds, kitchen and bathroom storage items, and cable management solutions under the Zone brand; and glass products, such as glass pool fencing, glass balustrading, shower screens, mirrors, kitchen splash backs, quikwire fencing, and now float glasses under the brand name of Highgrove. In addition, the company produces custom awnings; and various polymer fabrics under the brand name of Synthesis for commercial and industrial applications comprising building design, shade car parks, sporting facilities, school recreation areas, construction purposes, agriculture and horticulture, and water conservation and aquaculture. It offers its products to various consumer and industrial markets, including retail and home furnishing, architectural, construction, and agribusiness markets.
Gensource Potash Corporation ( TSX:GSP.V ) is a fertilizer development company based in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan and is on track to become the next fertilizer production company in that province. With a small scale and environmentally leading approach to potash production, Gensource believes its technical and business model will be the future of the industry. Gensource operates under a business plan that has two key components: (1) vertical integration with the market to ensure that all production capacity built is directed, and pre-sold, to a specific market, eliminating market-side risk; and (2) technical innovation which will allow for a small and economic potash production facility, that demonstrates environmental leadership within the industry, producing no salt tailings, therefore eliminating decommissioning risk, and requiring no surface brine ponds, thereby removing the single largest and negative environmental aspect of potash mining.
Global Clean Energy Holdings, Inc . ( OTC:GCEH ) operates on a fully integrated platform, which synthesizes biotechnology and crop improvement R&D with sophisticated management and optimization practices. Through its operating companies, Global has developed proprietary seed varieties, secured all necessary regulatory approvals from the US EPA, FDA, CA ARB (LCFS) and a RED-compatible sustainability standard, as well as provided over 40,000 gallons of renewable jet fuel to the US Department of Defense and developed and continuously operated the largest novel crop energy farm in the Americas.
Graincorp Limited ( ASX:GNC.AX ) is Australia's leading agribusiness with an integrated business model across three grain activities: storage & logistics, marketing and processing. GrainCorp focuses its activities on three core grains (wheat, barley and canola) where the company has comparative advantages through grain origination, freight differentials and technical expertise. GrainCorp has operations in Australia, New Zealand, North America and Europe (including the United Kingdom), which collectively represent over 50% of global export trade in wheat, barley and canola. GrainCorp has four reporting segments: Storage & Logistics, Marketing, Malt and Oils.
Great Quest Fertilizer Ltd. ( TSX:GQ.V ) is a Canadian mineral exploration company focused on the development of African agricultural mineral projects for local production of farm ready fertilizers. The Company's flagship asset is the Tilemsi Phosphate Project, encompassing 1,206 km² in northeastern Mali, containing high quality phosphate resources amenable to use as direct application fertilizer.
GreenGro Technologies, Inc. ( OTC:GRNH ) is a world class provider of eco-friendly green technologies with specific domain expertise in indoor and outdoor agricultural science systems serving both the consumer and commercial farming markets. It brings together community and commerce through the growth and distribution of healthy, nutritious foods and vital medicines backed by science and technology. Customers include restaurants, community gardens, small and large scale commercial clients.
Growlife Inc. ( OTC:PHOTO ) aims to become the nation's largest cultivation service provider for cultivating organics, herbs and greens and plant-based medicines. Our mission is to best serve more cultivators in the design, build-out and expansion of their facilities with products of high quality, exceptional value and competitive price. Through a nationwide network of local representative, regional centers and its e-Commerce team, GrowLife provides essential goods and services including media (farming soil), industry-leading hydroponics equipment, plant nutrients, and thousands more products to specialty grow operations in 17 states. GrowLife is headquartered in Seattle, WA and was founded in 2012.
GUD Holdings Limited ( ASX:GUD.AX ) comprises a number of dynamic consumer and industrial products companies based in Australia and New Zealand. The Davey business is Australia's leading supplier of a comprehensive range of water-related products with applications in domestic, farm and community markets. Davey manufactures and sources its comprehensive product range which is actively marketed in Australia, New Zealand and long-established export destinations, including the Middle East, Africa, Asia, the USA and the Pacific.
Gulf Resources, Inc. ( NasdaqGS:GURE ) operates through two wholly-owned subsidiaries, Shouguang City HaoyuanChemical Company Limited ("SCHC") and Shouguang Yuxin Chemical Industry Co., Limited ("SYCI"). The company believes that it is one of the largest producers of bromine in China. Elemental Bromine is used to manufacture a wide variety of compounds utilized in industry and agriculture. Through SYCI, the company manufactures chemical products utilized in a variety of applications, including oil and gas field explorations and papermaking chemical agents.
Heliospectra AB ADR ( OTC:HLSPY ; FirstNorth: HELIO) specializes in intelligent lighting technology for plant research and greenhouse cultivation. The Company's lighting system provides an effective and durable technology for cultivating greenhouse and indoor plants by combining several different groups of versatile light emitting diodes (LEDs) with optics, remote sensing techniques, and a robust heat dissipation solution. This proprietary setup gives growers the ability to control the intensity and wavelengths of the light emitted, creating a spectrum specifically adjusted to different plant species and growth stages to better facilitate photosynthesis. The complete, highly-engineered lamp produces crops that look better, taste better, and have a longer shelf-life than those grown under HID lamps. The technology not only reduces energy consumption by up to 50%, but also helps stimulate growth characteristics and improve plant quality. Other benefits include reduced light pollution, lower mercury use due to the avoidance of traditional HID/HPS bulbs, and less HVAC investment and monthly expense requirements. Heliospectra products are based on in-depth knowledge in plant physiology and photosynthesis along with a unique way to utilize modern LED technology. After six years of development in Sweden, the company has now begun to expand into the international market. The company has raised more than $ 21 million in capital and has received more than $2.6 million through academic scholarships and grants. It has also received numerous awards for its forward thinking technology.
Hempco Food and Fiber Inc ( TSX:HEMP.V ; HMPPF ) manufactures and distributes hemp food products for human and animal consumption in the United States, Canada, Mexico/Latin America, Asia/Pacific, and Europe. It produces bulk hulled hemp seeds, hemp protein powders, and hemp seed oil under the PlanetHemp brand name. The company is headquartered in Burnaby, Canada.
Highfield Resources Ltd . ( ASX:HFR.AX ) explores for and develops potash mineral properties in Spain. It holds 100% interests in the Muga-Vipasca, Pintano, and Sierra del Perdón potash projects, which are located in Northern Spain covering a project area of approximately 400 square kilometers.
Hiru Corporation ( OTC:HIRU ) and its subsidiary Jiangxi Shuangshi Animal Health Products Co. (Shuangshi AHP Co.) focuses on the development, manufacturing and marketing of a range of veterinary products for the Chinese Agricultural market. Shuangshi AHP Co. is devoted to the protection of animal and human health. The company focuses on all species and a range of breeding situations. Shuangshi AHP Co. focuses to expand its research and development and focuses to introduce veterinary drugs and solutions to the Chinese market. Shuangshi AHP Co. focuses on delivering veterinary and animal nutrition solutions for the Chinese agricultural market. To foster livestock health, Shuangshi AHP Co. produces injections, volume injections, injections, oral liquids, liquid disinfectants, feed additives, loose powders and premixes. The Company is solving problems specific to poultry, pigs and ruminants.
IC Potash Corp . ( TSX: ICP.TO ; OTCQX: ICPTF ) has previously demonstrated a method to make Sulfate of Potash ("SOP") from its 100%-owned Ochoa polyhalite deposit in Southeast New Mexico and is currently examining ways to become a low-cost fertilizer producer. The current review of IC Potash's existing feasibility study is being extended to determine a viable positive economic path to the production of direct application polyhalite. The Ochoa project has access to excellent local labor resources, low-cost electricity and natural gas, water, rail lines, and the Port of Galveston, Texas. IC Potash's land holdings consist of nearly 90,000 acres of federal subsurface potassium prospecting permits and State of New Mexico potassium mining leases.
ICL - Israel Chemicals Ltd. ( TASE:ICL ) a global manufacturer of products based on unique minerals, fulfills humanity's essential needs, primarily in three markets: agriculture, food and engineered materials.ICL produces approximately a third of the world's bromine, and is the sixth largest potash producer, as well as the leading provider of pure phosphoric acid. It is a major manufacturer of specialty fertilizers and specialty phosphates, flame retardants and water treatment solutions. The agricultural products that ICL produce help to feed the world's growing population. The potash and phosphates that it mines and manufactures are used as ingredients in fertilizers and serve as an essential component in the pharmaceutical and food additives industries; The food additives that it produces enable people to have greater access to more varied and higher quality food; ICL's water treatment products supply clean water to millions of people as well industry around the world; and other substances, based on bromine and phosphates help to create energy that is more efficient and environmentally friendly, prevent the spread of forest fires and allow the safe and widespread use of a variant of products and materials.
Imaflex Inc. ( TSXV: IFX.V ) is focused on the development and manufacturing of innovative solutions for the flexible packaging space. Concurrently, the Corporation develops and manufactures films for the agriculture industry. The Corporation's products consist primarily of polyethylene (plastic) film and bags, including metalized plastic film, for the industrial, agricultural and consumer markets. Headquartered in Montreal, Quebec, Imaflex has manufacturing facilities in Canada and the United States. Today, agricultural films are used in the growing of fresh fruits and vegetables worldwide to cover soil treated with fumigants - volatile and toxic pesticides essential for reducing pests, weeds and fungi in the soil, thus supporting good growth of new crop seedlings. The original EPA approved ADVASEAL® (ADVASEAL® HSM), contained only a herbicide for weed control. The new enhanced ADVASEAL® under development also includes fungicides and a nematicide to control soil borne pathogens, thus becoming a complete non-fumigant alternative for soil disinfestation. With ADVASEAL®, modern non-volatile crop protection products can be applied more effectively and safely than with fumigants. The crop protection products are incorporated into a coating, which is then applied to a mulch film. Once the coated film is applied to the ground the active ingredients are released into the soil under controlled conditions, preventing the over/under-dosing found with current soil disinfestation practices. This new technology dramatically reduces the amount of crop protection products required. The catalyst to trigger the release of the active ingredients is soil moisture. When the film is applied to the soil, they are efficiently and safely discharged into the ground, resulting in heightened productivity, lower costs and notable environmental benefits.
iMD Companies, Inc. ( OTC:ICBU ) a Florida corporation, has recently re-positioned to be a holding company for acquisitions in the Hydroponics and Hemp industry. The Hydroponics subsidiary, R-Quest Hydroponics, is engaged in the manufacturing, marketing, and distribution of equipment for the hydroponics industry. The 2013 acquisition of a majority stake in R-Quest Hydroponics Inc. purchased from Anything Technologies Media (OTC:EXMT) has been augmented by the purchase of Lumz'n Blooms, Ltd., a Manufacturer of Indoor Gardening and Hydroponics Equipment. The recently announced acquisition in process of a majority stake in Freedom Feed and Seed and related companies represents the Company's entry into the HEMP industry. The Company's management and advisory team has extensive backgrounds in finance, farming, manufacturing, marketing and distribution. iMD's goal is to create and increase shareholder value by organic growth, strategic acquisitions and creative business alliances, which should generate increased revenues and earnings.
Incitec Pivot Limited ( ASX:IPL.AX ) together with its subsidiaries, manufactures, trades, and distributes fertilizers, industrial explosives, and chemicals. It operates through Incitec Pivot Fertilisers, Southern Cross International, Dyno Nobel Americas, Dyno Nobel Asia Pacific, and Explosives Eliminations segments. The company offers urea, ammonia, single super phosphate, ammonium phosphate, and sulphuric acid; various industrial chemical products that are used in water treatment, process manufacturing, and other industrial applications; and ammonium nitrate for the mining industry. It also builds detonators, nonel, detcord, cartridge explosives, and boosters; and assembles products for customer specifications, as well as offers agricultural chemicals. The company offers its industrial explosives and blasting services to the mining, quarrying, seismic, and construction industries through a network of wholesale distributors and retail sites. Incitec Pivot Limited also imports and sells ammonium phosphates and other products. It operates primarily in Australia, North America, Europe, Asia, Latin America, and Africa
India Globalization Capital, Inc. ( NYSE MKT:IGC ) has articulated a strategy to become a company with diverse operating businesses and specialty pharmaceuticals. We are currently engaged in trading, vertical farming and rental of heavy equipment in India, China and the United States.
Indoor Harvest Corp ( OTCQB:INQD ) through its brand name Indoor Harvest®, is a full service, state of the art design-build engineering firm for the indoor farming industry. Providing production platforms and complete custom designed build outs for both greenhouse and building integrated agriculture (BIA) grows, tailored to the specific needs of virtually any cultivar. Our patent pending aeroponic fixtures are based upon a modular concept in which primary components are interchangeable.
Input Capital Corporation ( TSX:INP.V ) is an agriculture commodity streaming company with a focus on canola, the largest and most profitable crop in Canadian agriculture. Input enters into canola streaming contracts with canola farmers in western Canada. Pursuant to the streaming contract, Input purchases a fixed portion of the canola produced, at a fixed price, for the duration of the term of the contract. Input is a non-operating farming company with a portfolio of forty two canola streams, all of which produce canola and revenue for Input in the year the agreement is signed. Input plans to grow and diversify its low cost canola production profile through entering into additional canola streaming contracts with farmers across western Canada. Input is focused on farmers with quality production profiles, excellent upside yield potential, and strong management teams. Input has completed canola streaming contracts in Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba.
Intrepid Potash, Inc. ( NYSE:IPI ) is the largest producer of potash in the U.S. and is dedicated to the production and marketing of potash, which is essential for healthy crop development; and Trio®, a specialty fertilizer supplying three key nutrients, potassium, magnesium and sulfate, in a single particle. Intrepid owns six active production facilities across New Mexico and Utah. Intrepid is unique in the U.S. in its utilization of low-cost solar solution mining at three of its facilities, including the recently constructed HB solar solution mine.
Itronics Inc. ( OTC:ITRO ) is a "Creative Clean Technology" Company which produces GOLD'n GRO specialty liquid fertilizers and silver bullion. It owns a large Iron Oxide Copper Gold (IOCG) mineral property (the Auric Fulstone Project) in the prolific Yerington Copper Mining District in northwestern Nevada. The Company's goal is to achieve profitable clean technology driven organic growth in specialty GOLD'n GRO fertilizers, silver, zinc, and minerals. The Company's technologies maximize the recovery and use of metals and minerals. Through its subsidiary, Itronics Metallurgical, Inc., Itronics is the only Company with a fully permitted "Beneficial Use Photochemical, Silver, and Water Recycling" plant in the United States that converts spent photoliquids into pure silver and GOLD'n GRO liquid fertilizers. The Company is developing environmentally compatible mining technology. Itronics has received numerous domestic and international awards that recognize its ability to successfully use science and engineering to create and implement new environmentally clean recycling and fertilizer technologies.
Jain Irrigation Systems Limited (JISL) ( BSE: JISLJALEQS.BO ) derives its name from the pioneering work it did for the Micro Irrigation Industry in India. However, there is more to Jain Irrigation than Irrigation. The Corporation has multi product industrial profile and manufacturers of Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation Systems and Components; PVC Pipes, Polyethylene (HDPE, MDPE) & Polypropylene Piping Systems; Plastic Sheets (PVC & PC sheets); Agro Processed Products includes Dehydrated Onions and Vegetables; Processed Fruits (Purees, Concentrates &amp; Juices); Tissue Culture, Hybrid & Grafted Plants; Greenhouses, Poly and Shade Houses; Bio-fertilizers; Green energy solutions includes Solar Photovoltaic (Solar lighting and appliances, Solar pumping systems), Solar water heating systems, Bio-Energy sources; Financial Services and other agricultural inputs since last 27 years. We render consultancy for complete or partial project planning and implementation e.g. Watershed or Wasteland and / or Crop Selection and Rotation.
Jaguar Animal Health, Inc . ( NasdaqCM:JAGX ) is an animal health company focused on developing and commercializing first-in-class gastrointestinal products for companion and production animals. Our products are designed with a thorough understanding of not only species-specific health issues, but also market practices, the economics of current treatment strategies, competitive dynamics, government initiatives, such as concern for extensive antibiotic usage, and effective channels for new product introductions. In addition to Canalevia™ for dogs and Neonorm™ for preweaned dairy calves, we are developing formulations of these products across multiple animal species and market channels.
John Shearer Holdings ( ASX:SHR.AX ) manufactures and distributes agricultural machinery and transport equipment, and steel shelving and storage systems in Australia and China. It offers cultivation and seeding equipment; ground engaging tools; transport equipment, such as bulk tankers; and industrial and office steel shelving and storage systems. The company was founded in 1877 and is based in Kilkenny, Australia. John Shearer (Holdings) Limited is a subsidiary of Arrowcrest Group Pty. Ltd
K+S Group, The ( XETRA: SDF.DE ) is an international resources company. We have been mining and processing mineral raw materials for more than 125 years. The products we produce from them are used worldwide in agriculture, food and road safety and are important elements in numerous industrial processes. The nutrients potash and salt are accompanying the megatrend for the future: A constantly growing global population is becoming increasingly prosperous and striving for a more modern standard of living, which results in an increasing consumption of mineral raw materials. We serve the resulting growth in demand from production sites in Europe, North America and South America as well as through a global distribution network. K+S is the world's largest salt producer and one of the top potash providers worldwide.
Kindred Biosciences Inc. ( NasdaqCM:KIN ) is a pre-commercialization stage biopharmaceutical company focused on saving and improving the lives of pets. Its mission is to bring to pets the same kinds of safe and effective medicines that human family members enjoy. The Company's strategy is to identify compounds and targets that have already demonstrated safety and efficacy in humans and to develop therapeutics based on these validated compounds and targets for dogs, cats and horses. The Company has a deep pipeline of novel drugs and biologics in development across many therapeutic classes.
Kiwa Bio-Tech Products Group Corporation ( OTC:KWBT ) develop, manufacture, distribute and market innovative, cost-effective and environmentally safe bio-technological products for agriculture. Our main product groups are bio-fertilizer, biologically enhanced livestock feed, and animal drugs and disinfectants. Our products are designed to enhance the quality of human life by increasing the value, quality and productivity of crops and decreasing the negative environmental impact of chemicals and other wastes. Our businesses include bio-fertilizer, bio-enhanced feed and AF-01 anti-viral aerosol.
Korab Resources Limited ( ASX:KOR.AX ) is a diversified international mining and exploration company with gold, silver, phosphate and magnesite development projects and base metals exploration projects. Geolsec Phosphate Operations Pty Ltd (GEOLSEC) is the operator of the Geolsec phosphate mine located near Darwin in the Northern Territory. The phosphate mine has recently completed permitting process. The Geolsec project has some of the best logistics and basic infrastructure of any rock phosphate project in Australia. The mine is located 2km from the town of Batchelor, approximately 70km south from the port of Darwin (capital of the Northern Territory). Geolsec mine is accessible all year round by sealed Batchelor Road. Geolsec is situated in close proximity (10km by sealed road) from Stuart Highway and the transcontinental railway line connecting Darwin with Adelaide (capital of South Australia) and with the national road and rail transport network which links Adelaide with Western Australia, Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland.
Laguna Blends, Inc. ( CSE: LAG ; OTC:LAGBF ) is a network marketing company that generates retail sales through independent affiliates. Affiliates utilize tools and technology that enable them to build an international business from their own home or anywhere else in the world. This technology replaces the need for expensive travel and hotel meetings. The Company is currently focused on the nutritional health benefits derived from hemp. Laguna's first product category as an entry to market are functional beverage products that contain hemp and other efficacious ingredients. Laguna's initial products to market are the following: · "Caffe" is an instant, "just add water" hot coffee beverage that is infused with both whey and hemp protein. With 2 grams of protein in every serving, Laguna's proprietary product packs a powerful protein punch. Caffe, contains Instant coffee, whey protein hydrolysate, hemp protein, natural flavors. · "Pro369" is a single serving, "on-the-go," plant based, instant, hemp protein that is served cold and comes in 4 delicious flavors. Pro369 is water soluble and can be directly mixed in water, added to milk, almond milk or coconut milk. Pro369 can also be blended in a shake or smoothie. Pro369 is also a source of Omegas, 3, 6 and 9 and contains ginseng. Laguna Blends has been granted approval from Health Canada for four powdered Pro369 flavours: Chocolate Banana, Mixed Berry and Vanilla Caramel and Tropical Powder. Pro369 contains Hemp protein, natural flavors, stevia, and American ginseng. The Company sells its products through its independent affiliates in the USA and Canada.
Landec ( NasdaqGS:LNDC ) is a company that leverages its proprietary polymer technologies, application development and innovation capabilities to develop and commercialize new products in food and biomaterials markets. Agriculture : The unique properties inherent in Intelimer Polymer technology have been applied to agricultural seed coatings and treatments. Landec's coatings and formulations are used to regulate seed germination, protect seeds under adverse field conditions, deliver fungicides and insecticides with low dust off and good seed flow and provide sustained release of nutrients and pesticides.
Legend Holdings ( OTC:LGDI ) is a listed public company focused on developing its phosphate assets. Legend's current phosphate interests are through its 100% owned subsidiary Paradise Phosphate Limited which is a phosphate development company with projects in North West Queensland, Australia.
Lighting Science Group Corp. ( OTC:LSCG ) is a global leader in innovative LED lighting solutions that designs, manufactures and brings to market advanced, intelligent products for consumer and commercial applications. Our breakthrough technologies save energy and reduce the carbon footprint of the traditional light bulb by up to 80%. Lighting Science's innovative lighting solutions are also building a better, brighter future by aiding the growth of nutrient-dense crops, creating safer highways, and protecting endangered wildlife.
Limoneira Company ( NasdaqGS:LMNR ) a 120-year-old international agribusiness headquartered in Santa Paula, California, has grown to become one of the premier integrated agribusinesses in the world. Limoneira (pronounced lē mon΄âra) is a dedicated sustainability company with approximately 10,700 acres of rich agricultural lands, real estate properties and water rights in California and Arizona. The Company is a leading producer of lemons, avocados, oranges, specialty citrus and other crops that are enjoyed throughout the world.
Lindsay Corporation ( NYSE:LNN ) manufactures and markets irrigation equipment primarily used in agricultural markets which increase or stabilize crop production while conserving water, energy, and labor.
Luoniushan Co., Ltd. ( ShenZhen:000735.SZ ) is primarily engaged in animal husbandry business. The Company's main products consist primarily of live pigs, chickens, flour and wheat brans, feeds, and veterinary drugs. The Company also involves in the sale of commodity housings, construction projects, as well as the operation of technical schools, providing professional training services. The Company operates its businesses principally in Hainan province, China.
Marrone Bio Innovations, Inc . ( NasdaqGM:MBII ) strives to lead the movement to a more sustainable world through the discovery, development and promotion of biological products for pest management and plant health. Our effective and environmentally responsible solutions help customers operate more sustainably while controlling pests, improving plant health, and increasing crop yields. We have four products for agriculture on the market (Regalia®, Grandevo®, Venerate® and Majestene®), and also distribute Bio-tam 2.0® for Isagro USA in the western U.S. MBI also markets Zequanox® for invasive mussels for water markets. We also have a proprietary discovery process, a rapid development platform, and a robust pipeline of pest management and plant health product candidates. At Marrone Bio Innovations we are dedicated to pioneering better biopesticides that support a better tomorrow for users around the globe.
Mesa Exploration Corp. ( TSX:MSA.V ) is exploring a portfolio potash, gold and silver mineral properties in the United States where it controls significant land holdings in proven mining districts with excellent access and infrastructure.
MGP Ingredients ( NasdaqGS:MGPI ) provides a host of naturally derived specialty ingredients that have been developed for use primarily in food, beverage and household product applications. From developing new product innovations to enhancing the qualities of our unique proteins and starches and premium alcohol products, we create solutions that help our customers succeed.
Minemakers Limited ( ASX:MAK.AX ; TSX:MAK.TO ) aims to become a significant force in the world phosphate and fertiliser sector, through the development of the wholly owned Wonarah deposit in the Northern Territory, believed to be the largest conventional sedimentary deposit held by a listed company. Minemakers aims to strongly enhance shareholder wealth by development of its world-class Wonarah phosphate project and focusing on the production of high value downstream fertiliser products.
MONSANTO COMPANY ( NYSE:MON ) is committed to bringing a broad range of solutions to help nourish our growing world. We produce a variety of seeds ranging from fruits and vegetables to key crops - such as corn, soybeans, and cotton - that help farmers produce abundant and nutritious food. We work to find sustainable agriculture solutions that help farmers conserve natural resources, use data to improve farming practices, use water and other important resources more efficiently, and protect their crops from pests and disease. Through programs and partnerships, we collaborate with farmers, researchers, nonprofit organizations, universities and others to help tackle some of the world's biggest challenges.
Montero Mining & Exploration ( TSX:MON.V ) is a mineral exploration and development company engaged in the identification, acquisition, evaluation and exploration of mineral properties focused on rare earth elements (REE) in Tanzania, phosphates in South Africa and graphite in Ethiopia.
Mosaic Co. ( NYSE:MOS ) is one of the world's leading producers and marketers of concentrated phosphate and potash crop nutrients. Mosaic is a single source provider of phosphate and potash fertilizers and feed ingredients for the global agriculture industry.
Namaste Technologies Inc. ( CSE:N ; OTC:NXTTF ) Formerly Next Gen Metals, Inc. - is an emerging leader in vaporizer and accessories space. Namaste has over 30 e-commerce retail stores in 20 countries, offers the largest range of brand name vaporizers products on the market and is actively manufacturing and launching multiple unique proprietary products for retail and wholesale distribution. The Company is currently focused on expanding its product offering, acquisitions and strategic partnerships, and entering new markets globally.
Namoi Cotton Co-operative Ltd ( ASX:NAM.AX ) is Australia's leading cotton processing and marketing organisation. We have an extensive network of ginning, marketing and logistics operations throughout the cotton growing regions of New South Wales and southern Queensland, while also being represented internationally with an office in Jakarta, Indonesia. As part of its business operations Namoi Cotton owns and operates warehouse facilities in Wee Waa, Warren and Goondiwindi.
New Age Farm Inc. ( CSE: NF ; OTC: NWGFF ) is in the business of providing fully built out turnkey farming solutions for growers of high value luxury crops. We have operations in Washington State and British Columbia.
New Britain Palm Oil Limited ( LSE:NBPO.L ) is the world's leading producer of sustainable palm oil certified in accordance with the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) Principles & Criteria. Our operations are fully vertically integrated, producing our own seed and planting, cultivating and harvesting its own land and processing and refining palm oil. We contract directly with our end customers in the EU and arrange shipping of products. Our plantation operations are in Papua New Guinea and in the Solomon Islands, where we also have a refinery and a bulking terminal. Our newly built UK refinery - New Britain Oils - delivers segregated, traceable and certified sustainable food ingredients to our customers. We are also the largest domestic sugar and beef producer in Papua New Guinea and a global leader in high-quality oil palm seed production and research.
New Oriental Energy & Chemical Corp ( OTC:NOEC ) through its wholly owned subsidiary, Henan Jinding Chemical Co., Ltd. (Jinding) is engaged in the manufacturing and distribution of fertilizer and chemical products. The products are distributed to markets in the People's Republic of China. The primary business of the Company is the manufacturing and selling of urea, a chemical used as fertilizer for crops and in certain manufacturing processes, including the manufacturing of resin, plastic and medicine. NOEC is also engaged in the production and selling of methanol. The other products manufactured by the Company include Ammonium Hydrogen Carbonate, which can be used as a fertilizer for crops, and in the pharmaceutical and food industries. In addition, another product developed by the Company is Dimethyl Ether (DME). DME has a range of industrial applications in the production of pesticides, cosmetics and as a refrigerant.
NHS Industries Ltd. ( CSE: NHS ) is an agri-services company aimed at providing turnkey services to makers, bakers and growers. NHS is in the process of building out a commercial commissary kitchen that will be available to on site growers as well as local makers, bakers and growers producing small batch artisanal food products. NHS owns 5.5 acres of prime agricultural land in Langley, BC that includes over 48,000 square feet of greenhouse capacity and 80,000 cubic yards of saleable peat soil. The Langley Campus was recently spun out from its former parent - New Age Farm Inc.
Notis Global, Inc ( OTC:NGBL ) Based in Los Angeles, Notis Global is a pioneer in the burgeoning, multi-billion dollar legal hemp industry. The Company and its partners are working to grow confidence and generate revenues in the hemp industry. Through our key partnership with Folium Biosciences, one of the largest hemp operations in the U.S., Notis is a leading provider and distributor of cannabidiol (CBD).
Novarise Renewable Resources Ltd ( ASX:NOE.AX ) a company based in China, is an integrated green producer of a range of polypropylene fibre-based products made from post-consumer polypropylene waste materials. Novarise has developed its own technology to utilise up to 100 per cent of recycled polypropylene waste to produce polypropylene filament yarn, and other finished products such as straps and rope. The company's products comprise fibre-grade recycled PP pellets, PP filament yarns and cloth, PP consumer webbing products, and agricultural twine products. The company offers its products through a network of distributors primarily to original equipment manufacturers in the agricultural, industrial, and construction industries. The company has operations in People's Republic of China, Hong Kong, the Philippines, Russia, Turkey, Indonesia, India, Colombia, Sri Lanka, Estonia, the Unites States, Finland, Thailand, Taiwan, and other Asian and non Asian countries.
Nutrien Ltd. ( NYSE:NTR ; TSX: NTR.TO ) is the world's largest provider of crop inputs and services, playing a critical role in helping growers increase food production in a sustainable manner. We produce and distribute 25 million tonnes of potash, nitrogen and phosphate products world-wide. With this capability and our leading agriculture retail network, we are well positioned to supply the needs of our customers. We operate with a long-term view and are committed to working with our stakeholders as we address our economic, environmental and social priorities. The scale and diversity of our integrated portfolio provides a stable earnings base, multiple avenues for growth and the opportunity to return capital to shareholders.
Nutritional High International Inc . ( CSE:EAT ; OTCQB:SPLIF ; FRANKFURT:2NU.F ) is focused on developing, manufacturing and distributing products and nationally recognized brands in the hemp and marijuana-infused products industries, including edibles and oil extracts for nutritional, medical and adult recreational use. The Company works exclusively through licensed facilities in jurisdictions where such activity is permitted and regulated by state law.
Oasmia Pharmaceutical AB ( NasdaqCM:OASM ; Stockholm:OASM.ST ) develops, manufactures, markets and sells new generations of drugs in the field of human and veterinary oncology. The company's product development aims to create and manufacture novel nanoparticle formulations and drug-delivery systems based on well-established cytostatics which, in comparison with current alternatives, show improved properties, reduced side-effects, and expanded applications. The company's product development is based on its proprietary in-house research and company patents.
Obtala Resources plc ( LSE:OBT.L ) actively invests in and is developing a fully vertically integrated business solution. The Group is working towards building an integrated trading platform with an emphasis on agriculture, food production and processing with direct market access through owned retail and wholesale outlets. In the most simple of terms this is the "Farm to Fork" model which allows us to plant a seed and produce a finished marketable branded product. The initial geographic focus is within sub-Saharan Africa, with our projects currently operational in Tanzania, Mozambique and Lesotho. Obtala has also built up a substantial portfolio of natural forest timber concessions in Mozambique where it operates a sustainable, business model.
ORGANIC ALLIANCE INC ( OTC:ORGC ) is a vertically integrated, global grower and marketer of fresh, organic and Fair Trade fruits and vegetables in the rapidly growing $29.2 billion U.S. natural, organic and Fair Trade foods marketplace. Organic Alliance-branded mangoes, tomatoes, cucumbers, bell peppers and more can be found on the shelves of leading national grocery chains including Whole Foods, Kroger, Safeway, Trader Joes and others. We serve the demand-driven and supply-constrained U.S. Organic and Fair Trade food market by developing a growing variety of certified fresh produce items while making them affordable to our clients. This is accomplished through our direct approach to farming and the unrivaled network of sustainability experts and production sites that we've established in the U.S. and Latin America. Our premium Organic and Fair Trade produce allows consumers to enjoy safe, healthy, delicious food while helping to create a brighter future for the farming communities that grew it. This is a win-win we're proud to deliver to the expanding sustainable food marketplace. We work globally to cultivate a dedicated alliance of Organic and Fair Trade farms and processing facilities. Our international production is based in the High Plains of central Mexico and extends south toward Peru and Chile. Today, we are primarily invested in Mexico's surging year-round greenhouse vegetable sector and have begun to deepen our direct involvement in the production of Organic and Fair Trade tropical fruits. Our experts are working hard on the ground to develop these crops as Organic and Fair Trade for transportation and sale onto U.S. grocery shelves. Once on grocery shelves, we support retailers and consumers of our certified produce with media technology and innovative in-store programs that enable them to learn more about the farming communities they directly support.
Organic Potash Corporation ( CSE:OPC ) is a Canadian based corporation with operations in Ghana, West Africa. The Corporation is currently constructing a manufacturing facility which will implement a proprietary production technology to convert organic waste materials, such as Cocoa Husks, into 99%+ pure potassium carbonate. The purity of Organic Potash's potassium carbonate is an industry first and will allow for numerous applications in multiple industries including, the Agricultural, Food and Pharmaceutical industries.
Origin Agritech Limited ( NasdaqGS:SEED ) Founded in 1997 and headquartered in Zhong-Guan-Cun (ZGC) Life Science Park in Beijing, Origin Agritech Limited is China's leading agricultural biotechnology company, specializing in crop seed breeding and genetic improvement, seed production, processing, distribution, and related technical services. Leading the development of crop seed biotechnologies in China, Origin Agritech's phytase corn was the first transgenic corn to receive the Bio-Safety Certificate from China's Ministry of Agriculture. Over the years, Origin has established a robust biotechnology seed pipeline including products with glyphosate tolerance and pest resistance (Bt) traits. Origin operates production centers, processing centers and breeding stations nationwide with sales centers located in key crop-planting regions. Product lines are vertically integrated for corn, rice and canola seeds.
Pacific Potash Corporation ( TSX:PP.V ) an exploration stage company, engages in the acquisition, exploration, and development of mineral properties. The company primarily explores for potash deposits.
Papyrus Australia ( ASX:PPY.AX ) is the developer of a world-first technology that converts the waste trunk of the banana palm into alternatives to forest wood products to be used in the paper, packaging, furniture, building, construction and other industries. The company holds patent rights for this technology in Australia, China, Egypt, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, the Philippines, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, Vietnam, African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO) countries, the United States, Taiwan, and Israel. Its commercialization strategy is to license its technology, sell machinery, and provide support services for assisting suitable entities to establish banana veneering and panel production factories in locations where banana is grown.
Passport Potash, Inc. ( TSX:PPI.V ; OTC:PPRTF ) is a publicly traded corporation engaged in the exploration and development of advanced potash properties with its major focus on a previously explored potash property in Arizona. Passport has acquired a strategic position in the Holbrook Basin.
PHI Group, Inc. ( OTCQB:PHIL ) primarily focuses on acquisitions and invests in select industries and special situations that may substantially enhance shareholder value. It also provides merger and acquisition advisory services through a wholly owned subsidiary, PHI Capital Holdings, Inc. WATER: PHI EZ Water Tech, Inc. is a Wyoming corporation set up by PHI Group to manage, manufacture and market a portfolio of innovative water treatment systems developed by Dr. Martin Nguyen for agriculture and human use.
PhosCan Chemical Corp . ( TSX:FOS.TO ) Is a publicly-traded company which is engaged in the development of the Martison Phosphate Project. The Company's wholly-owned Martison Phosphate Deposit is located 70 kilometres north of Hearst, Ontario and has ready access to excellent infrastructure including rail, power and labour.
Phosphate Australia Limited ( ASX:POZ.AX ) acquires, explores, and develops phosphate, iron, and gold properties in Australia. Highland Plains Phosphate Project
Plant Health Care plc ( LSE:PHC.L ) is a leading provider of scientifically proven biological products for the agricultural industry. The Company offers products to improve the health, vigor and yield of major field crops such as corn, soybeans, cotton and rice, as well as specialty crops such as fruits and vegetables. Our innovative line of patent protected products provides both economic and environmental benefits for our customers and capitalizes upon long-term trends towards natural systems and biological solutions to promote plant health and growth. Plant Health Care has global reach through operating subsidiaries and supply agreements with major industry partners.
Plant Impact ( LSE:PIM.L ) is a leader in plant science innovation. The company develops and formulates products that realise and enhance crop capacity, enabling growers to improve quality and deliver consistently higher marketable yields. The company's products and technologies are backed by a robust research and development programme, managed from its head office and research facilities at Rothamsted, Harpenden, United Kingdom.
Pond Technologies Holdings Inc. ( TSX:POND.V ) has developed a proprietary growth platform that can transform carbon dioxide (CO2) from virtually any source into valuable bio-products. Pond works with the cement, steel, oil and gas and power generation industries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and generate new revenue streams. Pond's platform technology also includes the growth of algae superfoods for the nutraceutical and food additive markets. Pond's system is capable of growing many species of algae, including strains that produce anti-oxidants, omega-3 fatty acids, and protein for human and animal consumption
Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan Inc. ( NYSE:POT ) is the world's largest crop nutrient company and plays an integral role in global food production. The company produces the three essential nutrients required to help farmers grow healthier, more abundant crops. With global population rising and diets improving in developing countries, these nutrients offer a responsible and practical solution to meeting the long-term demand for food. PotashCorp is the largest producer, by capacity, of potash and third largest producer of nitrogen and phosphate. While agriculture is its primary market, the company also produces products for animal nutrition and industrial uses.
Potash West NL ( OTC:PWNNY ; ASX:PWN.AX ) engages in the exploration of potash minerals primarily in Australia. It has interests in the Dandaragan Trough project that covers an area of 2,600 square kilometers and is located in North Perth Basin, Western Australia. The company was incorporated in 2010 and is based in Belmont, Australia.
Prophecy Potash Corp . ( CSE: NUGT ) is a Canadian based Mineral Exploration Company focused on advancing the Indata Project located in north-central British Columbia. Indata contains numerous drill ready targets and geophysical anomalies occurring in comparable Paleozoic carbonate rocks to Sun Metal's Stardust project. Our planned 2019 work program will focus on high grade mineralization.
Pyxus International, Inc. ( NYSE: PYX ) is a global agricultural company united behind a common purpose - to transform people's lives so that together we can grow a better world. With 145 years' experience delivering value-added products and services to businesses and customers, we are a trusted provider of responsibly-sourced, independently-verified, sustainable and traceable products and ingredients. Pyxus International offers high-quality, distinct brands and products on the cutting edge of innovation and entrepreneurship in the E-Liquids, industrial hemp, legal cannabis and leaf tobacco industries.
Quantumsphere, Inc. (QSI) ( OTC:QSIM ) produces proprietary catalysts designed to improve process efficiencies and output in large scale chemical production facilities (such as Ammonia), creating lower costs and greater profits for chemical producers. QSI's products leverage a patented process to produce a unique high surface area catalyst accelerator technology which improves existing catalyst performance. QSI's technology is applicable to hundreds of chemical plants globally, which represents tens of billions of dollars in annual output. QSI's lead chemical focus is ammonia, which is critical to the global food supply. QSI's lead chemical sector focus is the $100 billion USD ammonia market which offers several hundred million dollars of total available market to QSI. More than 82% of all ammonia produced globally is used to make fertilizer to grow food more efficiently.
Raven Industries, Inc. ( NasdaqGS:RAVN ) Since 1956, Raven Industries has designed and manufactured high quality, high-value technical products. Raven is publicly traded on NASDAQ (RAVN) and has earned an international reputation for innovation, product quality, high performance, and unmatched service. Raven's purpose is to solve great challenges in areas of safety, feeding the world, energy independence, and resource preservation. To realize this purpose, we utilize our strengths in engineering, manufacturing, and technological innovation to serve the precision agriculture, high performance specialty films, aerospace, and situational awareness markets.
Ridley Corporation Limited ( ASX:RIC.AX ) together with its subsidiaries, provides animal nutrition solutions in Australasia. The company operates in two segments, AgriProducts and Property. It offers finished products in bulk or bags, as well as in pellet form; and raw materials, additives, and supplements, as well as animal meals. The company offers its animal nutrition solutions to food producers in the beef, dairy, poultry, pig, sheep, and aquaculture industries, as well as to laboratory animals, and the equine and canines in the recreational sector. Ridley Corporation Limited offers its products primarily under the Barastoc, Rumevite, Cobber, and Primo brands.
Rocky Mountain Dealerships Inc. ( OTC:RCKXF ; TSX:RME.TO ) is one of Canada's largest agriculture and construction equipment dealership networks with branches located throughout Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba. Through its network of Rocky Mountain Equipment locations, Rocky sells, rents, and leases new and used agriculture and construction equipment and offers product support and finance to its customers.
Ruralco Holdings Limited ( ASX:RHL.AX ) sells and markets products to rural and related industries in Australia. It operates through two segments, Rural Services and Financial Services. The company offers wool broking services; livestock marketing services for sheep, dairy, and beef cattle, as well as feedlot services; and provides a range of animal health and crop protection products, water management systems and equipment, fertilizers, and general rural merchandise products. It also provides agri and commercial business finance to rural and regional clients, as well as unsecured deposits, seasonal finance, home or term loans, lines of credit, overdrafts, asset or vehicle finance, and equipment finance; and finance broking and agricultural advisory services. In addition, the company offers various insurance products, including business, crop, fire, farm, stud stock, hobby farm, home and contents, landlords, motor vehicle, travel, life, total and permanent disablement, income protection, trauma, superannuation, and business expenses. Further, it provides seed and grain marketing services; water broking and other water related services; and real estate agency services, which comprise sale, purchase, or lease of rural, residential, commercial, and business properties, as well as property management services. The company manufactures and sells stockfeeds.
Scotts Miracle-Gro Company, The ( NYSE:SMG ) is the world's largest marketer of branded consumer products for lawn and garden care. The Company's brands are the most recognized in the industry. In the U.S., the Company's Scotts(R), Miracle-Gro(R) and Ortho(R) brands are market-leading in their categories, as is the consumer Roundup(R) brand, which is marketed in North America and most of Europe exclusively by Scotts and owned by Monsanto. In the U.S., we operate Scotts LawnService(R), the second largest residential lawn care service business. In Europe, the Company's brands include Weedol(R), Pathclear(R), Evergreen(R), Levington(R), Miracle-Gro(R) (R), KB(R), Fertiligene(R) and Substral(R).
Seedo Corp. ( OTCQB: SEDO ) is a market leading, high-tech company providing the hemp and agriculture industries with fully automated and controlled indoor growing solutions for home-grown and commercial hemp, herbs and vegetables. Seedo provides growers with the freedom to cut costs while generating high yields of lab-grade, pesticide-free herbs and vegetables. Seedo's artificial intelligence (AI)-powered, turnkey systems enable anyone, from the average consumers to large-scale producers, the ability to grow without prior experience or ample space. The Seedo solution minimizes cultivation costs by delivering maximum daylight illumination, built-in carbon filters, automated air conditioning, and a smart post-harvest drying system to users. Even in the harshest environments or with limited space, cultivators can use Seedo's intelligent technology to harvest the next generation of precision agriculture.
SenesTech Inc . ( NasdaqCM:SNES ) has developed an innovative technology for managing animal pest populations through fertility control as opposed to a lethal approach. The Company's first fertility control product, ContraPest®, is marketed for use initially in controlling rat infestations. ContraPest's novel technology and approach targets the reproductive capabilities of both sexes, inducing egg loss in female rodents and impairing sperm development in males. Using proprietary bait stations, ContraPest is dispensed in a highly palatable liquid formulation that promotes sustained consumption by rodent communities. ContraPest is designed, formulated and dispensed to be safe for handlers and non-target species such as wildlife, livestock and pets, in a biodegradable product. In contrast, the historical approach to managing rodent pest populations, rodenticides, carries a high risk of environmental contamination and the poisoning of non-target animals, pets and children. We believe our non-lethal approach, targeting reproduction, is more humane, less harmful to the environment, and more effective in providing a sustainable solution to pest infestations than traditional lethal pest management methods. There is currently no other non-lethal fertility control product approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), or the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), for the management of rodent populations. We believe ContraPest® will establish a new paradigm in rodent control, resulting in improved performance in rodent control over rodenticides, without the negative environmental effects of rodenticides.
Sennen Potash Corporation ( TSX:SN.V ) together with our industry partners and experienced team of multi-disciplined professionals, is focused on the exploration and responsible development of the unique Monument Potash Project. The Monument Potash Project is comprised of over 100,000 net mineral acres of highly contiguous mineral leases in South East Utah and South West Colorado and is located approximately 70 miles from Intrepid Potash Corp.'s operating Cane Creek Solution Mine. Sennen is currently undertaking exploration work required to swiftly delineate a maiden potash resource.
Sino Green Land Corporation ( OTC:SGLA ) through its subsidiaries, engages in the wholesale distribution, marketing, and sale of fruits and vegetables in Guangdong Province and north China. Its fruits include fuji apples, emperor bananas, and tangerine oranges; and vegetables comprise tomatoes, cauliflower, cucumber, lettuce, spinach, leek, celery, peppers, Chinese cabbage, carrots, loofah, pumpkin, bitter gourd, white gourd, gherkin, and yams. The company sells fruits through wholesale centers, and vegetables through supermarket chains.
Sirius Minerals plc ( LSE:SXX.L ) is the fertilizer development company focused on the development of its North Yorkshire polyhalite project, the United Kingdom. It has the world's largest and highest grade deposit of polyhalite, a multi-nutrient form of potash containing potassium, sulphur, magnesium and calcium.
Sociedad Quimica y Minera de Chile S.A. /Chemical & Mining Co. of Chile Inc. ( NYSE:SQM ) is an integrated producer and distributor of specialty plant nutrients, iodine, lithium, potassium-related fertilizers and industrial chemicals. Its products are based on the development of high quality natural resources that allow the Company to be a leader in costs, supported by a specialized international network with sales in over 115 countries. SQM's development strategy aims to maintain and strengthen the Company's position in each of its businesses.
Soil Sub Technologies ( ASX:SOI.AX ) engages in assessing Nutrimix and soil substitute technologies in Australia. The company is based in Subiaco, Australia.
Solis Tek Inc. ( OTC:SLTK ) is an importer, distributor and marketer of digital lighting equipment for the hydroponics industry with specific focus on the research, design, development and manufacturing of advanced, energy efficient indoor/greenhouse horticulture lighting and ancillary equipment. Using certain of its proprietary technologies, the Company provides innovative aptitudes with its ballast, reflector and lamp products. Our vision is to apply the latest advances in high efficiency lighting and controls technology as well as effective manufacturing techniques to deliver highly differentiated products with clear benefits at competitive prices to the greenhouse and indoor horticulture markets. The Company's customers include retail stores, distributors and commercial growers in the United States and abroad.
South Boulder Mines Ltd . ( ASX:STB.AX ) engages in the exploration and evaluation of mineral resources in Eritrea, East Africa. It primarily holds interests in the Colluli potash project covering an area of approximately 400 square kilometers in Eritrea; and comprising various salts, including rock salt, magnesium chloride, gypsum, and potassium bearing salts for the production of potash.
Stonegate Agricom ( TSX:ST.TO ) which is actively engaged in acquiring and developing agricultural nutrient projects, is currently focused on the development of the potentially world-class, long-life Paris Hills Phosphate Project located in Idaho . The Company is confident that the deposit has sufficient size and grade to become a strategic, cost-effective source of phosphate supply for major fertilizer producers.
Suburban Propane Partners LP ( NYSE:SPH ) is a publicly-traded master limited partnership listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Headquartered in Whippany, New Jersey, Suburban has been in the customer service business since 1928. The Partnership serves the energy needs of residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural customers in 41 states.
Sunshine Agri-Tech Inc. ( TSX:SAI.V ) is engaged in the research and development, production and sales of bio-feed, microbial feed additives and related products that aim to improve the health and performance of animals. The Company's line of products include: (a) bio-feed; and, (b) microbial feed additives. The Company currently sells its products throughout China as well as in Japan, and is expanding its reach to Southeast Asia.
Syngenta ( NYSE:SYT ) is one of the world's leading companies with more than 28,000 employees in over 90 countries dedicated to our purpose: Bringing plant potential to life. Through world-class science, global reach and commitment to our customers we help to increase crop productivity, protect the environment and improve health and quality of life.
Tandou Limited ( ASX:TAN.AX ) is a major Australian agribusiness focussed on the large scale irrigated production of cereal crops and cotton. Our strategy includes applying our significant expertise to invest in land and water to establish a business with diversity across regions, commodities and water systems.
Teck Resources Ltd . ( NYSE:TCK ; TSX:TCK-A.TO ; TSX:TCK-B.TO ) develops, and produces natural resources in the Americas, the Asia Pacific, and Europe. The company's principal products comprise steelmaking; copper concentrates and refined copper cathodes; refined zinc and zinc concentrates; and lead concentrates. It also produces molybdenum, gold, silver, germanium, indium, and cadmium, as well as chemicals and fertilizers. In addition, the company holds interest in oil sands projects and other interests in the Athabasca region of Alberta; and owns interests in mining and processing operations in Canada, the United States, Chile, and Peru, as well as operates a metallurgical complex. It also owns an interest in a wind power facility. Teck Resources Limited was founded in 1906 and is based in Vancouver, Canada.
Tejon Ranch Co ( NYSE:TRC ) is a diversified real estate development and agribusiness company, whose principal asset is its 270,000-acre land holding located approximately 60 miles north of Los Angeles and 30 miles south of Bakersfield.
Terra Nitrogen Company, L.P. ( NYSE:TNH ) is a leading manufacturer of nitrogen fertilizer products. TNCLP is the sole limited partner of Terra Nitrogen, Limited Partnership (TNLP), owner of the Verdigris, Oklahoma manufacturing facility and related assets. Terra Nitrogen GP Inc., an indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary of CF Industries Holdings, Inc., is the General Partner of TNCLP and exercises full control over all of TNCLP's business affairs.
Terra Tech Corp ( OTC: TRTC ) through its wholly-owned subsidiary GrowOp Technology, specializes in controlled environment agricultural technologies. The company integrates best-of-breed hydroponic equipment with proprietary software and hardware to provide sustainable solutions for indoor agriculture enterprises and home practitioners. Our complete product line is available at specialty retailers throughout the United States, and via our website. TRTC, through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Edible Garden, cultivates a premier brand of local and sustainably grown hydroponic produce, sold through major grocery stores such as Shoprite, Walmart, Krogers, and others throughout New Jersey, New York, Delaware, Maryland, Connecticut, Pennsylvania and the Midwest.
The Andersons, Inc . ( NasdaqGS:ANDE ) is a diversified company rooted in agriculture. Founded in Maumee, Ohio, in 1947, the company conducts business across North America in the grain, ethanol, and plant nutrient sectors, railcar leasing, turf and cob products, and consumer retailing.
Titan Machinery Inc. ( NasdaqGS:TITN ) founded in 1980 and headquartered in West Fargo, North Dakota, is a multi-unit business with mature locations and newly-acquired locations. The Company owns and operates a network of full service agricultural and construction equipment stores in the United States and Europe. The Titan Machinery network consists of 96 North American dealerships in North Dakota, South Dakota, Iowa, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, Wyoming, Wisconsin, Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico, including three outlet stores, and 16 European dealerships in Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia, and Ukraine. The Titan Machinery dealerships represent one or more of the CNH Industrial Brands (CNHI), including CaseIH, New Holland Agriculture, Case Construction, New Holland Construction, and CNH Capital.
Toro Company, The ( NYSE:TTC ) is a leading worldwide provider of innovative solutions for the outdoor environment including turf, snow and ground engaging equipment, and irrigation and outdoor lighting solutions. Toro's global presence extends to more than 90 countries. Through constant innovation and caring relationships built on trust and integrity, Toro and its family of brands have built a legacy of excellence by helping customers care for golf courses, landscapes, sports fields, public green spaces, commercial and residential properties and agricultural fields.
TWO RIVERS WATER & FARMING ( OTC:TURV ) is building a new water paradigm for the arid regions of the southwestern United States. Two Rivers assembles its water assets by acquiring irrigated farmland with senior water rights because 85% of water rights in the arid southwest are owned by agricultural interests. Two Rivers transforms the value of its water rights and farmland by continually developing operations that generate higher revenues and better profit margins. Two Rivers current farm operations convert feed crop farmland into fruit and vegetable crop production in Pueblo County Colorado, which generates six times more revenue with better profit margins.
Tyratech Inc. ( LSE:TYR.L ) Nature's Technology effectively controls insects and parasites while providing a new level of safety for people, animals and the environment. TyraTech's patented scientific process targets receptors found only in invertebrates, not in humans or animals. TyraTech leverages this scientific platform to develop natural products that are as effective as traditional chemical options.
Vale SA ( NYSE:VALE ) together with its subsidiaries, engages in the research, production, and sale of iron ore and pellets, nickel, fertilizer, copper, manganese, ferroalloys, cobalt, platinum group metals, and precious metals in Brazil and internationally.
Valmont Industries, Inc. ( NYSE:VMI ) is a global leader, designing and manufacturing highly engineered products that support global infrastructure development and agricultural productivity. For more than 60 years, Valmont® Irrigation has led the center pivot and linear irrigation industry by providing the most reliable precision irrigation equipment and technology advancements for agriculture. The Valley® brand of center pivot and linear irrigation equipment provides solutions toward meeting the world's growing demand for food. Center pivots and linears provide precise water, chemical and fertilizer applications that can result in improved crop yields, reduced labor costs, more efficient energy consumption, water conservation and reduced runoff. Valmont Irrigation currently operates in nine factories located in five continents, and markets Valley products in more than 100 countries. Valley dealers and agents are the most dependable and highly valued representatives in the industry.
Vega Biofuels, Inc. ( OTC:VGPR ) is a cutting-edge energy company that manufactures and markets a renewable energy product called Bio-Coal and a soil enhancement called Biochar, both made from timber waste using unique technology called torrefaction. Torrefaction is the treatment of biomass at high temperatures under low oxygen conditions.
Verde Agritech Plc ( TSX:NPK.TO ) is an agri-tech company promoting sustainable and profitable agriculture through the development of its Cerrado Verde Project. Cerrado Verde, located in the heart of Brazil's largest agricultural market, is the source of a potassium-rich deposit from which the Company intends to produce solutions for crop nutrition, crop protection, soil improvement, and increased sustainability. Verde's mission is to offer technological and intelligent solutions that meet the needs of an increasingly demanding and conscious market.
Vicwest Inc. ( TSX:VIC.TO ) is a leading manufacturer and distributor of engineered storage and handling systems for grain, fertilizer and liquid storage as well as building construction products for agriculture, commercial, industrial and residential markets. The Company operates through two divisions: Vicwest Building Products and Westeel.
Village Farms ( TSX:VFF.TO ) is one of the largest producers, marketers and distributors of premium-quality, greenhouse-grown tomatoes, bell peppers and cucumbers in North America. This premium product as well as premium product produced under exclusive arrangements with other greenhouse producers is grown in sophisticated, highly efficient and intensive agricultural greenhouse facilities. Product is marketed and distributed under the Village Farms® brand primarily to retail grocers and dedicated fresh food distributors throughout the United States and Canada. Since its inception, Village Farms has been guided by friendly growing methods, growing produce vegetables 365 days a year from its facilities that are healthier for people and the plant.
Webster Limited ( ASX:WBA.AX ) engages in producing, processing, and marketing walnuts and onions. It operates through two divisions: Field Fresh Tasmania and Walnuts Australia. The company owns and manages approximately 2,200 hectares of walnut orchard area in New South Wales and Tasmania. It sells its products in Australia, Europe, and internationally. The company also exports its products. Webster Limited was founded in 1831.
Wesfarmers Limited ( ASX:WBA.AX ) has grown into one of Australia's largest listed companies with headquarters in Western Australia. Its diverse business operations include chemicals, energy and fertilisers; and industrial and safety products. CSBP Fertilisers manufacture, import and distribute phosphate, nitrogen and potassium based fertilisers in blended, compound and liquid form for the Western Australian agricultural sector. CSBP also offers farmers a comprehensive soil and plant analysis service supported by the NUlogic interpretation model delivered by its network of staff and accredited partners in regional WA.
Western Potash Corp. ( TSX:WPX.TO ) is a development stage potash company focused on building a solution mine on the Milestone Property located in southern Saskatchewan. The Company intends to develop this world-class Milestone potash deposit in an ecologically sustainable, economically efficient and socially responsible manner.
Where Food Comes From Inc. ( OTC:WFCF ) (d.b.a. IMI Global ) is America's trusted resource for third party verification of food production practices. The Company supports more than 10,000 farmers, ranchers, processors, retailers, distributors and restaurants with a wide variety of value-added services through its IMI Global, International Certification Services, Validus Verification Services, and Sterling Solutions units. In addition, the Company's Where Food Comes From® retail and restaurant labeling program utilizes the verification of product attributes to connect consumers to the sources of the food they purchase through product labeling and web-based information sharing and education.
Yuhe International, Inc. ( NasdaqCM:YUII ) through its subsidiaries, engages in supplying day-old chickens raised for meat production or broilers in the People's Republic of China. It purchases baby parent breeding stocks from primary breeder farms, raises them for hatching eggs, and sells live day-old broilers. The company also supplies chicken feed stock. The company has 43 breeder farms with 28 in operation and 3 hatcheries with a total annual capacity of 3.15 million sets of breeders and 160 hatchers. It serves integrated chicken companies, broiler raising companies, and individual broiler raisers through third party distributors. The company was founded in 1996 and is headquartered in Weifang, the People's Republic of China.
Zerez Holdings ( OTC:ZRZH) is a public equity corporation focused on the advanced agriculture and cannabis industries with plans to grow through acquisition, strategic alliances, and proprietary intellectual property. The company's wholly owned subsidiary Next Generation Farming Inc . provides turnkey commercial greenhouses and automation systems that improve yields and decrease water consumption for cultivators of organic food and cannabis crops.
Zomedica ( TSX:ZOM.V ) is a veterinary pharmaceutical and health care solutions company creating products for companion animals (canine, feline and equine) by focusing on the unmet needs of clinical veterinarians. Zomedica is developing a diversified portfolio to include diagnostics, devices, innovative drugs, and drug-delivery technologies. With a team comprised of clinical veterinary professionals, it is Zomedica's mission to give veterinarians the opportunity to lower costs, increase productivity, and grow revenue while better serving the animals in their care.
Active Health Foods, Inc . ( OTC:AHFD ) is an innovative leader representing a 21st century company primarily focused on "Health and Wellness" and the desire to bring products to the market place to help battle both "CHILDHOOD OBESITY" and "TYPE II DIABETES". ACTIVE X BARS are made with extremely High Quality 100% Organic "CERTIFIED", 100% Natural ingredients that are Gluten Free "CERTIFIED", Soy free, NON GMO, and Kosher and Vegan "CERTIFIED" and ALL NATURAL FLAVORS is the ONLY soft drink beverage consumers can purchase that is sweetened 100% with STEVIA and is Sugar Free with No Carbohydrates, No Calories, No Caffeine, No Sodium, No Aspartame or Nutra-Sweet, No Sugar Alcohols, and No After Taste.
Evolva Holding SA ( Swiss:EVE.SW ) is a pioneer and global leader in sustainable, fermentation-based approaches to ingredients for health, wellness and nutrition. Evolva's products include stevia, vanillin, saffron and resveratrol. As well as developing its own proprietary ingredients, Evolva also deploys its technology for partners, providing them with a competitive edge and sharing in the returns they make.
GLG Life Tech Corporation ( TSX:GLG.TO ) is a global leader in the supply of high-purity zero calorie natural sweeteners including stevia and monk fruit extracts used in food and beverages. GLG's vertically integrated operations, which incorporate our Fairness to Farmers program and emphasize sustainability throughout, cover each step in the stevia and monk fruit supply chains including non-GMO seed and seedling breeding, natural propagation, growth and harvest, proprietary extraction and refining, marketing and distribution of the finished products. Additionally, to further meet the varied needs of the food and beverage industry, GLG has launched its Naturals+ product line, enabling it to supply a host of complementary ingredients reliably sourced through its supplier network in China.
Grupo Herdez ( OTC:GUZOF ) is a leader in the market for homemade sauces, moles, mushrooms, mayonnaise, jams, mustards, 8 vegetable juice, tomato puree, vegetable and hone. The Company is made up of a large family of brands, under the support, encouragement and care of this great leader in food, each and every one of them stand out on the shelves of the Mexican market for its reliable quality of workmanship variety of presentations and accessible prices. The Company produces and markets over 600 products with brands: Herdez Del Fuerte, McCormick, Doña María, Barilla, Yemina, Vesta, Nair, Embasa, La Victoria, Buffalo, La Gloria, Carlota, Blazon, Aires de Campo, Nutrisa and Truvia (Natural sweetener made from the stevia plant) , among others, which have a high recognition and market value. Additionally, distributes and markets soy sauces with Kikkoman brand and from June 2006, also distributes cranberry drinks under the brand Ocean Spray.
Ingredion Incorporated ( NYSE:INGR ) is a leading global ingredients solutions provider specializing in nature-based sweeteners, starches and nutrition ingredients. With customers in more than 100 countries, Ingredion serves approximately 60 diverse sectors in food, beverage, brewing, pharmaceuticals and other industries. Ingredion Incorporated offers a wide variety of sweeteners for a number of food and beverage products. Our full line of sweeteners includes: Dextrose, liquid dextrose and anhydrous dextrose; Stevia-based, high-intensity sweetener; Glucose, glucose blends and glucose solids; Polyols; HFCS 42, HFCS 55 and HFCS 90; High maltose syrup; Maltodextrin.
PureCircle Limited ( LSE:PURE.L ) is the world's leading producer of high purity stevia ingredients for the global food and beverage industry. As the driving force behind moving stevia from niche to mainstream global acceptance, we are changing the conversation around sweet for manufacturers as well as consumers.
Redpoint Bio Corporation ( OTC:RPBC ) a development stage biotechnology company, focuses on the development of healthier foods and new approaches for the treatment of diabetes and obesity by understanding the biology of taste and its relationship to metabolism, satiety, and diabetes. It enters into a license and commercialization agreement with International Flavors and Fragrances Inc. for the development, manufacture, use, and commercialization of RP44, which is a component of the stevia plant that works as a sweetness enhancer amplifying the existing sugary sweetness in a food or beverage.
S&W Seed Company ( NasdaqCM:SANW ) is a global agricultural company, headquartered in the Central Valley of California. The Company's vision is to be the world's preferred proprietary seed company which supplies a range of forage and specialty crop products that supports the growing global demand for animal proteins and healthier consumer diets. The Company is the global leader in alfalfa seed, with unrivaled research and development, production and distribution capabilities. S&W's capabilities span the world's alfalfa seed production regions with operations in the San Joaquin and Imperial Valleys of California, five other U.S. states, Australia, and three provinces in Canada, and S&W sells its seed products in more than 25 countries around the globe. Additionally, the Company is utilizing its research and breeding expertise to develop and produce stevia, the all-natural, zero calorie sweetener for the food and beverage industry.
Stevia Corp ( OTC:STEV ) is a farm management company and healthcare company focused on developing highly nutritional, high value products through proprietary plant breeding (including the stevia plant) and hemp, excellent agricultural methodologies and innovative post-harvest techniques. Stevia Corp invests in R&D and IP acquisition and manages its own propagation, nursery and plantations as well as provides services to contract growers and other industry growers. Stevia Corp was founded on the principal of implementing socially responsible, sustainable, quality agribusiness solutions to maximize the long-term efficient production of nutritional crops.
Stevia First Corporation ( OTC:STVF ) is an agricultural biotechnology company that is enabling dramatically healthier food and nutrition products. Stevia First Corp. is seeking to establish a vertically-integrated enterprise in the U.S. that uses technological expertise in fermentation-based stevia production and improves upon traditional stevia farming and processing methods. Stevia First's U.S. operations are located in the heart of California's Central Valley, one of the world's most productive agricultural regions.
Stevia Nutra Corp ( OTC:STNT ) focuses on the cultivation, development, and post-harvest processing of stevia plants for use as a sweetener. It has an agreement for the lease of 20 hectares of land in the Kampong Speu province of the Kingdom of Cambodia.
Sunwin Stevia International, Inc. ( OTC:SUWN ) engages in the areas of zero calorie, all natural sweeteners (Sunwin Stevia™ Extracts). As an industry leader in agricultural processing, Sunwin Stevia has built an integrated global firm with the sourcing and production capabilities to meet the needs of consumers throughout the world.
ELEMENTS Rogers Intl Commodity Agri ETN ( NYSEArca:RJA ) are exchange-traded notes designed to track the return of a specific underlying market measure. ELEMENTS provide convenient access to markets and strategies that may not be readily available to individual investors. After their initial offering, ELEMENTS can be bought and sold through a broker or financial advisor on a U.S. securities exchange. The index represents the value of a basket of 20 agricultural commodity futures contracts.
iPath Bloomberg Agriculture SubIndex Total Return ETN ( NYSEArca:JJA ) are designed to provide exposure to the Bloomberg Agriculture Subindex Total ReturnSM (the "Index"). The ETNs are riskier than ordinary unsecured debt securities and have no principal protection. The ETNs are unsecured debt obligations of the issuer, Barclays Bank PLC, and are not, either directly or indirectly, an obligation of or guaranteed by any third party. Any payment to be made on the ETNs, including any payment at maturity or upon redemption, depends on the ability of Barclays Bank PLC to satisfy its obligations as they come due. An investment in the ETNs involves significant risks, including possible loss of principal, and may not be suitable for all investors. The Index reflects the returns that are potentially available through an unleveraged investment in the futures contracts on agriculture commodities. The Index is currently composed of seven futures contracts on agricultural commodities which are included in the Bloomberg Commodity Index Total ReturnSM.
iPath Bloomberg Coffee Sub-Index Total Return ETN ( NYSEArca:JO ) are designed to provide exposure to the Bloomberg Coffee Subindex Total ReturnSM (the "Index"). The ETNs are riskier than ordinary unsecured debt securities and have no principal protection. The ETNs are unsecured debt obligations of the issuer, Barclays Bank PLC, and are not, either directly or indirectly, an obligation of or guaranteed by any third party. Any payment to be made on the ETNs, including any payment at maturity or upon redemption, depends on the ability of Barclays Bank PLC to satisfy its obligations as they come due. An investment in the ETNs involves significant risks, including possible loss of principal, and may not be suitable for all investors. The Index reflects the returns that are potentially available through an unleveraged investment in the futures contracts on coffee. The Index currently consists of one futures contract on the commodity of coffee which is included in the Bloomberg Commodity Index Total ReturnSM.
iShares Global Agriculture Index ETF ( TSX:COW.TO ) seeks to replicate, net of expenses, the MFC Global Agriculture Index. The index that seeks to provide long-term capital appreciation by investing in equities and equity-related securities of companies involved in the agricultural sector.
Market Vectors Agribusiness ETF ( NYSEArca:MOO ) seeks to replicate as closely as possible, before fees and expenses, the price and yield performance of the Market Vectors® Global Agribusiness Index. The fund normally invests at least 80% of its total assets in securities that comprise the fund's benchmark index. The Agribusiness Index is comprised of equity securities of companies that generate at least 50% of their revenues from: (i) agri-chemicals and fertilizers, seeds and traits, (ii) farm/irrigation equipment and farm machinery and/or (iii) agricultural products, aquaculture and fishing, livestocks, plantations and trading of agricultural products. It is non-diversified.
PowerShares DB Agriculture Dble Long ETN ( NYSE Arca: DAG ) seeks to replicate as closely as possible, before fees and expenses, the price and yield performance of the Deutsche Bank Liquid Commodity index - Optimum Yield Agriculture. The fund is a senior unsecured obligation that allows investors to take a leveraged view on the performance of the agriculture sector. The index is composed of roughly equal percentages of corn, wheat, soybean, and sugar futures contracts.
PowerShares DB Agriculture Fund ( NYSEArca:DBA ) seeks to track the price and yield performance, before fees and expenses, of the Deutsche Bank Liquid Commodity Index - Optimum Yield Agriculture Excess Return. The index is a rules-based index composed of futures contracts on some of the most liquid and widely traded agricultural commodities - corn, wheat, soy beans and sugar. The index is intended to reflect the performance of the agricultural sector
Teucrium Corn Fund ETV ( NYSEArca:CORN ) provides investors unleveraged direct exposure to corn without the need for a futures account. The Teucrium Corn Fund was also designed to reduce the effects of backwardation and contango. The investment objective of the Fund is to have the daily changes in percentage terms of the Shares' Net Asset Value ("NAV") reflect the daily changes in percentage terms of a weighted average of the closing settlement prices for three futures contracts for corn ("Corn Futures Contracts") that are traded on the Chicago Board of Trade ("CBOT"), specifically (1) the second-to-expire CBOT Corn Futures Contract, weighted 35%, (2) the third-to-expire CBOT Corn Futures Contract, weighted 30%, and (3) the CBOT Corn Futures Contract expiring in the December following the expiration month of the third- to-expire contract, weighted 35%, less the Fund's expenses. Teucrium Corn Fund is a commodity pool that issues Shares that may be purchased and sold on the NYSE Arca.
The Defiance Next Gen Food and Agriculture ETF ( NYSE: DIET ) Defiance ETFs is a low-cost* thematic ETF provider focusing on the Next Generation of investors. The DIET ETF provides exposure to companies that are focused on technologies like alternative plant-based sources of meat, such as Beyond Meat (BYND), seed modification, sustainable farming and irrigation techniques.
Our site does not give specific recommendations and encourages investors to complete their own due diligence. Our lists are compiled from internal and external research sources. Our lists are to be used  only as a partial source of due diligence.
