AI Eye Episode 378: AWS (NasdaqGS: $AMZN) Selected as Preferred Cloud Provider by IHS Markit (NYSE: $INFO) and FICO  (NYSE: $FICO) Has Been Awarded 13 New Fraud / AI Patents
Point Roberts, WA and Vancouver, BC - June 29, 2020 (Investorideas.com Newswire) Investorideas.com ( www.investorideas.com ), a global investor news source covering Artificial Intelligence (AI) brings you today's edition of The AI Eye - watching stock news, deal tracker and advancements in artificial intelligence.
AI Eye Episode 378: AWS (NasdaqGS: $AMZN) Selected as Preferred Cloud Provider by IHS Markit (NYSE: $INFO) and FICO (NYSE: $FICO) Has Been Awarded 13 New Fraud/AI Patents
Today's Column - The AI Eye - Watching stock news, deal tracker and advancements in artificial intelligence
Amazon Web Services (AWS), a subsidiary of Amazon ( NasdaqGS:AMZN ), has been selected as the preferred cloud infrastructure provider by IHS Markit Ltd. ( NYSE:INFO ). The latter, described as a "global market intelligence leader," is going to be "moving the majority of its data processing infrastructure, corporate platforms, and end user applications and services out of its data centers to AWS to accelerate innovation and improve resiliency." Mike Clayville, Vice President, Worldwide Commercial Sales at AWS, explained:
"The breadth and depth of AWS's portfolio, including our machine learning and analytics services, will enable IHS Markit to gain greater insights from data and expand their global reach by serving more clients worldwide. We look forward to helping IHS Markit on their digital transformation journey in the cloud as they innovate new services to further their industry leadership."
Fair Isaac Corporation ( NYSE:FICO ) has been awarded 13 new patents related to fraud, artificial intelligence, and decision management, bringing its total US and foreign patents held to 198. One such newly-awarded patent, called Adaptive Fraud Detection features "adaptive technology," that "overlays core machine learning technology to adjust to near-term fraud and non-fraud activity occurring between model retrains." According to the press release, "this technology is a critical component of machine learning models within the FICO® Falcon® Platform." Scott Zoldi, chief analytics officer, FICO, commented:
"We are innovators pushing the envelope of analytics. Being at the forefront of AI and intelligent decision automation is not only the key to our success but that of our customers."
A report from Fortune Business Insights finds that the global market for AI-based Fever Detection Cameras is expected to grow from $1.28 billion in 2020 to $2.19 billion by 2027, with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 8 percent in the forecast period. An excerpt from the report summary outlines factors driving the market:
The rapid spread of coronavirus along with the unavailability of vaccine is putting immense stress on the global health system. To reduce this stress to some extent, the tech companies have come up with AI-enabled fever detection cameras as fever is the earliest symptom of COVID-19. These cameras are designed to provide real-time updates of a person's body temperature. Unlike the conventional thermal cameras, AI-powered fever cameras can detect a person within the crowd with high accuracy of temperature screening, sending an immediate alert automatically to the officials.
About Investorideas.com - News that Inspires Big Investing Ideas Investorideas.com is a recognized news source publishing third party news, research and original financial content. Learn about investing in stocks and sector trends with our news alerts, articles, podcasts and videos, looking at cannabis, crypto, AI and IoT, mining, sports biotech, water, renewable energy and more. Investor Idea's original branded content includes the following podcasts and columns: Crypto Corner , Play by Play sports and stock news column, Investor Ideas Potcasts Cannabis News and Stocks on the Move podcast and column, Cleantech and Climate Change , Exploring Mining the AI Eye .
The Investorideas.com podcasts are also available on iTunes, Spotify, Tunein, Stitcher, Spreaker.com, iHeartRadio and Google Play Music.
Visit the Podcast page at Investorideas.com:
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
The AI Eye - Watching stock news, deal tracker and  advancements in artificial intelligence is an original content brand of Investorideas.com
