The agriculture sector is struggling in wake of a trade    war between the two largest economies.
Tariffs have sent agricultural prices lower and halted    shipments from the US.
American agriculture exports are expected to drop by    $1.9 billion this year, according to new estimates from the    USDA chief economist.
Seven months into a trade war  between Washington and Beijing, the US agriculture sector is in  jeopardy.
Tit-for-tat tariffs between the  largest economies have lowered commodity prices and handed market  share over to other countries. American farm exports are expected  to drop by $1.9 billion during the 2019 fiscal year, according to Department of Agriculture chief  economist Robert Johansson.
Businesses across the country,  especially within the farming sector, have warned of losses  resulting from trade barriers. Here are a few of them:
With farms putting investments on  hold in wake of tariffs, Deere & Co. warned this month that the trade war may sting the  company if it continues. Reporting its first-quarter earnings,  the largest tractor manufacturer in the world cut the profit  estimate for its agriculture division.
"Our results were hurt by higher  costs for raw materials and logistics as well by customer  concerns over tariffs and trade policies," chairman and chief  executive Samuel Allen said following the results. "These latter  issues have weighed on market sentiment and caused farmers to  become more cautious about making major purchases."
While Bayer could potentially  benefit from rearranged trade flows - for example, if farmers  switch from soy to corn - the company has said it would be harder  to make business plans amid the trade spat between Washington and  Beijing. Such uncertainty can weigh heavily on investment plans.
"The big unknown next year will  be how U.S. farmers react to the Chinese-U.S. trade war," Liam  Condon, the head of Bayer's crop science division, told Reuters in September.
This month, Bunge reported a $125  million loss on the back of uncertainty related to the tariffs.  The company had bet on rising premiums for Brazilian beans, which  rose and then fell dramatically in value following the start of  the trade war.
"They'll do whatever else they have to do not to buy US  soybeans," Soren Schroder, chief executive of the company, said  of China in August, according to the Financial Times . "The export hole that the  Chinese leave in the US will be bigger than anyone else can  really replenish."
The Alma-based  Morning Sun reported last year that soybean plants in  Michigan were feeling the impact of tariffs. At Michigan  Agricultural Commodities, near-decade low prices had limited  sales and exports.
"That is a hindrance to the  company we ship to for export," Adam Geers, a facility manager in  Breckenridge, told the Sun in September. "We're not exporting  beans as a result of the tariff, to my knowledge."
