CHICAGO, April 28, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- According to the new market research report "Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture Market by Technology (Machine Learning, Computer Vision, and Predictive Analytics), Offering (Software, Hardware, AI-as-a-Service, and Services), Application, and Geography - Global Forecast to 2026", published by MarketsandMarkets™, the Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture Market is estimated to be USD 1.0 billion in 2020 and is projected to reach USD 4.0 billion by 2026, at a CAGR of 25.5% between 2020 and 2026. The market growth is driven by the increasing implementation of data generation through sensors and aerial images for crops, increasing crop productivity through deep-learning technology, and government support for the adoption of modern agricultural techniques.
The market for drone analytics is expected to grow at the highest rate due to its extensive use for diagnosing and mapping to evaluate crop health and to make real-time decisions. Favorable government mandates for the use of drones in agriculture are also expected to fuel the growth of the drone analytics market. Increasing awareness among farm owners regarding the advantages associated with AI technology is expected to further fuel the growth of the AI in agriculture market.
The increasing use of computer vision technology for agriculture applications, such as plant image recognition and continuous plant health monitoring and analysis, is one of the major factors contributing to the growth of the computer vision segment. The other factors include higher adoption of robots and drones in agriculture farms and increasing demand for improved crop yield due to the rising population. Computer vision allows farmers and agribusinesses alike to make better decisions in real-time.
The AI in agriculture market in Asia Pacific is expected to witness the highest growth during the forecast period. The wide-scale adoption of AI technologies in agriculture farms is the key factor supporting the growth of the market in this region. AI is increasingly applied in the agriculture sector in developing countries, such as India and China. The increasing adoption of deep learning and computer vision algorithm for agriculture applications is also expected to fuel the growth of the AI in agriculture market in the Asia Pacific region.
International Business Machines Corp. (IBM) (US), Deere & Company (John Deere) (US), Microsoft Corporation (Microsoft) (US), Farmers Edge Inc. (Farmers Edge) (Canada), The Climate Corporation (Climate Corp.) (US), ec2ce (ec2ce) (Spain), Descartes Labs, Inc. (Descartes Labs) (US), AgEagle Aerial Systems (AgEagle) (US), and aWhere Inc. (aWhere) (US) are the prominent players in the AI in agriculture market.
Artificial Intelligence Market by Offering (Hardware, Software, Services), Technology (Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, Context-Aware Computing, Computer Vision), End-User Industry, and Geography - Global Forecast to 2025
Artificial Intelligence in Manufacturing Market by Offering (Hardware, Software, and Services), Technology (Machine Learning, Computer Vision, Context-Aware Computing, and NLP), Application, Industry, and Geography - Global Forecast to 2025
MarketsandMarkets™ provides quantified B2B research on 30,000 high growth niche opportunities/threats which will impact 70% to 80% of worldwide companies' revenues. Currently servicing 7500 customers worldwide including 80% of global Fortune 1000 companies as clients. Almost 75,000 top officers across eight industries worldwide approach MarketsandMarkets™ for their painpoints around revenues decisions.
Our 850 fulltime analyst and SMEs at MarketsandMarkets™ are tracking global high growth markets following the "Growth Engagement Model – GEM". The GEM aims at proactive collaboration with the clients to identify new opportunities, identify most important customers, write "Attack, avoid and defend" strategies, identify sources of incremental revenues for both the company and its competitors. MarketsandMarkets™ now coming up with 1,500 MicroQuadrants (Positioning top players across leaders, emerging companies, innovators, strategic players) annually in high growth emerging segments. MarketsandMarkets™ is determined to benefit more than 10,000 companies this year for their revenue planning and help them take their innovations/disruptions early to the market by providing them research ahead of the curve.
MarketsandMarkets's flagship competitive intelligence and market research platform, "Knowledge Store" connects over 200,000 markets and entire value chains for deeper understanding of the unmet insights along with market sizing and forecasts of niche markets.
