Govt kicks off innovation challenge to boost made in India apps; cash rewards of up to Rs 20 lakh also up for grabs
Meanwhile, during a plenary session on value addition and storage management, experts said that due to increasing awareness among farmers to grow processed varieties of potatoes, India is gradually emerging as a leading exporter of frozen potato food items in Asia.
Till 2007, India was importer of frozen potato food items including that of French fries, but systematic development of potato value chain right from farming to post harvest handling, India became exporter in the segment by 2015 and exported around 5,000 MT, said Haresh Karamchandani, CEO of Gujarat-based HyFun Foods during panel discussion, adding that since then, India’s export is continuously increasing and by the end of 2019, it had reached up to 30,000 MT.
According to him, the exports would further increase due to lower transit time within Asia, lower capital employment by customer, global quality standards and consistency in price.
Not only exports but domestic demand for frozen potato food items is also augmenting and reached around 75,000 MT.
Domestic demand would further increase due to urbanisation, addition of more number of nuclear families and working women and increase in disposable income among families, he added. ITC ’s chief executive for Fresh F&V & Frozen business, Sachin Madan claimed that market size of potato and its value chain in India has exceeded `50,000 crore and still has the potential to go farther.
“For the purpose, we need to look beyond Gujarat. Already, Gujarat is having very good infrastructure for potato value chain, but states like Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal also need to come up. Lady Rosetta variety of seed has changed the fortune of Gujarat’s farmers, such revolution needs to take place in other major potato growing states to encourage value addition in potato crop,” said Madan.
Gujarat chief minister Vijay Rupani claimed that due to efforts of his government cold storage capacity of Gujarat has reached 23 lakh MT which is highest in the country.
Do you know What is Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) , Finance Bill , Fiscal Policy in India , Expenditure Budget , Customs Duty ? FE Knowledge Desk explains each of these and more in detail at Financial Express Explained . Also get Live BSE/NSE Stock Prices , latest NAV of Mutual Funds , Best equity funds , Top Gainers , Top Losers on Financial Express . Don’t forget to try our free Income Tax Calculator tool.
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
