The Budget may also spell out plans to form state-level rural banks by way of amalgamating RRBs in states where multiple entities exist.
Kolkata: The Centre is looking to infuse fresh capital into regional rural banks (RRB) to help them meet the minimum capital requirement of 9 per cent and this may find a mention in the Union Budget on February 1, people close to the development said.
The size of the capital infusion could be in the range of Rs 10,000-15,000 crore, which would be spread over a span of five years. Capital infusion in RRBs assumes importance as the government is finding ways to boost credit to the farm sector. The government may also put the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (Nabard) at the centre of its effort to address rural distress.
The Budget may also spell out plans to form state-level rural banks by way of amalgamating RRBs in states where multiple entities exist.
According to documents assessed by ET, a proposal to provide the central government’s share of recapitalisation assistance to RRBs has been under “active consideration of the government and is expected to be approved during the current financial year.”
As per central bank guidelines, it is mandatory for RRBs to meet regulatory requirement of capital to risk weighted assets ratio (CRAR) of 9 per cent . On the basis of the CRAR position of RRBs, as on March 31 of every year, Nabard identifies RRBs that require recapitalization assistance to maintain CRAR of 9 per cent .
There are 45 RRBs at present. Several of them have come under stress due to the new pension burden. RRB employees won a protracted legal battle in the Supreme Court in 2018 for 30,000-odd retirees, who are now receiving pension on a par with nationalised bank pensioners with effect from April 2018.
Nabard, at the behest of the government, has carried out an exercise to assess the financial impact of the pension burden on the financial position of RRBs as on March 31, 2019 and also assessed the required capital requirement for them over a period of five years, taking the amortisation of pension liability into account.
The central government has also written to some state governments where RRBs are financially weak to contribute 15 per cent of the capital requirement as per the holding structure. RRBs are jointly owned by the Government of India , the respective state government and sponsor banks in the proportion of 50 per cent ,15 per cent and 35 per cent , respectively.
In a communication to the West Bengal government dated November 25, 2019, the central government had said that Bangiya Gramin Vikash Bank , sponsored by United Bank of India , would need a total Rs 1,281 crore of capital over a fiveyear period, including Rs 422.5 crore proposed for 2019-20.
“The recapitalisation assistance estimated for 2020-21 to 2023-24 may change based on the financial results of RRBs in subsequent years,” the note said.
