Birketts has advised industry leading silage storage company, ARK Agriculture Limited (ARK), on the acquisition of shares in international agricultural specialist Thomas & Fontaine Ltd, which is the company behind the patented Secure Cover product line, for an undisclosed amount.
This acquisition is set to boost ARK's hold over the market, opening up further opportunities in the UK and overseas.
Founded in 1990, Shropshire based Thomas & Fontaine Ltd develops and manufactures market leading silage products, including high-quality protective netting. It is intended that ARK’s acquisition of shares in Thomas & Fontaine Ltd will raise their profile in the anaerobic digestion sector.
Active since 2011, Colchester based ARK is part of the prestigious Milbank Group. The Milbank Group contains an array of companies specialising in fibreglass, mobile crane hire and pre-cast concrete, with ARK focusing on the provision of sloping walled silage clamps, silage sheets and accessories. This deal is expected to bolster ARK’s presence in the dairy and livestock sector.
Francis Auchincloss, Managing Director of ARK, commented: “This acquisition caps an exciting period of growth for ARK. Milbank were once again struck by Birketts’ efficiency and impressed with their sound commercial knowledge, pragmatic approach and straightforward attitude. Their helpful and supportive client service was exceptional.”
Leading Partner James Allen, concluded: “Birketts were pleased to be able to support ARK in this acquisition which provides an excellent opportunity for them to develop their overseas markets further. We wish them every success with their plans for expansion.”
Birketts is a top 100 UK law firm with offices in Cambridge, Chelmsford, Ipswich and Norwich.  Our lawyers deliver a full range of expert legal advice on corporate and commercial, commercial property, dispute resolution and private client issues. Our clients trust us to achieve a solution that is right for them however difficult or challenging the circumstances.
