A key outcome of the Strike Two summit was the establishment of the Blockchain for agri-food community, supported financially by CTA and managed by FairFood, a Netherlands-based NGO
The Strike Two summit, a series of events showcasing digital innovations for the food system, has given CTA and partners a launchpad to demonstrate the transformative potential of blockchain for small-scale agriculture, and establish a growing global community that aims to accelerate its adoption.
Blockchain – a digital ledger providing data storage and exchange  through a secure, decentralised platform – has been widely acknowledged  as a promising tool for safe and transparent inter-organisational  information sharing. By cutting out intermediaries and  automating agreements, blockchain technology offers novel ways of smart  supply chain management. This has particular potential for the agri-food  sector, where supply chains are often long and complex, by enhancing  transparency, traceability and trust. This, in turn, can resolve issues  of provenance and quality, opening up new, premium markets to  smallholder farmers.
However, access to and knowledge of  blockchain technology is limited, especially in agriculture in Africa,  Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries. Through the project Promoting blockchain to increase innovation and business performance in the agri-food sector ,  CTA aims to demonstrate the development, testing and implementation of  blockchain technology, as part of its ongoing work in agribusiness, ICT  entrepreneurship and innovation. More specifically, the project, which  runs from April 2018 to May 2020, seeks to improve  understanding of ­– and provide evidence for – the use of blockchain in  agriculture across the ACP, building on the promising results that the  technology has exhibited so far.
The realisation of these goals took an important step forward with the organisation of the Strike Two summit ,  a series of three events held between September 2019 and February 2020,  designed to accelerate adoption of digital innovations that will make  the food system more circular and sustainable. “It was a unique grouping  of participants”, says Chris Addison, Senior Programme Coordinator at  CTA, which is a partner of Strike Two. “On the industry side, The New Fork ,  which initiated the summit, was a driving force in engaging leading  technical players such as IBM, consulting firms Accenture and Deloitte,  financial institutions, agri buyers through to consumer companies such  as Ahold Delhaize”, he continues. The Dutch Ministry of Agriculture also  played an active role in the events, along with farmer organisations  and CTA-supported companies from the ACP. The presence of the latter  provided an opportunity to showcase blockchain concepts for smallholder  farmers and to link ACP and European experiences.
Over the course of the three events, which brought together more than 500 people, the summit addressed consumer trust , farm income and chain management .  One of the main objectives was to gain insight into what is happening  in blockchain right now and to identify and make sense of some of the  issues.
Marieke de Ruyter de Wildt, founder of The New Fork,  continues: “If you take consumer trust – the theme of the first event  –one in ten people falls ill because of what they eat, and less than one  third of consumers truly trust their food. We explored how new  technologies can improve food safety, food quality and circularity.  Using business canvasses that also took into account social,  environmental and sustainable development dimensions, we built  collective scenarios of what these products could look like and created  road maps identifying who and what was needed to get there.”
A key outcome of the summit was the establishment of the Blockchain for Agri-food community . Supported financially by CTA and managed by FairFood ,  a Netherlands-based NGO, the community brings together agripreneurs,  researchers, tech developers, policymakers and other actors in the  agri-food sector. “The summit brought together a diverse array of  stakeholders with different backgrounds, expertise and networks. We  established the community with the aim of sharing blockchain learnings  with these and other stakeholders, facilitating online interaction and  connecting the right people to actually make things happen and start  implementing proven solutions, instead of inventing new ones,” says  Rafael da Costa Guimaraes, manager of the community.
The blockchain community, as well as its associated articles, case studies, info sheets and webinars, are free and open to all. Membership of the community is  being expanded via ‘Dgroups’, a platform for groups and communities in  international development. When this is completed, members will be able  to sign up and interact with the platform through email, making it  simple and convenient to use, including for low-bandwidth members in the  Global South.
Further to partnering in the summit and the blockchain community, CTA co-funded AgriFoodTrust ,  a testing and learning platform for digital trust and transparency  technologies. “Like CTA, we are convinced that blockchain has the potential to  become the big game-changer for smallholder agriculture in low and  middle income countries,” explains Gideon Kruseman, Foresight and  Ex-Ante Research Leader at CIMMYT ,  which hosts the platform. “But if you look at where blockchain is  mostly being used in the agri-food sector, it is in relatively short and  well-defined value chains, usually for high-value commodities. And even  then, there are a number of challenges such as connectivity and  technical support. So, using blockchain to transform food systems in our  target geographies is not going to be easy,” Kruseman explains.
To  address the challenge of applying blockchain in low- and middle-income  countries, CTA has provided the AgriFoodTrust platform with a database  of 60 use cases of blockchain technologies. “By subjecting these use  cases to rigorous scientific testing, we will build a knowledge base of  what works, what doesn’t work and why,” Kruseman continues. As the  platform matures, it aims to attract additional use cases from other  actors in dynamic, complex agri-food systems as well as funding from  agencies interested in investing in digital trust and transparency  technologies.
“CIMMYT will carry out some initial investigation,  but through the platform, will also broker partnerships with other  research and academic organisations,” says Kruseman. With a growing body  of evidence around blockchain, such partnerships are expected to grow,  further accelerating the adoption and benefits of the technology in  agriculture.
