Shifting payment of dividend distribution tax (DDT) from companies to investors, full tax benefit to sovereign funds investing in infra projects and a thrust on rural consumption failed to enthuse markets.
ICICI Securities projects how Sensex stocks may perform over the next one year:
Revitalising its commitment towards Rs 102 lakh crore National Infrastructure Plan (NIP), the government has increased capital expenditure allocation by 18% to Rs 4.12 lakh crore for FY21, which is likely to create tendering opportunities for L&T. A push for rural infra bodes well.
Allocation of Rs 1.8 lakh crore towards agriculture and allied activities to support under-penetrated farm mechanisation in India. M&M as domestic market leader in tractors and other farm equipment segment to beneﬁ t. Higher customs duty on EVs is a ‘positive’ for its EV segment.
Rise in discretionary income for taxpayers who migrate to the new tax regime is a positive for Maruti. However, given the lacklustre new product line-up and limited operating leverage, we hold a ‘negative’ view on the company. It trades at expensive valuations of 25x P/E on FY22E.
There was no budget announcement with a direct impact on Nestle. A higher disposable income in the hands of tax payers who opt for the new personal tax regime may have an indirect positive effect. We have a ‘neutral’ view on the stock, given the rich valuations.
The government continues to focus on augmenting renewable capacity as it allocated Rs 22,000 crore for the sector, while the budget remained ‘neutral’ for thermal power generation companies such as NTPC. A rising thrust on non-fossil energy is a long-term negative for the company.
No major impact of the budget on ONGC. The budget has increased allocation of oil subsidies to Rs 40,000 crore from last year’s Rs 33,000 crore. This may offer some relief amid rising crude oil prices. We remain ‘neutral’ on the stock due to lower production growth.
To attract investments in the power sector, the Union budget proposed extension of concessional corporate tax rate of 15% to new domestic companies engages in the generation of electricity. This is only marginally ‘positive’ for the largest transmission company.
Abloshing dividend distribution tax may result in promoter led high-paying dividend companies to increase share buyback amount before the end of the current ﬁ scal year to save tax outgo for the promoters. RIL paid dividend of Rs 3,554 crore in FY19.
Extension of additional tax deduction on affordable home loan and introduction of scheme to provide guarantee to MSME credit will enable the bank to grow its advances. Higher agriculture credit target to result in higher share to SBI, thereby leading to probability on future NPA.
Higher focus on rural and overall infrastructure augurs well for the steel sector, which is core to economic development. This may lead to higher domestic steel demand thereby improving volume of the company amid volatile price scenario following the spread of coronavirus.
The Budget proposed to abolish the dividend distribution tax. This may prompt TCS to either increase dividend payout or to retain the proﬁ t and improve cash ﬂ ow. In FY19, it paid `13,148 crore in dividend and Rs 16,000 through share buyback.
The budget was more or less silent on the pharma sector. A thrust on healthcare and well-being will be an indirect advantage. We have a ‘neutral’ view on the stock due to slow ramp-up in the US specialty portfolio and whistleblower overhang.
Allocation for roads and highways is increased by 10% to Rs 91,823 crore. In addition, the budget has given impetus to rural income and affordable homes This should spur cement demand, a positive for UltraTech.
There was no budget announcement impacting Titan. Despite the challenging scenario for the jewellery sector, Titan, with its strong brand and robust store network, displayed resilience with sustained market share gain.
No major proposal for IT sector. The abolition of dividend distribution tax may prompt the IT ﬁ rm to revise its dividend policy. It had paid Rs 1,641 crore of dividend in FY18 and announced buyback of Rs 1,956 crore in 2019.
There is no direct budget impact. But a thrust to increase agri expenditure in FY21 estimates by around 30% from the revised FY20 BE may lead to a spurt in rural income. This may help drive demand for paint. Asian Paints commands over 50% stake in the decorative paints segment.
Axis Bank, with a focus on increasing the retail book, is poised to beneﬁ t from extension of additional tax deduction on affordable home loans. Introduction of ascheme to provide guarantee in lieu of subordinate debt to MSMEs will enable growth in advances while maintaining asset quality.
High allocation towards rural economy, commitment to double farmer incomes by 2022 and increased discretionary income in the hands of taxpayers via a new tax regime to beneﬁ t Bajaj Auto. A push for digital refund of duties would support the company’s export revenue.
The proposal to let NBFCs extend invoice ﬁ nancing to MSMEs through TReDS bodes well for business growth. Extension of additional tax deduction on affordable home loans and introduction of ascheme to provide guarantee in lieu of subordinate debt to MSMEs is another positive.
There was no budget announcement impacting Airtel. Fundamentally, it is our top telecom pick, given the relatively stronger retention of its revenue market share and comfortable leverage. The recent fund raising assures its survival with astronger future, given the recent tariff hike.
Abolishment of DDT may either increase dividend payout or result in higher cash ﬂ ow for the company. Alternatively, the management may push for share buybacks. Apart from that, the budget did not have any major impact on the country’s third-largest software exporter.
HDFC will beneﬁ t from the extension of additional deduction of `1,50,000 for affordable home loans. Abolition of exemption under thenew (optional) tax regime to put pressure on business growth of subsidiary engaged in life & general insurance and AMC.
Allocation of `2.8 lakh crore for the agriculture, irrigation and related sectors is expected to boost rural income. This supports HDFC Bank’s increasing focus in rural areas and will have a long-term effect on the business growth. The stock has a buy recommendation.
Hero Motocorp has the highest dividend payout in the domestic automobile OEM space and tends to beneﬁ t from abolition of dividenddistribution tax. Moreover, increase in allocation towards rural infrastructure spend and custom duty on SKD/CKD Electric 2-W is an added advantage.
Extension of tax beneﬁ t on affordable home loans will enable the bank to grow its home loan portfolio, which is around 22% of the loan book. Abolition of exemption underthenew (optional) tax regime to put pressure on business growth of subsidiary engaged in life insurance.
The Budget proposes to increase NCCD (National Calamity Contingency Duty) on cigarettes from `0.40 to `0.50 per stick. This warrants a price increase of 4-8%. We believe the company would get the opportunity to take a price hike, which was absent for the past two years.
The country's second-largest software exporter is a consistent dividend payer. Therefore, the removal of dividend distribution tax may help the company to increase shareholder payout. It had paid `11,200 crore in dividend and `8,260 crore in share buyback in FY19.
The government has increased the budget for agricultural spend by 30% from the revised budget estimate of FY20. Schemes like PM Kisaan, crop insurance, along with Swachh Bharat, is likely to revive growth for FMCG companies. Rural sales accounts for more than 40% for HUL.
The bank's home loan and rural loan portfolio contributes nearly 50% and over 14% to the retail segment respectively. Hence, it will beneﬁ t from the push for affordable housing and rural income growth. Its life insurance subsidiary may be impacted by the new optional personal tax regime.
Abolition of exemption in thenew tax regime to impact business growth of companies engaged in life and general insurance. IndusInd is relatively better placed with no direct engagement in insurance. A push for affordable housing may not help much given the lower exposure to mortgage loans.
