Initiatives on crop diversification and another on financial assistance to create FPOs may be announced.
The agriculture ministry will fund, handhold, train, ensure easy credit and provide other support to FPOs to make them viable. The government will also provide them with technological intervention for better output.
ET was the first to report on October 11 about the Rs 7,000-crore FPO programme – a promise made by finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman in the previous budget – where the government is expected to help nurture 10,000 such FPOs.
These FPOs — organised groups of small and marginal farmers — will help farmers improve their incomes through better market access and collective bargaining power.
The agriculture ministry will fund, handhold, train, ensure easy credit and provide other support to FPOs to make them viable. The government will also provide them with technological intervention for better output. “The main challenge before FPOs is availability of credit as banks don’t give them loans owing to unsecured returns,” a government official said. “With government’s equity, FPOs will be able to have easy access to credit backed by sovereign guarantee. This will help FPOs expand their operations.”
The FPOs will run as business units and the profits they generate will be shared between member-farmers. Like a corporate body, these FPOs will also have capacity-building programmes to enhance their competitiveness.
The government may also roll out a Rs 500-600 crore crop diversification programme to promote crops other than water guzzling paddy in Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh, where the water table is depleting due to overexploitation of ground water.
The programme is aimed at improving soil health and to maintain equilibrium in the agri-ecosystem.
In the last kharif season, Haryana had launched a pilot project to divert 50,000 hectares from cultivation of paddy to maize and pulses. It had provided incentives to farmers by giving free seeds, free insurance and financial assistance of Rs 2,000 its infrastructure to make its network per acre for the same.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
