Budget 2020 was disappointing for lacking vision; but fiscal, taxation measures welcome: EAC-PM member Ashima Goyal
The Budget expectations from the pharma sector include “job creation initiatives through spending on agriculture, infra projects and incentives for rural India. These will lead to employment, demand generation and aid rural recovery. These may prove positive for the consumer companies with higher rural sales mix such as Hindustan Unilever , Dabur India , Colgate-Palmolive India , Marico and Emami ,” Nirmal Bang said
While, if the investors are looking to buy stocks during Budget run-up then “High dividend-yielding stocks will be a good bet before the Budget since any tweaks in the personal tax space will improve chances for these stocks to soar,” Nirali Shah, Senior Stock Analyst, Samco Securities said. “ Coal India , Vedanta , ONGC , Oil India should be considered before the Budget from a dividend yield perspective,” Nirali Shah recommended.
Finance ministry had announced Rs 25,000 crore special window for affordable and middle-income group housing segment. “Budget is likely to reiterate further provision and structure this fund will help the stuck projects to come out of the wood,” Pritam Deuskar, Fund Manager, Bonanza Portfolio Ltd said. The brokerage has recommended Kolte-Patil Developer (Stop loss- Rs 229, Target price- Rs 320), LIC Housing Finance (Stop loss- Rs 408, Target price- Rs 580) and AAVAS Financiers (Stop loss- Rs 1,900, Target price- Rs 2,250).
There are high chances that the government will announce measures or fund allocation to provide support to infrastructure, power and agriculture sectors. “Investors can look at Coromandel International , Godrej Agrovet , Rallis India , L&T, KEC international , Tata Power, PGCIL,” Ajit Mishra, VP – Research, Religare Broking Ltd said.
Do you know What is Finance Bill , Short Term Capital Gains Tax , Fiscal Policy in India , Section 80C of Income Tax Act 1961 , Expenditure Budget ? FE Knowledge Desk explains each of these and more in detail at Financial Express Explained . Also get Live BSE/NSE Stock Prices , latest NAV of Mutual Funds , Best equity funds , Top Gainers , Top Losers on Financial Express . Don’t forget to try our free Income Tax Calculator tool.
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
