As the coronavirus pandemic shutters restaurants and delays market openings, Colorado farmers are at risk of losing a lot of revenue—but you can help.
For the past several weeks, farmers across the Front Range have been seeding cool-weather crops, hiring seasonal workers, repairing equipment, and much more to prepare for the growing season ahead. But as farmers’ markets delay openings by at least a month and restaurants close to on-site dining in compliance with the state’s effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, dozens of Colorado producers are at risk of losing weeks worth of income.
At this time, Boulder County Farmers Markets (BCFM), a nonprofit that operates four producer-only markets across Boulder, Longmont, Lafayette, and Denver, has delayed the opening of its Boulder and Longmont markets from April 4 to May 2, and doesn’t plan to open the Denver and Lafayette markets until May 16 and June 4, respectively. “The delay will hit us all pretty hard,” says Josh Olsen, a farm-to-table instructor at Acres at Warren Tech in Jefferson County. “If we can get this turned around by mid-May, opening the markets back up would be ideal, with the hopes that markets can finish out the season strong. September through the end of the season are the biggest months for sales anyway.”
In addition to farmers’ markets, many producers rely heavily on sales to area restaurants as a significant portion of their revenue. Wyatt Barnes, owner of Red Wagon Farm in Longmont, sells about one-third of what he grows to restaurants. He’s hired five fewer seasonal employees in response to the novel coronavirus, as he doesn’t expect restaurant sales to pick up until July or August.
Luckily, many farms offer community-supported agriculture (CSA) shares to bring in cash flow at the beginning of the season. How it works: Shareholders pay farmers a lump sum to cover the cost of produce throughout an entire growing season, which can last anywhere from 15 to 25 weeks in Colorado. In return, CSA members receive a weekly share of fresh, seasonal produce. In some cases, shares may also include other products like eggs and meat, or farms may partner with other local companies to offer items such as flowers as add-ons. The practice acts as a form of crop insurance for those who work in an industry that relies heavily on the will of Mother Nature; while CSA members don’t get their money back if the farm is decimated by a flood or a bear eats half an acre of melons, the farmers are supported.
Not all farms offer CSA shares, though, and Brian Coppom, executive director of BCFM, is working with market vendors to offer alternative ways to distribute food to consumers while markets remain closed. “The impacts on the market this season will be interesting. As long as social distancing is the key to staying healthy and preventing transmission, it will affect our at-market activities,” says Coppom. “Our hearts go out to our chef partners and the many restaurants and hourly workers who are being devastated by this.”
In the meantime, here are 20 farms on the Front Range with available CSA shares this season:
Where: 2575 S. Linley Ct., Denver; delivery is available, along with farm stand sales (Mondays, June–October; 5-7 p.m.); paperkitefarm@gmail.com
