With U.S. slaughter rates down, pork and beef packer profit margins have improved.
Bernstein analyst Alexia Howard thinks now is the right time to buy stock in meat-processing giant Tyson Foods . She upgraded the stock to the equivalent of Buy from Hold Thursday morning, and increased her price target to $83 a share, up 38% from recent levels.
It is a bold call. The protein industry has had a rough go of it lately.
For starters, executives at chicken processor Pilgrim’s Pride (ticker: PPC) were indicted on price-fixing charges on Wednesday. The stock of the Tyson competitor dropped 12.4%, and Tyson shares fell 3.8% in sympathy. Tyson (TSN) is a also a large chicken processor, but wasn’t part of the legal complaint.
Even before that, the industry was struggling with the impacts from Covid-19 . Keeping plants open has been difficult, labor costs are rising, and the shift from restaurant to grocery sales has strained supply chains.
Tyson’s earnings , as a result, are expected to drop from about $5.46 a share in 2019 to $4.45 in 2020. Shares are down about 34% year to date, worse than comparable drops of the Dow Jones Industrial Average and S&P 500 .
But Howard points out some positives for the company.
In the short run, with U.S. slaughter rates down , pork and beef packer profit margins have improved. Less meat pushes up price and less processing means the glut of animals sitting at the front of the abattoir pushes input costs down.
“Although this could be offset by operational deleveraging and incremental Covid-related costs, the situation has improved from a few weeks ago,” Howard wrote.
Operational deleveraging means profit margins can get hurt by lower volumes. Fixed costs stay the same regardless of how much protein is processed.
Over the medium term, African swine fever , which has led to pork shortages in China, can continue to support global protein pricing. The global agriculture industry has been dealing with the fever for more than a year .
Howard’s call amounts to zigging while others are zagging. Tyson’s Buy rating ratio had fallen to about 55% before Thursday’s upgrade, in line with the average Buy-rating ratio for stocks in the Dow. As recently as February, more than 90% of analysts had rated Tyson shares Buy.
The average analyst target price is about $71 a share, about 14% below Howard’s target price.
Tyson shares were up 1.8% around 9 a.m. Eastern time. S&P 500 futures were down 0.7%.
Bernstein analyst Alexia Howard thinks now is the right time to buy stock in meat-processing giant Tyson Foods.
