Union Cabinet Briefing | Highlights: The Union Cabinet today approved major economic support measures for MSMEs, farmers, agricultural sector employees, and street vendors, in what the government claimed were ‘historic’ decisions. Among the decisions taken today, MSME definition was relaxed, and easier loans for street vendors and farmers were announced.
In PM Narendra Modi ’s economic package of Rs 21 lakh crore, the government kept Rs 1.63 lakh crore aside for the agriculture sector.
Union Cabinet Briefing | Highlights: The Union Cabinet today approved major economic support measures for MSMEs, farmers, agricultural sector employees and street vendors, in what the government claimed were ‘historic’ decisions. Among the decisions taken today, MSME definition was relaxed, and easier loans for street vendors and farmers were announced. Agriculture Minister Narendra Singh Tomar announced that the minimum support prices for 14 Kharif crops will be increased, in a measure to provide relief to India’s farmers. Eventually, the government has hiked MSP for sunflower seed to Rs 5,885/100 kg, jowar hybrid to Rs 2,620/100 kg, maize to Rs 1,850/100 kg, and tur to Rs 6,000/100 kg. This is the first cabinet briefing after the Modi government has announced to gradually lift the lockdown restrictions. In PM Narendra Modi’s economic package of Rs 21 lakh crore, the government kept Rs 1.63 lakh crore aside for the agriculture sector. Along with bringing major agriculture reforms, the government has amended the stringent Essential Commodities Act (ESA) to remove cereals, edible oil, oilseeds, pulses, onions, and potato from its purview. Also, a new law is to be framed to give farmers the option to choose the market where they want to sell their produce by removing inter-state trade barriers and providing e-trading of agriculture produce. However, even before the centre had announced the agro reforms, states like Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh had announce similar reforms to help the farmers of their respective states. UP CM Yogi Adityanath had announced that fruits and vegetables farmers in the state will not have to pay mandi fee for selling their produce and the mandi fee for 46 perishable fruits and vegetables were also waived off. Shivraj Singh Chouhan-led MP government also relieved the farmer by allowing them to sell their produce in a more competitive market.
Agriculture MinisterNarendra Singh Tomar announced that the minimum support prices for 14 kharif crops will be increased, in a measure to provide relief to India’s farmers.
Procurement of wheat and paddy has gone up despite concerns due to lockdown, says Agriculture Minister Narendra Singh Tomar.
Stressed MSME fund will invest up to 15% in equity of MSMEs with a strong track record of exports, GST filings, healthy turnover, says Nitin Gadkari.
The overall effect of joblessness due to coronavirus is yet to be established but the impact is significant. 100% industries of India are dependent on migrant labourers - Nitin Gadkari.
In an effort to provide support to MSMEs, the government said that it will buy stake in MSMEs with good ratings.
Govt hikes MSP for sunflower seed to Rs 5,885/100 kg, jowar hybrid to Rs 2,620/100 kg, maize to Rs 1,850/100 kg, and tur to Rs 6,000/100 kg.
Union Minister PrakashJavdekar announced MSP for Kharif crops to be 50-83% over cost.
Government launches PM SWAN Nidhi, Prime Minister Street Vendors Atma Nirbhar Nidhi scheme for street vendors.
Listing in the stock market will make MSMEs attract more funds from the market - Nitin Gadkari.
Govt announces Rs 10,000 crore funds for MSME to get listed in the stock market. Nitin Gadkari said that along with the other investment, this fund will reach Rs 50,000 crore
Distressed asset fund Rs 4,000 crore to help weak MSMEs that are struggling through NPA norms.
Distressed asset fund Rs 4,000 crore to help weak MSMEs that are struggling through NPA norms.
Distressed asset fund Rs 4,000 crore to help weak MSMEs that are struggling through NPA norms.
Investment in plant and machinery can be up to Rs 50 crore, increased from Rs 10 crore -  Nitin Gadkari
Nitin Gadkari said that MSMEs hold 29% contribution in the country's GDP and 48% share in the country's exports.
Farmers who will repay their loans timely till August 31, will get a 4% waiver on their loans -- Agri minister.
Agriculture Minister Narendra Singh Tomar hails villages and farmers to work along with centre's policies.
Agriculture Minister Narendra Singh Tomar will announce more agriculture reforms today.
Historic decisions for MSME sector, agriculture sector, farmers, street vendors,
The cabinet is announcing historic decisions for MSME sector, agriculture sector, farmers, street vendors, says Prakash Javadekar.
Farmers will benefit from reduced loans of Rs 3 lakh by 2% will be disbursed till 31 August.
Rs 10,000 one-time loan will be disbursed to 50 lakh street and footpath vendors, which they could return in one year. There is no penal provisions in this loan scheme.
The government further eases the definition of MSMEs to Rs 1 crore investment and Rs 5 crore turnaround for micro industries and Rs 50 crore investment and turnaround of Rs 250 crore in medium enterprises.
Government to announce further measures under Atma Nirbhar Bharat for MSME sector.
Union Minister Nitin Gadkari, Agriculture Minister Narendra Singh Tomar, along with Information & Broadcasting Minister Prakash Javadekar are announcing major cabinet decisions on MSME and agriculture sectors.
