Tamil Nadu government will not permit hydrocarbon exploration projects, Chief Minister Edappadi K. Palaniswami says.
Chief Minister Edappadi K. Palaniswami on Sunday announced that the Cauvery delta region would be declared a Protected Special Agriculture Zone as a step towards ensuring food security of the State.
At an official function at Thalaivasal in his native Salem district, Mr. Palaniswami said the State government would never give its approval for projects such as hydrocarbon exploration in the delta region.
“I am a farmer and the State government would never give permission for any project that would affect the livelihood of farmers... At Neduvasal, whatever project the Centre may introduce, it cannot be implemented without NOC from the State government,” he said.
“The Cauvery delta region is an important agriculture region in Tamil Nadu and farmers continue to do agriculture, despite climate challenges. It is just and reasonable that projects like hydrocarbon exploration have raised concerns among farmers and other agriculture-based labourers. Since the delta region is close to the sea, there is a need to safeguard the region. To ensure that agriculture is not affected, the Cauvery delta regions in Thanjavur, Tiruvarur, Nagapattinam, Pudukottai, Cuddalore, Ariyalur, Karur and Tiruchirapalli will be converted into a Protected Special Agriculture Zone,” he announced.
Mr. Palaniswami said the State government would hold consultations with legal experts, and steps would be taken to enact special legislation.
He alleged that DMK leader T.R. Baalu, who had served as the Union Minister of State for Petroleum in 1996, when methane gas was found in the Rajasthan desert, chose to get the project implemented in Tamil Nadu in 2010.
The DMK government in January 2011 signed a memorandum of understanding with the Great Eastern Energy Corporation to dig borewells and conduct explorations for four years in the region, he charged.
The MoU was signed when DMK president M.K. Stalin was the Deputy Chief Minister. But now the DMK was conducting protests in the region and spreading lies among the public, he said.
You have reached your limit for free articles this month.
Start your 14 days trial now. Sign Up
Find mobile-friendly version of articles from the day's newspaper in one easy-to-read list.
Move smoothly between articles as our pages load instantly.
Enjoy reading as many articles as you wish without any limitations.
A one-stop-shop for seeing the latest updates, and managing your preferences.
A select list of articles that match your interests and tastes.
We brief you on the latest and most important developments, three times a day.
*Our Digital Subscription plans do not currently include the e-paper ,crossword, iPhone, iPad mobile applications and print. Our plans enhance your reading experience.
We have been keeping you up-to-date with information on the developments in India and the world that have a bearing on our health and wellbeing, our lives and livelihoods, during these difficult times. To enable wide dissemination of news that is in public interest, we have increased the number of articles that can be read free, and extended free trial periods. However, we have a request for those who can afford to subscribe: please do. As we fight disinformation and misinformation, and keep apace with the happenings, we need to commit greater resources to news gathering operations. We promise to deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Your support for our journalism is invaluable. It’s a support for truth and fairness in journalism. It has helped us keep apace with events and happenings.
The Hindu has always stood for journalism that is in the public interest. At this difficult time, it becomes even more important that we have access to information that has a bearing on our health and well-being, our lives, and livelihoods. As a subscriber, you are not only a beneficiary of our work but also its enabler.
We also reiterate here the promise that our team of reporters, copy editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers will deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Please enter a valid email address.
var data = {"email" : email, "category" : "mb"};
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 768px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
box-shadow: 0 0 4px 0 rgba(0, 0, 0, .328);
@media ( max-width : 320px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
