LEXINGTON, Ky. (Jan. 23, 2020) — For the fifth consecutive year, University of Kentucky employees with UK health insurance are eligible to receive Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) vouchers. Starting Jan. 24, these vouchers can be used to receive significant discounts toward the purchase of produce shares at local farms. These farmers are part of the Kentucky Farm Share Coalition .
In previous years, the vouchers were limited in number and supplied through a lottery system. Beginning this year, the vouchers are available to any eligible employee as a regular benefit.
On Friday, Jan. 24, a CSA Fair will be held between 11 a.m. and 1 p.m. at The Food Connection Kitchen in The 90 for employees to learn more about CSA, meet local farmers and enter a raffle to win one of four CSA shares. There will be giveaways for the first 150 attendees. Snacks and desserts will be served on a first-come, first-served basis. Representatives from the Kentucky Farm Share Coalition will be there as well.
If you are an employee with UK health insurance and are interested in receiving fresh, organic vegetables grown locally on Kentucky farms, you have the opportunity to claim a voucher and use it between Jan. 24 and April 20.
To activate your voucher, you will need to log into your UK Health and Wellness Dashboard. Then, you will receive an email with a code and a link to purchase your share at the farm of your choice.
HR Health and Wellness offers two voucher options:
$100 off a small/mini produce share; and
$200 off a regular/large produce share.
When you purchase a CSA produce share from a local farm, you become a member of that farm. You will receive a weekly share during the 20- to 22-week growing season. The full price cost for the entire season ranges from $440 to $700, but with a voucher, that cost is reduced to $340 to $500.
By offering CSA shares, farmers are able to plan and purchase what they need for the upcoming growing season, and members benefit from their savings.
Participants can enjoy better quality and greater variety in their diets and help their families to eat healthier.
For additional information, visit the CSA voucher and Frequently Asked Questions pages.
The University of Kentucky is increasingly the first choice for students, faculty and staff to pursue their passions and their professional goals. In the last two years, Forbes has named UK among the best employers for diversity, and INSIGHT into Diversity recognized us as a Diversity Champion three years running. UK is ranked among the top 30 campuses in the nation for LGBTQ* inclusion and safety. UK has been judged a “Great College to Work for" two years in a row, and UK is among only 22 universities in the country on Forbes' list of "America's Best Employers."  We are ranked among the top 10 percent of public institutions for research expenditures — a tangible symbol of our breadth and depth as a university focused on discovery that changes lives and communities. And our patients know and appreciate the fact that UK HealthCare has been named the state’s top hospital for four straight years. Accolades and honors are great. But they are more important for what they represent: the idea that creating a community of belonging and commitment to excellence is how we honor our mission to be not simply the University of Kentucky, but the University for Kentucky.
