Loans up to Rs. 5 million will be provided to farmers at 4 percent interest rate to cultivate 36 varieties of  crops including paddy under the  New Comprehensive Rural Loan Scheme (NCRCS), the Government announced yesterday.
The decision was reached at the Presidential Task Force meeting headed by former Minister Basil Rajapaksa on Supplying Essential Goods, under the instructions of Prime Minister Mahinda Rajapaksa.
The loans would be provided through State banks to be repaid within nine months to cultivate paddy, chillies, onions, cowpea, green gram, soya, kurakkan, maize, sesame, sunflower, potatoes, sweet potatoes, manioc, coco yam and vegetables.
The Central Bank also has approved to grant loans up to a maximum of Rs 40,000 at an interest rate of 4 percent for the Saubhagya (Prosperous Tomorrow) Home garden Programme. These loans will also be provided through State banks under the NCRCS. The loan interest rate subsidy paid by the government for this loan program is 5 percent.
It was also decided to pay a loan up to a maximum of Rs. 25 million at an interest rate of 8 percent under Saubhagya Loan Scheme.
It was decided to grant a loan up to a maximum of Rs. 250,000 at an interest rate of 5.5 percent under the Swashakthi Loan Scheme.
Additionally it was decided to offer loans up to a maximum of Rs 50 million at an interest rate of 11.7 percent under the Small and Medium Enterprises Line of Credit Loan Scheme. These are among the measures being adopted by the Government to revitalize agriculture, SME, industry and other main sectors of the economy in a post-COVID-19 scenario.
Meanwhile, the deans of agriculture faculties of State universities have written to President Gotabaya Rajapaksa appreciating the steps taken so far to ensure the continuity of agriculture and outlining the steps that can be taken to revitalize agriculture and ensure food security. “Amidst many challenges faced by the society, we must highlight that the disturbances experienced in the food supply chains are critical, and will affect the post-COVID-19 era, as the basic food need is a major concern of every citizen of the country,” they wrote. The dons provided recommendations to be implemented with a view to improve the efficiency of food supply chains, and specific intervention for vegetable supply chain, after assessing the potential short and medium term challenges in the food delivery system amidst the actions taken to combat the pandemic.
