Editor’s Note: Morning Agriculture is a free version of POLITICO Pro Agriculture’s morning newsletter, which is delivered to our subscribers each morning at 6 a.m. The POLITICO Pro platform combines the news you need with tools you can use to take action on the day’s biggest stories. Act on the news with POLITICO Pro .
— Optimism among farmers and ranchers plummeted in March as the financial impact of the coronavirus pandemic became clear and commodity prices dropped sharply, according to a monthly survey of sentiment in the industry.
— The aid requests from ag industry groups and lawmakers keep pouring in as the Agriculture Department deliberates on how to disperse billions of dollars in stimulus funds across the farm economy.
— A federal appeals court rejected oil refiners’ request for a hearing on its January decision to strike down a trio of biofuel blending waivers for small refineries. Meanwhile, more ethanol plants are shutting down amid the downturn.
HAPPY WEDNESDAY, APRIL 8! Welcome to Morning Ag, where we salute Steak-umm for fighting the good fight against coronavirus misinformation. Send tips to [email protected] and @ryanmccrimmon , and follow us @Morning_Ag .
POLITICO Pro is here to help you navigate these unprecedented times. Check out our new Covid-19 Coverage Roundup , which provides a daily summary of top Covid-19 news coverage from across all 16 federal policy verticals as well as premium content, such as DataPoint graphics. Please sign up at our settings page to receive this unique roundup sent directly to your inbox every weekday afternoon.
CORONAVIRUS BLOWS UP AG OPTIMISM: After two painful years on the front lines of President Donald Trump’s trade wars, farmers were due for a rebound in 2020. Industry surveys showed producer optimism at record highs in January and February, after Trump signed a trade deal with China that promised massive purchases of U.S. farm goods. Now the pandemic has shattered those high hopes. A monthly barometer of industry sentiment from Purdue University and CME Group, published Tuesday, recorded its steepest one-month drop from February to March.
Forty percent of farmers in the survey said they were “very worried” about the impact of the virus on their profitability this year (and another 34 percent were “fairly worried”). Less than 1 in 5 producers said they expect the next 12 months to be a good stretch for the ag economy.
More producers expect farmland values to decline over the next year, up from just 13 percent in February to 28 percent in March. And farmers are also less optimistic about trade with China: Less than half of those surveyed last month said they expect a quick trade recovery, down from nearly 70 percent in January, when the “Phase One” trade deal was signed.
PRICE CHECK: The drop in commodity futures has crushed every corner of agriculture, though some sectors like cotton, dairy, ethanol and livestock have taken an especially hard hit, according to analysis from the American Farm Bureau Federation.
Crop carnage: The price of May corn futures has dropped by 15 percent since mid-January, amid projections of massive 2020 corn planting and freefalling ethanol demand. May cotton futures are down to 53 cents per pound, a loss of nearly 30 percent, stemming from the slowdown in manufacturing capacity around the world.
On the livestock side, June live cattle and lean hog prices have each dropped by more than 30 percent since Jan. 14. Prices of Class III and Class IV milk — used to produce cheese and nonfat dry milk, respectively — are down 28 percent and 34 percent, prompting a number of dairy farmers to dump their milk.
Silver linings? Soybean futures prices have dropped just 10 percent over the same period, and wheat prices have held up relatively well due to higher demand for wheat-based products at grocery stores and large Chinese purchases.
Another egg-ception: At the retail level, wholesale egg prices have more than tripled as shoppers stock up at grocery stores, The Wall Street Journal reports.
Sign up for POLITICO Nightly: Coronavirus Special Edition , your daily update on how the illness is affecting politics, markets, public health and more.
FLOODING THE ZONE WITH FARM AID REQUESTS: The Agriculture Department has yet to decide how to divvy up more than $23 billion in agricultural aid provided by Congress in the $2 trillion stimulus package. In the meantime, commodity groups and their allies on Capitol Hill are swamping the Trump administration with policy ideas and requests for financial help.
The National Milk Producers Federation and International Dairy Foods Association sent a joint plan to USDA to bolster the dairy industry and redistribute milk products to food banks, school feeding programs and other outlets. The industry expects to lose as much as $10 billion in sales over the next six months, Food Business News reports.
Aid for ethanol: A bipartisan group of senators is calling on USDA to direct farm relief funds toward biofuel producers, who have seen demand and prices plummet with the drop in gasoline consumption. In a letter to Secretary Sonny Perdue, 15 senators led by Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) and Tammy Duckworth (D-Ill.) said 4 billion gallons of ethanol production have been idled since March, reports Pro Energy’s Eric Wolff.
Beyond USDA: Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wis.) is pressing the Small Business Administration to clarify farmers’ eligibility for Economic Injury Disaster Loans, and to allow ag producers seeking aid through the Paycheck Protection Program to use alternative calculations rather than payroll costs to determine the size of their loans.
“Many sole-proprietors do not pay themselves an income,” Baldwin wrote in a letter to Administrator Jovita Carranza on Tuesday. “Additionally, because of the unique circumstances of agricultural production, basing the PPP loan size on a farm’s payroll costs will likely yield loans that are far smaller than needed.”
The drop in gasoline consumption has lowered demand for biofuels. | AP
COURT SHOOTS DOWN APPEAL OF BIOFUEL RULING: A U.S. appellate court on Tuesday rejected a request for an en banc hearing of a legal decision that voided biofuel blending exemptions for small oil refineries — though a similar case before the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals is still pending, Eric reports.
ICYMI: The 10th Circuit Court ruled in January that the EPA could not exempt refineries from their blending requirements under the Renewable Fuel Standard unless they had maintained blending waivers continuously since 2011 — upending Trump’s fraught efforts to strike a balance on ethanol policy between oil and agricultural interests, two key parts of his base.
Oil refiners HollyFrontier and Wynnewood Refining requested the hearing after Trump flip-flopped several times over whether his administration would appeal the decision, before deciding not to do so. The EPA intends to apply the court’s decision nationwide, which could wipe out blending waivers for many oil refiners, though it plans to seek new ways to mitigate their costs.
MORE ETHANOL PLANT CLOSURES: POET, the largest ethanol producer in the country, said Tuesday that it would idle three of its plants and delay opening a fourth facility. The four plants could produce 330 million gallons a year. “Unfortunately, plummeting fuel demand amid the coronavirus pandemic has overwhelmed markets already suffering from continued trade barriers, a foreign price war over oil and regulatory uncertainty here at home,” CEO Jeff Broin said in a statement.
— The coronavirus is suffocating marijuana legalization efforts in nearly a dozen states, including New York, the current epicenter of the pandemic, where Gov. Andrew Cuomo has thrown in the towel on what was once a “top priority” as he focuses on the public health emergency. Pro Cannabis’ Mona Zhang has the story.
— The seafood sector is among the hardest hit because of its heavy reliance on restaurant sales, especially for high-end goods like scallops and lobster. Fishermen and seafood dealers are angling for new markets to replace the shuttered foodservice sector, while shipping slowdowns have caused logjams for the globally connected industry. More from the AP.
— Sen. Deb Fischer (R-Neb.) is asking USDA to expand its investigation into potential beef price-fixing to include recent discrepancies in the meat market. The recent drop in cattle prices doesn’t match the demand for beef at the retail level. “This has left many producers wondering why, yet again, they have been taking losses as packer and retailer margins have increased,” Fischer wrote in a letter to Perdue.
— Senate Intel Chairman Richard Burr sold $47,000 in shares of a small Dutch fertilizer company in 2018, just before the stock began a steep 40 percent drop, according to an investigation by ProPublica. The North Carolina Republican and his wife sold their stake in OCI in three days when shares were priced at their highest point in the last four years.
— Laura Chadwick, former director of strategy and communications at the National Restaurant Association, has joined the XR Association, a trade group representing headset and technology companies including Facebook and Google, per Pro’s Tech team.
