The Countess of Wessex has written a letter of support for the Royal Norfolk Show, which had to be cancelled this year due to the pandemic.
Sophie wrote of her memories attending last year’s show in her role as Patron of the Association of Show and Agricultural Organisations. The association works to promote agricultural, horticultural and countryside shows throughout the United Kingdom.
“This time last year, I was among thousands of others across the country who were looking forward to visiting Norwich for the Royal Norfolk Show. As the 2019 president of the Royal Norfolk Agricultural Association (RNAA), I was hugely impressed by all that I saw at the show, and the very warm welcome I received from every farmer, producer and member of the rural community. Agricultural and county shows play an enormous part in the fabric of the UK, bringing together the very best every county has to offer. The Royal Norfolk Show does just that, keeping agriculture firmly at its heart, whilst showcasing the breadth of Norfolk’s rural economy and food production capability.
“In the absence of this year’s show, I am delighted to hear that people are sharing their photos, videos and memories from previous years instead. I hope fans of the show will enjoy seeing these images and that it will encourage many more new and interested visitors for when the show hopefully returns in 2021. I thoroughly enjoyed being president for 2019 and look forward to remaining in touch with the association and its show in future. I wish everyone involved with the Royal Norfolk well during these difficult times.”
The Royal Norfolk Agricultural Association aims to “help educate young people and adults, and to bring people and business together through a range of inspiring events, including the Royal Norfolk Show and the Norfolk Spring Fling, to promote a better understanding of food, farming and the countryside,” per its official website.
It was founded in 1847, making it one of the oldest county associations in the UK, and was granted its royal status by King Edward VII in 1908.
