Today’s businesses call for the highly focused, comprehensive and detail-oriented information about the market so that they get a clear idea about the market landscape. The Poultry Diagnostics market research report is generated with a combination of detailed industry insights, and use of latest tools and technology. The study of this market research report covers a market attractiveness analysis, wherein each segment is targeted based on its market size, growth rate & general attractiveness. The Poultry Diagnostics market research report plays a key role in developing the strategies for sales, advertising, marketing, and promotion.
Not to mention, the data included in this Poultry Diagnostics market document is collected only from the trustworthy sources such as journals, newspapers, company websites and annual reports of the companies on which businesses can rely confidently. Other data models used for the research methodology are vendor positioning grid, market time line analysis, market overview & guide, company positioning grid, company market share analysis, standards of measurement, top to bottom analysis & vendor share analysis. The studies related to competitor analysis in this Poultry Diagnostics market document keeps competitive landscape clearly into focus with which businesses can decide or advance their own strategies to thrive in the market.
Global Poultry Diagnostics Market is expected to reach USD 731.25 million by 2025 from USD 335.14 million in 2017, at a CAGR of 10.5% in the forecast period 2018 to 2025.Rising incidence of disease in poultry, and increased demand for poultry-derived food products are expected to drive the market. On the other hand high cost involved in poultry production may hinder the growth of the global poultry diagnostics market.
In 2017, the global poultry diagnostics market is dominated by IDEXX Laboratories, Inc. with market share of 30.4%, followed by Zoetis 25.8%, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. 23.3% and QIAGEN 7.4%.
Enzyme linked sorbent assay (ELISA), is dominating the global poultry diagnostic market.
The avian influenza segment is expected to grow with the highest CAGR of 12.0% in the forecast period 2018 to 2025.
Poultry Diagnostics market analysis document contains basic, secondary and advanced information related to the global status, recent trends, market size, sales volume, market share, growth, future trends analysis, segment and forecasts from 2020 – 2025. Market research data included in this report lend a hand to businesses for planning of strategies related to investment, revenue generation, production, product launches, costing, inventory, purchasing and marketing. Furthermore, Poultry Diagnostics report presents the data and information for actionable, most recent, and real-time market insights which makes it easier to even reach to the critical business decisions.
To Get This Report at an Attractive Cost, Click Here https://www.databridgemarketresearch.com/speak-to-analyst?dbmr=global-poultry-diagnostics-market
Poultry-derived food products signifies a substantial part of agricultural and food production in the world. Demand for poultry-derived food is increasing due to various reasons such as urban population growth and poultry-derived food products are rich in protein. According to The Food and Agriculture Organization, it has been estimated that by 2030 the demand for poultry meat will increase by 106.0%.
The growth in poultry-derived food product is significantly taking rise due to growth in population, and also growing the purchasing power. The growth in demand of poultry-derived food products has also increased due to the lifestyle of the population. For instance, according to World Chicken Meat Market, in 2012, it has been estimated that the global supply of meat was approximately 292.0 million tons per year.
According to USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) the per capita consumption of chicken was 91.0 pounds in 2016 and is estimated to reach 92.5 pounds by 2018.
According to Turkish Journal of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, in 2013, it has been estimated that out of 625 household people 57.1% consume meat daily in Belgium.
Moreover, poultry-derived food products especially meat is not only consumed as a food product but is also a significant trade commodity which impacts the economy. According to United States International Trade Commission, it has been estimated that, in 2012 the U.S. has been considered as the world’s largest poultry meat consumer which contributed around one-fifth of the total world consumption. Chicken meat is the most commonly consumed meat in the U.S.
The global poultry diagnostics market is segmented based on test into three notable segments as enzyme linked sorbent assay (ELISA), polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests and others. In 2018, enzyme linked sorbent assay (ELISA) market is likely to dominate market with 51.4% shares and is estimated to reach USD 390.11 million by 2025. It is growing at the highest CAGR of 11.1% in the forecast period.
The global poultry diagnostics market is segmented based on disease into eleven notable segments; avian influenza, avian salmonellosis, newcastle disease, avian mycoplasmosis, infectious bronchitis, infectious bursal disease, avian pasteurellosis, avian encephalomyelitis, avian reovirus, chicken anemia and others. In 2018, avian influenza market is likely to dominate market with 27.1% shares and is estimated to reach USD 218.45 million by 2025. It is growing at the highest CAGR of 12.0% in the forecast period.
The global poultry diagnostics market is segmented based on service into three notable segments; bacteriology, parasitology and virology. In 2018, bacteriology market is likely to dominate market with 61.3% shares and is estimated to reach USD 446.61 million by 2025. It is growing at a CAGR of 10.4% in the forecast period.
Based on geography, the market is segmented into 5 geographical regions, North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, South America and Middle East & Africa. In 2018, North America is expected to account for the largest share of 40.6% for this market, followed by Europe.
Rising incidence of disease in poultry, and increased demand for poultry-derived food products are expected to drive the market. On the other hand high cost involved in poultry production may hinder the growth of the global poultry diagnostics market.
To get a comprehensive overview of the Poultry Diagnostics Market.
About Data Bridge Market Research:
Data Bridge Market Research is a versatile market research and consulting firm with over 500 analysts working in different industries. We have catered more than 40% of the fortune 500 companies globally and have a network of more than 5000+ clientele around the globe. Our coverage of industries include Medical Devices, Pharmaceuticals, Biotechnology, Semiconductors, Machinery, Information and Communication Technology, Automobiles and Automotive, Chemical and Material, Packaging, Food and Beverages, Cosmetics, Specialty Chemicals, Fast Moving Consumer Goods, Robotics, among many others.
Data Bridge adepts in creating satisfied clients who reckon upon our services and rely on our hard work with certitude.We are content with our glorious 99.9 % client satisfying rate.
