Crypto Corner Episode 419: BitMEX Launching Corporate Option, Core Scientific to Buy Over 17,000 Miners from Bitmain, and Mining Giant BHP (NYSE: $BHP) Completes $14 Million Blockchain Trade
Point Roberts, WA and Delta, BC - June 29, 2020 (Investorideas.com Newswire) Investorideas.com, a leader in crypto and blockchain investing news brings you today's edition of the Crypto Corner podcast and commentary on what's driving cryptocurrency stocks and the crypto market.
Listen to today's Crypto Corner Podcast:
Crypto Corner Episode 419: BitMEX Launching Corporate Option, Core Scientific to Buy Over 17,000 Miners from Bitmain, and Mining Giant BHP (NYSE: $BHP) Completes $14 Million Blockchain Trade
BitMEX, the Hong Kong-based crypto derivatives giant, recently reported the launching of BitMEX Corporate, described in the announcement as an "account programme is a set of features and services designed to better serve our ever-growing segment of corporate customers." The service boasts "tailored benefits for corporate clients," including: corporate legal structure, enhanced service and security, accounting requirements, and an account audit service. An excerpt from the announcement reads:
'Corporate' accounts are simply the part of our customer base where the account owner is not an individual, but a company or other legal entity, and as such need different ownership structures for their accounts, ways for employees to access and manage those accounts on their behalf, additional security requirements, and so on.
Cointelegraph reports that AI and blockchain hosting provider Core Scientific has signed a deal to buy more than 17,000 S19 Antminers from Chinese crypto mining giant Bitmain. Russell Cann, Chief Customer Service Officer of Core Scientific, outlined the impetus for growing hash rates in North America to Cointelegraph:
"Our view is that this rise in interest and increase in capital allocation and investment can be attributed to the growing acceptance of crypto and/or digital assets as an investment asset class as well as the favorable investing characteristics of North America; specifically, the stable geopolitical and regulatory environment, suitable climatic conditions and multiple energy sources present."
He went on to say:
"Importantly, with the collapse of energy pricing, the lower cost power areas in the US and Canada, are creating some unique project opportunities for larger-scale miners, like Core Scientific, to consider."
Mining giant BHP Group ( NYSE:BHP ) has completed its first blockchain trade in iron ore - worth $14 million - with China Baoshan Iron & Steel Co Ltd, according to a report from Reuters . The transaction was executed on a blockchain platform developed by MineHub, which "processed contract terms, exchanged digital documents and provided real-time cargo visibility." BHP sales and marketing officer Michiel Hovers said that "The bulk commodity industry needs a digital revolution to reduce physical documentation processes," while MineHub's Chief Executive Arnoud Star Busmann pointed out that ""Current pandemic events and fraud cases in the commodity trading industry are causing a step-change in the adoption of digital solutions."
For investors following the sector Investor Ideas has a comprehensive Bitcoin, Blockchain and Digital Currency Stocks Directory
About Investorideas.com - News that Inspires Big Investing Ideas Investorideas.com is a recognized news source publishing third party news, research and original financial content. Learn about investing in stocks and sector trends with our news alerts, articles, podcasts and videos, looking at cannabis, crypto, AI and IoT, mining, sports biotech, water, renewable energy and more. Investor Idea's original branded content includes the following podcasts and columns: Crypto Corner , Play by Play sports and stock news column, Investor Ideas Potcasts Cannabis News and Stocks on the Move podcast and column, Cleantech and Climate Change , Exploring Mining the AI Eye .
The Investorideas.com podcasts are also available on iTunes, Spotify, Tunein, Stitcher, Spreaker.com, iHeartRadio and Google Play Music.
Visit the Podcast page at Investorideas.com:
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
Investorideas.com news content is not meant to be a solicitation to buy or sell cryptocurrencies and Investorideas.com does not directly sell cryptocurrencies; but acts as a news and research resource for interested investors following the blockchain sector.
