June 30, 2020 (Investorideas.com Newswire) The gold futures contract gained 0.05% on Monday, as it extended its short-term consolidation along last Wednesday's new yearly high of $1,796.10. The market continued its long-term uptrend last week. The recent economic data releases didn't bring any new surprises for the financial markets. However, gold broke above the medium-term local highs, as we can see on the daily chart:
Gold is trading 0.2% lower this morning, as it is fluctuating within a short-term consolidation. What about the other precious metals? Silver gained 0.16% on Monday and today it is 0.2% lower. Platinum gained 1.09% yesterday and today it is unchanged, palladium gained 2.04% on Monday and today it's down 0.1%. So precious metals extend their short-term fluctuations this morning.
Yesterday's economic data releases from China have been slightly better than expected. The PMI numbers are above 50 mark again. Today we will get the important Consumer Confidence release at 10:00 a.m. and then at 12:30 p.m. the Fed Chair Powell will testify. But investors will be waiting for Thursday's monthly jobs data release. And tomorrow we will get the ADP Non-Farm Employment Change along with the ISM Manufacturing PMI numbers.
Below you will find our Gold, Silver, and Mining Stocks economic news schedule for the next two trading days:
Thank you for reading today's free analysis. We hope you enjoyed it. If so, we would like to invite you to sign up for our free gold newsletter . Once you sign up, you'll also get 7-day no-obligation trial of all our premium gold services, including our Gold & Silver Trading Alerts. Sign up today!
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
