The Department of Agriculture (DA) through its Agricultural Credit Policy Council (ACPC) has so far downloaded P310 million worth of loans as assistance to agri-fishery-based micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and marginalized small farmers and fishers (MSFF) to tide the impact of the coronavirus pandemic.
“This is the time that our stakeholders, especially our farmers and fishers, need us the most. They are the ones affected by this crisis,” DA Secretary William Dar said.
The MSEs can borrow up to a maximum of P10 million and pay the loans at zero-interest in five years.
The DA explained that MSEs may be a single proprietorship, partnership, corporation or cooperative/association that will use the loans as working capital to ensure the availability of food supply and help them recover their losses incurred from the effects of the community quarantine.
It added that the MSEs have expressed willingness to deliver or supply products to DA’s Kadiwa Ni Ani at Kita centers and consumers of high consumption markets, such as Metro Manila and other demand centers.
Under the same program, 8,781 farmers and fishers from 18 provinces benefited from the P220.43 million loan fund released through 28 partner lending conduits during the same period.
Each beneficiary received a non-collateralized loan of P25,000 with zero interest payable in 10 years.
The financial assistance aims to finance the emergency and production capital requirements of the farmers and fishers whose incomes were affected by the lock down during the crisis.
ACPC continues to identify and negotiate with local/provincial-based financial institutions as potential lending conduits for the program.
To date, it has already transferred P593.363 million to its 51 lending conduits in 35 provinces.
The SURE COVID-19 program, which has a P2.5 billion fund, targets to provide financial support to 150 MSEs and 40,000 MSFF nationwide.
It forms part of the Ahon Lahat, Pagkaing Sapat Kontra COVID-19 Program (ALPAS kontra COVID-19), the DA’s initiative to increase the country’s food adequacy level during the emergency situation resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
