With the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on food and nutrition security expected to be harsh, poverty and malnourishment could become even worse. Digital agriculture offers a glimpse of hope.
As COVID-19 continues to devastate lives all over the world, agriculture and food systems come under critical strain. Recessions, food shortages, hunger and malnutrition are feared to be likely, with grave impact on vulnerable communities in developing regions like sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
Agriculture in sub-Saharan Africa is largely dominated by smallholder  farmers, many of whom already farm under severe strain of climatic  variability and resource constraints. With the impact of COVID-19  pandemic on food and nutrition security expected to be harsh, poverty  and malnourishment could become even worse. SSA must guard the basic  operations required to produce, trade and supply food. Digital  agriculture offers a glimpse of hope.
The progress made with  digitalising agriculture in Africa over the years can be used as a  strong foundation for new initiatives to alleviate the COVID-19’s impact  on food security.
The pandemic is already accelerating Africa’s digital transformation ,  governments and stakeholders need to bolster these efforts to  digitalise Africa’s agriculture by improving infrastructure and delivery  systems essential for food production, trade and supply chains.
Digitalisation  is already being used to secure basic supplies essential for farm  operations activities in SSA, reaching farmers with advisory, markets,  financial, and supply chain services – all essential lifelines during  such difficult times.
In recent years, CTA – which is due to close in 2020 – has championed new technologies,  helping smallholders and other food system actors adopt them to fulfil  Africa’s digitalisation potential. Driving this progress is more  important now than ever.
Food  production operations such as ploughing, planting, weeding and  harvesting are seasonal time-critical activities, delays in accessing  inputs and agronomic advice have a devastating impact on food and  nutrition security. While governments are urged to consider food  production and supply logistics essential activities, applying digital  solutions not only reduce the risk of spreading the virus, but also  enhances efficiency amidst possible labour shortages.
FarmIT in Kenya provides farmers with agronomic support, market linkages and an e-commerce solution, for example, while Zambia-based eMsika is Africa’s leading platform for wholesale and retail trade in agricultural products.
Availability  of real-time data using remote sensing tools such as drones and  satellites, coupled with mobile telephone and internet access are key  enablers, while inclusive systems particularly serving women and  underserved groups are essential to make a difference.
Growing  start-ups across the continent must be supported to keep supply chains  moving and ensure that food reaches everyone. Indeed, as global supply  chains break down, protecting local markets and businesses will become  even more crucial.
E-commerce, produce delivery and equipment  sharing platforms all enable continued production and distribution,  while upholding social distancing measures. For instance, marketing  platform Mkulima Young and G-Soko connects farmers to suppliers and distributors, helping produce reach traders and consumers.
Ever-increasing  rates of internet penetration and mobile phone access mean the  potential for digital commerce is vast in SSA, but still  under-exploited.
Strengthening digital services in logistical  operations will help ensure food gets to hard-to-reach communities,  especially when it comes to cross-border trade. E-commerce platforms are  making this movement more efficient – as seen with the European Union’s introduction of “green lanes” for essential goods, to prevent freight hold-ups.
The worlds hungry people are expected to double due to the impact of COVID-19, with the  consequence on the most vulnerable such as women, children and the  elderly only beginning to emerge. The impact of this pandemic will be  especially devastating for these populations if food supply is  interrupted, further widening the access gaps. Food assistance and  social safety programmes should be supported.
Digital tools such as Chowberry are helping to ensure food and information reaches the most vulnerable  populations and avoid waste – even when under lockdown, in quarantine or  self-isolating. While not always designed with these groups in mind,  they can be adapted to reach those most in need. For instance, Ghanaian  start-up Farmerline is sharing vital COVID-19 updates with at-risk farming communities through its voice message service.
Providing  immediate relief is a priority for now. But this crisis presents an  opportunity to improve digital infrastructure and ensure more robust  support systems for smallholder farmers, by fostering stronger  partnerships between African government and the private sector to  further advance digitalisation in the longer term.
With urgent  action, we can build on existing digital services to ensure food and  supplies reach the poorest in the world now – to cope with today’s  coronavirus crisis, and to strengthen tomorrow’s food systems. This can  ensure food supply in the short term during the health crisis as well as  creating a more sustainable system for the long term.
