“Prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, Beyond Meat has been increasing its exposure to the foodservice channel, reaching levels closer to 50% of sales,” wrote Theurer to his clients. “The latter, in our view, poses downside risk in the short to medium term as a full foodservice recovery might not take place until 2021.”
The double downgrade exposes significant underlying uncertainty about the future of the plant-based protein market, as Theurer points to continued disruptions in food service and a rebounding conventional meat supply chain as critical factors in his analysis of Beyond Meat’s stock price.
While grocery sales of plant based foods have grown exponentially amid the pandemic— sales of fresh meat alternatives up an astounding 239.8% as compared to last year’s sales—the overall sales are still a fraction of what the conventional meat industry makes each year.
The meat industry did suffer a very public hit amid the pandemic, as meat plant closures due to coronavirus outbreaks among workers caused a bottleneck in the supply chain and forced pork and poultry farmers to euthanize upwards of a 100,000 hogs and millions of chickens.
Amid efforts to inspect these plants in a push towards swift reopening, USDA inspectors also became infected , leading to at least three deaths. But the meat supply chain seems to have largely stabilized again, as agricultural economist Jayson Lusk, PhD, explained in a recent blog post.
Uncertainty about the future of plant-based proteins has led at least one environmental organization to call for government investment in the sector as a way to reduce the environmental impacts of meat-eating, particularly beef and other ruminant animals that are major greenhouse gas contributors from the agriculture sector.
Researchers Saloni Shah and Dan Blaustein-Rejto of the Breakthrough Institute recently argued that foodservice closures, nervous investors and slowdowns in research have left the industry “far from secure.” They call for around $60 million in government funding and $13.3 million in federal loan guarantees, which they argue could lead to “60,000 higher-than-average paying jobs, providing $3.6 billion in income each year, in at least 35 different states.”
Meanwhile, the Canadian government recently announced plans to provide $100 million in financing to plant based protein maker Merit Functional Foods. The move was applauded by plant based advocacy group The Good Food Institute, which has argued for a combination of private and public investment in the sector.
I’m a food and agriculture journalist whose work has appeared in The Washington Post, Popular Mechanics, OneZero, New York Magazine, Slate, Mental Floss and SELF. I've
I’m a food and agriculture journalist whose work has appeared in The Washington Post, Popular Mechanics, OneZero, New York Magazine, Slate, Mental Floss and SELF. I've been covering the intersection of technology and food since 2015, from cutting edge cattle feedlots to new future foods like plant-based  and cultured meat. My story on cultured meat, Please Don't Call This Cultured Nugget 'Lab Meat' for Popular Mechanics, won the 2020 ASJA award in the Food & Beverage category. I also cover climate change, food and agriculture policy and sustainability in agricultural and food technologies. Though I grew up in Northern California, not too far from the farms of the Salinas Valley “Salad Bowl,” I now live in Washington, D.C. with my husband and two kids. You can find me on Twitter at @jennysplitter.
