DowDuPont Spinoff Corteva Is a New Agriculture Stock. FMC Is a Safer Bet.
Times are tough in the Farm Belt: Severe flooding and cold weather this year damaged fields and delayed shipments, and tariffs have weighed on U.S. exports of agricultural products to China.
U.S. farm income, a broad measure of farm profits provided by the USDA, is expected to total $69 billion this year, down 44% from its 2013 peak. Record soybean and corn crops around the world have pushed commodity prices down about 30% in recent years, cutting into farmers’ earnings.
Still, farming is cyclical—the weather will change and crop prices will rise. More important, from an investment perspective, the agriculture business is uncorrelated with the broader economy, which can help protect an investor’s portfolio.
That makes a new agriculture play coming to the stock market all the more intriguing.
The crop-protection and seeds and traits businesses of the chemical conglomerate DowDuPont (ticker: DWDP) are being spun off as Corteva (CTVA), effective on June 1. Corteva will be the largest stand-alone company selling crop inputs to farmers in 140 countries. Last year, Corteva generated more than $14 billion in sales: some $7.8 billion selling corn, soybean, and other seeds, and $6.4 billion selling crop-protection products.
Farmers want to get the most crop output per acre, and companies like Corteva tailor seeds to specific environments. Many modern seeds are genetically modified; they have traits from different plant species inserted to give the crop resistance to a specific pest or a climate condition such as drought. Corn and soybean seeds account for 85% of Corteva’s seed sales. Its crop-protection business is more diverse, with different chemicals to control weeds, bugs, and fungi.
“Corteva could be the best of the three DowDuPont assets,” says David Marcus, Evermore Global Advisors’ chief investment officer, who manages a portfolio of value investments. “[Corteva] has perhaps the most robust new product pipeline of any of the major [agricultural chemical] players.”
Yet Corteva isn’t the only option for investors looking to add agriculture exposure. FMC (FMC) is a smaller company in the same business. More on FMC in a moment.
On Friday, shares of Corteva began trading on a “when-issued” basis. The shares opened at $32, giving the company a market value of roughly $26 billion, or about 10 times estimated 2020 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, or Ebitda.
That’s about a 10% discount to other large specialty chemical companies, which Corteva will likely be compared against. FMC, by comparison, trades for about 9.6 times estimated 2020 Ebitda.
How Corteva and FMC stack up. The spinoff of Corteva is the last step in the break-up of the DowDuPont chemical conglomerate.
Corteva is trading at a big discount to past agricultural chemical multiples. In 2016, for example, Monsanto agreed to be bought by Bayer (BAYN. Germany) for 20 times Ebitda. Syngenta was purchased by China National Chemical for 19 times Ebitda.
Bayer’s current legal woes involving Monsanto are a major reason agricultural valuations won’t return to 2016 levels soon. Monsanto recently lost several jury trials in California over its Roundup herbicide product. The most recent judgment against the company was a $2 billion award to two landscapers who blamed their cancer on Roundup, Monsanto’s brand name for the herbicide glyphosate.
Corteva never produced glyphosate, but sells a generic version to farmers. Corteva’s soon-to-be-CEO, Jim Collins, told investors at a recent conference that he expected the spotlight on glyphosate to have a limited impact on Corteva’s business.
All the same, FMC look like the safer bet right now. FMC doesn’t make or sell glyphosate-based weed killers.
And FMC is less exposed to the U.S. market currently being buffeted by the Midwestern flooding. It generates about 25% of sales in North America, compared with 50% for Corteva. About 25% of FMC’s sales are in Latin America. Brazil and Argentina are among the largest exporters of grains and pulses.
“FMC is a different growth story,” says Aleksey Yefremov, an analyst with Nomura Instinet. “We think FMC’s growth relative to its peers is underappreciated.”
The market may be missing something with regard to FMC, because the company has transformed itself in recent years from a diversified chemical conglomerate into a focused producer of agricultural chemicals.
Earlier this year, FMC spun out its lithium business, Livent (LTHM). And in 2017, FMC bartered for some of DuPont’s crop protection assets, offering in return its food and nutrition division along with $1.2 billion in cash.
“The acquisition was about growth, not cost cutting, and we are happy with how integration has gone. The DuPont business was in good shape,” FMC CEO Pierre Brondeau tells Barron’s.
FMC expects to generate about $1 billion in net new sales from product launches between 2020 and 2023, growing sales by more than 6.5%, almost double the rate of industry growth.
Just two new active ingredients are part of that projected $1 billion in sales, says FMC’s president, Mark Douglas. He says the company has six new active ingredients in development and 16 new active ingredients in the discovery pipeline. An active ingredient is a new way to control weeds or bugs.
Wall Street, meanwhile, expects FMC to have $4.8 billion in sales, $1.3 billion in Ebitda, and $6.64 in per-share earnings by 2020.
This weekly email offers a full list of stories and other features in this week's magazine. Saturday mornings ET.
If FMC shares trade in line with specialty chemical peers, the stock could reach $100 in the coming 12 months, up some 40% from $71 on Friday. And if the new products perform as expected, there could be further upside.
Nomura’s Yefremov has a price target for FMC of $93 a share, about 12 times his 2020 Ebitda. He values Corteva at about $37 per share.
UBS analyst John Roberts says Corteva is worth about $39 per share. The two analysts have similar 2020 Ebitda estimates for Corteva, but Roberts believes multiples for agricultural assets will trend back to levels like Monsanto’s before the 2016 merger.
If you are looking to reap a return on a future upturn in farming, FMC is the simpler, less risky play. It gives exposure to the agricultural business at a time when earnings are depressed.
DowDuPont Spinoff Corteva Is a New Agriculture Stock. FMC Is a Safer Bet.
Times are tough in the Farm Belt: Severe flooding and cold weather this year damaged fields and delayed shipments, and tariffs have weighed on U.
