UVM agronomist Heather Darby says the growing season in Vermont started off cold and dry. Now it's hot and dry, with drought conditions affecting everything from haying to vegetable crops. Farmers also face pests like leafhoppers and their notorious "hopper burn" on crops - all of that on top of an uncertain economy brought on by a global pandemic. We check in for a summer agriculture update.
Vermont’s corn crop is ahead of schedule this year, despite some dry growing conditions.
Darby says corn crop samples were waist-high this week and close to tasseling in some parts of Vermont—which means a harvest is about a month away.
“Now if we could get those timely rains, that will help, so, fingers crossed, if we can keep getting some rain the corn crop should be good but also early this year,” she tells Vermont Edition.
Even with corn ahead of schedule, about 30% of Vermont is experiencing moderate drought—affecting hay and other crops.
Recent rains have helped farmers with those drought conditions—but maybe too little, too late for the hay crop.
Darby says a dry winter and spring, coupled with dry summer weather, is affecting hay more than any other crop.
“People are reporting about 50% of a normal yield, some less, maybe some a little more. But hot and dry weather for our hay crop is really bad,”she adds.
Energy-dense hay is critical feed for dairy cows—and a poor haying season could require farmers to purchase expensive feed for their cows.
The coronavirus pandemic is highlighting just how critical local agriculture is to Vermont’s food security.
UVM Extension agronomist Heather Darby tells Vermont Edition that local producers fill the void created by problems in the national food supply chain.
"When you go to the store and you can’t get produce because it’s been plowed up in Florida, because there was nobody there to harvest, or meat, because plant shave been shut down in the pandemic, where ya gonna get it? You’re gonna get it from your neighbor that’s growing beef, or vegetables, or milk," she says.
Darby says wearing masks, washing hands and keeping distance at farmers markets and farm stands helps keep farmers — and the food supply — safe.
She adds that a single sick worker on a small farm could spell the end of production for the season.
