Migrant agricultural workers in Estonia who are in the country since March 17, will have the right to continue their work until July 31, as a new proposal enabling them to do so has been approved by the governing coalition.
The amendment will be attached to the draft law submitted to the Estonian parliament that deals with the implementation of the COVID-19 control measures, SchengenVisaInfo.com reports.
“According to the proposal, as of March 17, migrant workers legally staying in Estonia will be able to continue working in agriculture,” the Minister of the Interior Mart Helme pointed out.
The amendment enables aliens working in Estonia on the bases of short-term employment, to continue their work until July 31, only if the agricultural employer offers them work and register their short-term employment with the Police and Border Guard Board.
When the extended period comes to an end, aliens will have another month to prepare to leave Estonia. The final date of their leave will be August 31.
“An employer operating in agriculture applies to the Police and Border Guard Board to employ a migrant worker legally staying in Estonia until July 31 2020; after July 31 this year, the migrant worker has until August 31, 2020, to organize his or her departure from Estonia” the amendment reads.
As on March 12, Estonia has declared a state of emergency, that will last until May 1, in an effort to prevent the spread of coronavirus (COVID-19). The country also has imposed travel restrictions and entry bans and published a list of persons who can enter in Estonia since March 17 .
Currently, the Police and Border Guard Board are reviewing applications for registration of short-term employment of foreign citizens submitted by employers, for internationals who are working in Estonia.
Applications for short-term employment of internationals abroad wishing to work in Estonia are currently not processed by the PBGB. The main reason is that they are not eligible to enter the country even if they have the right to stay without a visa, due to coronavirus crisis.
The draft clarifies that internationals working in Estonia, under the rules of short-term employment, who have full working hours but do not work in agriculture, are not allowed to work in Estonia, and they must leave the country immediately. If they can not go back to their home nations due to travel bans and border closures, they have to leave Estonia no later than ten days after the emergency situation ends.
Aliens are advised to turn to their embassies and get information about the possibilities of leaving Estonia.
