(Togo First) - On June 25, 2020, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) inked in Lomé seven (7) agreements to finance its local partners. This falls in the framework of the body’s forest and farmer facility.
In all, more than XOF130 million was disbursed in the process, and between 15%-20% of this amount will be spent on anti-coronavirus actions. The remainder will be directed towards initiatives aimed at making forests more resilient to climate change and improving the income of local communities.
“Concretely, the goal is to contribute to the processing of products locally and create market systems that foster product sales, both at the local and international levels,” said Issifou Aboussissamilou, the national facilitator of the forest and farmer facility. Moreover, the financing should “help restore forest landscapes, by expanding the forest seeds sector to grow better seedlings and support the government in implementing the AFR100 project which aims at restoring 1.4 million hectares of forest lands.”
The funds’ beneficiaries include the Togolese coordination of farmers and agricultural producers associations (CTOP), the botany and ecology lab of the University of Lomé, and Chocotogo.
The agreements, it should be noted, were signed as the FAO celebrates its 40th anniversary in Togo. Over the past four decades, the institution has carried out 336 projects, worth about XOF70 billion, in the country.
At the fifteenth position, worldwide, and first in Africa, under the Starting a Business index of the 2020 Doing Business ranking, Togo sustains its reformative dynamics with more reforms….
Compared to some years ago when it was one of the lowest rankers under the Doing Business’ Enforcing Contracts indicator, Togo, leveraging many efforts to improve its business climate, was able to jump significantly on the index in the recent years... .
In comparison to previous years,Togo has significantly improved its ranking under the“Trading across borders” indicator by adopting multiple reforms that focus mainly on the digitization and reduction in delays, for import and export procedures related to import and export.
In comparison to previous years, Togo has significantly improved its ranking on the “Trading across borders” index by adopting multiple reforms that focus mainly on the digitalization and reduction in delays, for import and export procedures related to import and export.
After moving from the 133rd to 127th place under the 2020 Doing Business’ construction permit index, Togo intends to reiterate this feat in the coming edition of the global ranking. To this end, it has introduced this year multiple reforms.
Over the past two years, Togo’s ranking under the Doing Business’ Getting electricity and water indicator has increased consistently. Owing this performance to multiple reforms aimed at making it easier for businesses to access power and water, Lomé plans to introduce even more reforms this year to keep up its improvements.
Out of all the 'Doing Business’ indicators, Property Registration is where Togo has improved the most since 2018. Indeed, after spending years in the lowest part of this ranking, the country now seeks to beat Rwanda which is the best performer on this index in Africa. To do so, Lomé has been introducing many reforms, with the latest batch implemented this year.
From professionalization to digitization, through legislative regulations, Togo’s public procurement framework is constantly being modernized. Several reforms have been implemented to improve the sector much to the benefit of the private sector, which is the focus of the National Development Plan.
To improve its business environment, Togo introduced some important reforms related to the payment of tax and duties. From the replacement of some taxes to the cancellation of others through exemptions, the country has only one objective: offer the most attractive tax framework to investors and economic operators. To achieve this, the authorities relied on digitization.
