Farmers are facing supply shortages that could eat into food production after coronavirus shutdowns in Chinese manufacturing.
Stocks of essential farm inputs, including controversial weed killer glyphosate, which remains the most commonly used farm chemical in Australia, are running low after a spike in demand after recent drought-breaking rain.
The glyphosate shortage comes as Bayer prepares to defend two big class actions in Australia launched by farmers and others who allege its Roundup product caused their cancer.
Farm chemicals distributor Nufarm said the coronavirus outbreak and extended manufacturing closures in China had coincided with rain across eastern and western Australia.
Nutrien, the dominant player in Australian farm supply and services, said the active ingredients in a range of herbicides, pesticides and fungicides were available only from China.
It predicted worldwide shortages of important farm chemicals within six to nine months if there was an extended breakdown in Chinese manufacturing.
Nufarm and other suppliers in Australia steadily reduced their inventories of farm chemicals during the drought as demand fell away.
A Nufarm spokesman said delays in shipments of raw materials from China had coincided with a "significant spike in demand due to the recent widespread rainfall, making supply of some products very tight".
"It’s still a developing situation but we have raw materials on ships from China right now and this will help ease the supply and demand balance," he said.
Nufarm reopened its formulation plant in Laverton last year after clearing about $100 million of inventory that had built up over the drought.
Nutrien chief executive Chuck Magro, in Australia for the first time since the Canadian fertiliser giant added Ruralco to its Landmark operations here, said it was well placed to meet demand for the most promising winter cropping season since 2016.
Mr Magro said Nutrien was keeping a close eye on supply chain disruption in China and foreshadowed global crop production issues if coronavirus problems escalated.
"There are several active ingredients that are exclusively from China. These would be things like active ingredients for pesticides, herbicides, fungicides," he said.
"We are well positioned from an inventory perspective I would say around the world for the first six months of this year, but if that situation persists and we still see supply chain disruption coming out of China over the next six months, nine months then I think we are going to see a shortage of some pretty important crop chemicals.
"We are monitoring that very closely. It is not going to impact us for the northern American spring season or for where we are today in Australia."
Elders boss Mark Allison said crunch time in Australia would come around the end of this month and then around Anzac Day, traditionally the peak of seeding for winter grain crops.
Mr Allison said Elders had stocks but supplies of glyphosate and another weed killer, MCPA, had run low across Australia.
He said fresh supplies were being dispatched from China and  glyphosate should arrive next week.
"Factories in southern China have been up and running for a week to 10 days and getting back to full operation," he said.
Bayer Australia said it sourced most of its glyphosate active ingredient from the US and that supply of its branded Roundup products had not been affected by the supply chain issues in China.
A Bayer spokesman said: "The recent widespread rains in the eastern states and parts of Western Australia, together with current uncertainty of glyphosate supply in the broader market, has led to a spike in demand for glyphosate-based products, at least in the short term.
How the coronavirus is changing markets, business and politics.
Brad Thompson writes across business and politics from Western Australia for The Australian Financial Review. Brad is based in our Perth bureau. Connect with Brad on Twitter . Email Brad at bradthompson@afr.com
Peter Ker covers resource companies, based in Melbourne. Connect with Peter on Twitter . Email Peter at pker@afr.com
