Area farms have seen sales increases of meat boxes and community-supported agriculture shares, but the gains don’t offset the revenue from local restaurants.
Apr 19th 2020 - 8pm.
Weaned piglets crowd together at Y-ker Acres farm in Carlton. (File / News Tribune)
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused disruptions to farms across Minnesota, but Carlton’s Y-ker Acres’ meat delivery service — started before the outbreak — is gaining steam and providing another source of revenue as restaurants and bars cut back their purchases.
Y-ker Acres, which raises pigs and beef cattle, made a name for itself with a farm-to-table business model delivering to restaurants in Duluth. Recently, the small farm also started delivering boxes of its meat to customers from the Twin Cities to the North Shore — a concept that has boomed for owner Matt Weik since the pandemic gained traction in March.
A small box of meat is $130 and contains 3 pounds each of sausage, bacon and chops as well as three chef-made items like soup, pulled pork or deli meat. A larger box is available for $250 and contains double the amount of the small box, Weik said. Y-ker also periodically sells similarly portioned beef boxes, though those are currently unavailable.
Y-ker Acres in Carlton has seen a dramatic increase in the sale of its meat boxes since the COVID-19 pandemic began closing restaurants and bars. Small boxes typically contain 3 pounds of sausage, bacon and chops as well as three chef-made items. (Photo courtesy of Y-ker Acres)
Since the pandemic began closing bars and restaurants across the nation, Weik said, there has been a surge in online orders for his farm’s meat. Y-ker sold an average of 15 boxes per month, but in the last two biweekly deliveries, they’ve sent out 60 boxes.
“We weren’t really trying to sell them very hard before,” Weik said. “We were kind of in beta mode working out the kinks, but we’ve had to 100% switch what we’ve been doing, since restaurant sales are usually 80% of our business. We have seen an increase — which has been great — but it isn’t nearly what we need to keep the farm going.”
Y-ker sells meat to Duluth Grill, Ursa Minor Brewing, New Scenic Cafe and other restaurants from Minneapolis to Grand Marais, but since Gov. Tim Walz ordered bars and restaurants to close or offer only pickup or delivery service, sales have plummeted.
Other farms in the area have also seen an increase in retail sales and community-supported agriculture, or CSA, but there are still concerns about lost revenue to restaurants and uncertainty around farmers markets this summer.
Food Farm in Wrenshall has seen a similar uptick in the farm’s sales of its CSA shares. Owner Janaki Fisher-Merritt said the summer CSA program filled up about six weeks earlier this year than it typically does.
CSA shares make up about 50% of Food Farm’s annual revenue and 50% is wholesale to restaurants and grocery stores in the area. Sales to restaurants disappeared almost overnight, Fisher-Merritt said, and the uptick in CSA sales won’t cover the loss to restaurants.
Food Farm's first harvest of spinach, among other winter vegetables, was recently sent out to those who purchased CSA shares. (Photo courtesy of Food Farm)
“Right now it is really hard to know what to plan for,” Fisher-Merritt said. “Normally, we have a different product mix for restaurants versus CSAs. ... Everything is different in the processing and packaging between the different markets. You take one market out of that system, we get less profitable really quickly.”
Food Farm sells different vegetables to different markets, Fisher-Merritt, said. CSAs don’t typically receive kale while carrots and other vegetables are sorted by size. Larger carrots go to restaurants, while CSAs and retail purchasers want smaller varieties.
Catherine Conover of Stone’s Throw Farm in Wrenshall said CSA signups were initially slow, but they’ve increased in the past week.
“I don’t know if other places are full or if people are learning more about it, but we’ve had more signups,” Conover said.
Stone’s Throw doesn’t wholesale to grocery stores or restaurants, but typically sells at the Carlton County Farmers Market in Cloquet. It’s unclear when the market that usually opens in June will start this year or what it will look like once it does open. Conover said she is unsure if she will try to sell at the market this season.
Farmer Rob Gamble watches a small number of his laying hens recently at Promised Land Farm south of Carlton. (Steve Kuchera / skuchera@duluthnews.com)
Promised Land Farm in Carlton doesn’t sell traditional CSA shares, but it has seen an increase in individual sales — online and at a farm store — as well as wholesale to grocery stores, according to owner Rob Gamble.
“We supply both to grocery stores and restaurants,” Gamble said. “Of course, the restaurant has disappeared on us, but for whatever reason, demand at grocery stores storage has gone up tremendously.”
The Super One supermarket chain lost one of its egg suppliers, providing Promised Land with a new venue to sell its products. Gamble was unsure if the increased demand for eggs from his farm will continue, but for the moment it has helped offset some of the losses in restaurants.
Y-ker is in a different position than other local farms, however, with the vast majority of its revenue coming from restaurants now closed or operating on a limited basis.
A laying hen takes a dirt bath at Promised Land Farm recently. (Steve Kuchera / skuchera@duluthnews.com)
“They are just ramping up on their animal numbers and have a huge feed bill and restaurants are most of their sales,” Fisher-Merritt said. “For Y-ker, it has been a real problem. For me, it has mostly just been a headache.”
The cost to small farms selling to restaurants is “quite staggering,” Weik said, and it’s unclear if the sales will return once the pandemic ends.
“Our focus right now is trying to get to the place where the boxes might be able to support us,” Weik said. “We have no idea how many restaurants will still order from us, how many will survive this aftermath and how many people will want to even go.”
Rob Gamble checks the eggs in one of his farm’s nesting boxes. (Steve Kuchera / skuchera@duluthnews.com)
A young lamb rests next to its mother at Promised Land Farm near Carlton. (Steve Kuchera / skuchera@duluthnews.com)
