Romaine and red leaf lettuce, spotted at the Portland Farmers Market on Wednesday, Sept. 19, 2018. Local farmers have seen demand for community-supported agriculture increase exponentially over the last month amid the coronavirus pandemic. (Grant Butler, The Oregonian/OregonLive)Grant Butler, The Oregonian/Oreg
Jessie Blume, the co-owner of Totum Farm , used to make the drive from Corvallis to Portland once a month to deliver meat to customers enrolled in the small family farm’s membership program.
Now, she makes the drive one to two times a week.
Blume has seen demand increase exponentially over the last month as people have grown increasingly wary about shopping in crowded grocery stores and nervous about confronting empty shelves amid the coronavirus pandemic. Over the last three weeks, Blume said orders for Totum Farm’s ethically-raised chicken, pork and beef have increased fivefold.
“We’ve seen a huge increase in demand,” Blume said. “Absolutely, this is the busiest we’ve been in eight years.”
Blume is not alone. While some farmers who primarily sell food directly to restaurants have struggled to retain business since restaurants were forced to stop on-site dining last month, farmers who offer community-supported agriculture, commonly called CSA or farm shares, have had to hustle to keep up with increased demand.
CSA members generally pay a lump sum, usually at the start of the planting season, to join a farm’s program. The deposit guarantees customers weekly boxes of produce or meat for a set number of weeks. Boxes are either delivered or available for pickup, making them an increasingly appealing option for people looking to safely purchase food while avoiding crowds.
“I think that this is really a moment for local food to shine,” said Emily Cooper, the owner of Full Cellar Farm in Boring. “We’re already doing a lot of the things that make people’s food safer. At my farm, there’s me, and I have one employee. The two of us are going to be the only people that touch the food before the end user gets it. We also harvest a lot of vegetables the day before or two days before people get them, so in terms of freshness, nutrition and flavor, it’s also the highest quality that they could get.”
While farmers say they are grateful for the new interest in their CSA programs, meeting increased demand has been a challenge. Some farmers have already sold out of their CSA memberships, even though many won’t start delivering boxes until May or June.
Cooper put together a crop plan and began planting seeds in February with the expectation that she would sell 100 farm shares before starting to send out boxes during the first week of June. She ended up selling 115 shares, before deciding to close sales.
Linda Davies, the CSA manager at Winter Green Farm near Eugene, said the farm is already getting close to selling out of the 500 farm shares it offers every year, even though they won’t start deliveries until the second week of June. Davies sent an email to longtime customers this week informing them that they would need to purchase their farm shares soon if they wanted to be involved in this year’s program.
“We’ve thought about trying to plant more due to the increased demand, but of course, our limitation is our land and what we have available to plant on,” Davies said. “I think that will be a factor for many farms. … You don’t want to increase so much that then you aren’t giving people the quality of food that you want to give. You promise people a certain amount of vegetables and you want to be able to provide them with what you promised and what they paid for.”
Other farms have tried to quickly adjust their plans for the season to accommodate the increased interest. Michael Guebert, co-owner of Terra Farma in Corbett, launched a small meat CSA program for the first time this year. After all 26 memberships sold out, he began putting people on a waitlist and started looking at options to increase the farm’s capacity. He is in talks with two farmers who could potentially raise animals for Terra Farma on their properties and is considering purchasing a walk-in freezer if demand remains high.
Blume has started selling frozen meat that she had earmarked for farmers markets, which she usually begins attending in May. She is also increasing the number of animals on the farm to keep up with demand. Last month, she made the decision to waive delivery fees for customers who order through the farm’s website in hopes of continuing to provide as many people as possible with a safe way to access food during the coronavirus crisis.
“I’m just having people put a cooler on their front porch, so we don’t even have to interact,” Blume said. “It keeps everybody safe. They don’t have to leave their home. I just zip around and people wave from their windows, but other than that, I’m not seeing people face-to-face and having conversations right now.”
The Portland Area CSA Coalition has compiled a list of farms that offer CSA programs on their website . Customers can search by location to find out what farms have pickup locations or delivery options in their neighborhoods. While many CSA programs are quickly selling out, plenty remain open as well.
Cooper said that it has been tremendous to see so much support for local farms from the community during this difficult time, but she is hoping that the support for local farms will continue, even when the crisis finally ends.
“There were already a lot of benefits to buying local food and I’m really glad a lot more people are turning to that now,” Cooper said. “I hope that people realize how great it is and stick with us after this catastrophe is over.”
Subscribe to Oregonian/OregonLive newsletters and podcasts for the latest news and top stories.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
