With agriculture credit increased from Rs 87,000 crore in 2003 to 15 lakh crore in Budget 2020, Ramandeep Mann a farm activist said that they have to see the about financial inclusion of farmers. “Just 41% of small & marginal farmers avail credit from schedule commercial banks. Who will cover the rest,” said Mann.
NEW DELHI: Farm leaders and outfits said that they were disappointed with no increase in PM Kisan pay-out to farmers and allocation kept at Rs 75,000 crore similar to the previous year in the Union Budget 2020-21 tabled in the Lok Sabha by Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Saturday.
“It's a lost opportunity. The Budget was expected to provide more money into the hands of farmers which would create more rural demand. More rural demand would lead to more consumption, driving the GDP up. That was the surest way to emerge out of slowdown,” said Food and agriculture policy analyst Devinder Sharma.
He said that the 16 action points was unlikely to help in income augmentation for 70% of rural households who depend primarily on agriculture. The budget allocation this year for agriculture and allied sectors is almost same as last year, he said.
Yogendra Yadav, founder of Jai Kisan Andolan and president of Swaraj India said the funds given to Food Corporation of India for procurement and PDS operations have been slashed from Rs 1,51,000 lakh crore to Rs 75,000 crores.
“This unprecedented cut is bound to hurt procurement operations and would leave the farmers at the mercy of private traders. This suspicion is strengthened when we see that the allocation for Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan (PM AASHA) , Monthly Income Scheme (MIS) and Price Support Scheme Schemes have also been reduced from Rs1,500 crore to Rs 500 crores and Rs 3,000 crores to Rs 2,000 crores respectively,” he said.
The drastic reduction in fertilizer subsidy from Rs 79,996 crores to Rs 70,139 crores comes in the wake of increasing price for fertilizers in the domestic and international market, said Yadav.
Further the reduction in funds allocated for MNREGA, the primary source of sustenance for agricultural labour, will lead to suppression of demand for work and throttle an important livelihood source of rural people, said Yadav. “Against the estimated expenditure of Rs 71,000 crore for MNREGA in this financial year, the finance minister has allotted only Rs 61,500 crore for the next financial year,” said Yadav.
The Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha avem Utthan Mahabhiyan (PM KUSUM) to be expanded to provide 20 lakh farmers in setting up standalone solar pumps and further 15 lakh for grid connected pumps is a good step, said Jakhar adding that they had hoped for more such steps.
“It is a brave attempt under the circumstances but will not yet double farmer incomes. Increase in allocations for farming sector only manages to offset inflation,” said Ajay Vir Jakhar, chairman of the Bharat Krishak Samaj, a farmer’ organisation.
He said that there were no details on many announcements like program to balance use of fertilizer which could be a trojan horse for farmers.
On account of increasing gap between input cost and market price of commodities farmers were expecting augmentation of income through lowering of interest rates on agri-credit and increase in the amount of Rs 6000 under PMKSY, but without any relief, said Sudhir Panwar, president of the Kisan Jagriti Manch.
“With the subsidy amount on fertiliser reduced by Rs 8000 crore, this will impact urea prices,” said Panwar. Also, without any public investment, how will Government double the farmers income in 2022, he asked.
With agriculture credit increased from Rs 87,000 crore in 2003 to 15 lakh crore in Budget 2020, Ramandeep Mann a farm activist said that they have to see the about financial inclusion of farmers. “Just 41% of small & marginal farmers avail credit from schedule commercial banks. Who will cover the rest,” said Mann.
