The Daly family say they are not "competition-enterers", so you might be able to imagine their surprise to find out they have been crowned Australia's Farmers of the Year.
"Our daughter nominated us without us knowing, so we're pretty shocked and stoked with the news," Susie Daly said.
Susie and Gerard Daly have run a potato farm in Dunalley in Tasmania's south for around 30 years, but it is a potato farm with a difference — it is also a distillery and factory for making convenience foods.
The couple were inspired to expand their business after bushfires swept through the area in 2013, destroying more than 150 properties and taking the life of a firefighter.
The Dalys have found ways to use the second-grade potato harvest for their distillery.
While that is now long in the past for the Dalys, it helped spur them on to find better uses for their second-grade potatoes in order to make the operation more sustainable.
The Dalys have introduced new sorting practices to help cut waste on their potato farm.
"Because we wash potatoes, there's a part of it that isn't suitable for the specifications for the supermarkets, so we started to look at value-adding our second-grade ones that just had harvester damage or were misshaped, because there's actually nothing wrong with those potatoes," Ms Daly said.
That is where the idea for Australia's first potato vodka came from, and that has since been expanded into potato gin, limoncello and coffee liqueur.
"It was very hard to learn how to make potato vodka because most vodka now is made with grain … but we're pretty proud of our distillery now," Ms Daly said.
"It's been a tough time, you know, I feel like I've learned two different university careers at once — one in food technology and distilling — it's two totally different things.
"There's been probably more downs than there has been ups, but it's the way of the future for our business, and we now have three children working back in the business, which probably wouldn't have happened if we hadn't diversified."
Rural news in your inbox?
Subscribe for the national headlines of the day.
Leaving the family farm to accept the award at Parliament House in Canberra means leaving their comfort zone.
"It's a big black-tie event and I'd rather be in work clothes any day than in a suit and tie, that's for sure," Mr Daly said.
The Dalys were also honoured with the Award for Excellence in Innovation, but they were not the only farmers to take home prizes.
Here are the winners of the other categories:
Young Farmer of the Year: Ben Martin
Ben Martin said it was "great to be appreciated" in the industry.
A lot further north, Ben Martin grows mangoes in Bowen in north Queensland.
But like the Dalys, he had no idea his wife had put him in the running for Young Farmer of the Year.
"Huge honour. Something I probably don't feel worthy of, we do a lot for the industry and it's great to be appreciated and thought of in that aspect," he said.
Following in his parents' footsteps, he expanded the mango operation to include 20,000 trees producing different varieties for exportation.
Ben Martin followed in his parents' footsteps, taking over the mango business.
He said he also learned to come back from adversity, bouncing back from the destruction of 2017's Cyclone Debbie.
"Complete and utter devastation. You couldn't drive down the rows, trees as thick as your legs snapped off knee-high," he said.
"Cyclone Debbie, you know at the time it's hard to see it, but she definitely taught us a lot."
Farming Legend of the Year: Nils Blumann
In his eighties, Nils Blumann has been farming for 63 years, and is not stopping anytime soon.
Nils Blumann said while "hard work" was valuable, "use your brains as well".
The grain and mixed-grazing farmer has a 3,250-hectare property north of Esperance in Western Australia, and has been recognised for his community-wide focus over more than six decades.
Mr Blumann put his success down to this simple statement.
"Hard work, use your brains as well, make do, ensure that you're input costs are low and that you achieve as high a price for your product as you are able to do," he said.
"I love farming and all things associated with growing healthy, profitable and sustainable crops and caring for our livestock."
Agricultural Student of the Year: Sally Downie
Charles Sturt University student and dairy farmer Sally Downie was praised for her work on a project connecting famers with mental health services.
Ms Downie said she did not expect someone doing their degree by distance could win such an award.
"I am pretty shocked to be honest," she said.
She said agriculture was worth the sacrifices it demanded.
"It's all I have ever known, it is what I have grown up with and I have always just loved doing it," she said.
Rural Consultant of the Year: Sally Murfet
Sally Murfet won her award for her work helping farmers build their businesses.
Back down on the Apple Isle, Sally Murfet won recognition for helping farmers keep up with changes in technology and rapid globalisation.
"I believe the power of agriculture is its people," Ms Murfet said.
"I get a real buzz out of condensing complex human resource management issues and transforming them into practical outcomes that translate into growth opportunities, from the farm gate and beyond."
Rural Community Leader of the Year: Jackie Jarvis
Based in the Margaret River region of Western Australia, Jackie Jarvis has built a reputation for being a champion for rural women.
"I believe women in small rural towns are often the drivers of innovative new business ideas that can add significantly to the economic and community growth of their towns," she said.
"It is important that they have people willing to help volumise their voice and support their initiatives, and this has always been my motivation."
Involved in a number of women's organisations, Ms Jarvis was the chief executive of the Rural, Regional, Remote Women's Network of Western Australia — work the judges said has a far-reaching impact.
