Editor's Note: This edition of Morning Agriculture is published weekdays at 10 a.m. POLITICO Pro Agriculture subscribers hold exclusive early access to the newsletter each morning at 6 a.m. Learn more about POLITICO Pro's comprehensive policy intelligence coverage, policy tools and services at www.politicopro.com .
— The Federal Reserve delivered another sobering assessment of agricultural conditions in major farming regions across the Midwest, as trade and weather challenges continue to pose financial problems for producers.
— The Trump administration laid out a possible path for massive Chinese agricultural purchases under the new “phase one” trade agreement between Beijing and Washington. But China has yet to confirm it will buy more than $40 billion of U.S. farm goods, as President Donald Trump has claimed.
— House Democrats grilled the Agriculture Department’s top nutrition official about a proposal to crack down on eligibility for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program — and why USDA took so long to acknowledge that hundreds of thousands of students would no longer be directly certified for free meals under the rule.
Get the free POLITICO news app for the critical updates you need. Breaking news, analysis, videos, and podcasts, right at your fingertips. Download for iOS and Android .
HAPPY THURSDAY, OCT. 17! Welcome to Morning Ag, where we’re wishing everyone a very happy National Pasta Day! Send tips to [email protected] and @ryanmccrimmon , and follow us @Morning_Ag .
FED SAYS FARM FINANCES ARE WORSENING: The central bank released its latest “Beige Book” report on the economic strength of specific sectors and regions, and the survey says… agriculture is still in a tough spot. The Fed reports that farm conditions across the country “deteriorated further due to the ongoing impacts of adverse weather, weak commodity prices and trade disruptions.”
The troubles are especially pronounced in key farming regions, like the Midwestern corn belt. In the Seventh District, which includes Iowa and parts of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan and Wisconsin, industry sources surveyed by the Federal Reserve “had mounting concerns about how much of this year’s crop would be able to fully mature before a hard frost hits.”
In states further down the Mississippi River, like Missouri and Arkansas, “agriculture conditions have declined modestly compared with the previous report” (on Sept. 4), according to the St. Louis Fed, citing a sharp drop in corn, rice and soybean production. “The outlook among contacts remained relatively pessimistic due to depressed commodity prices and trade uncertainty.”
In the Upper Midwest, “heavy rains that hampered crop planting this season have persisted into the fall and may complicate harvests in some areas, according to sources,” the central bank said. “Recent forecasts indicated that corn and soybean production in [Ninth] District states may decrease 10 percent and 20 percent, respectively, in 2019 compared with last year.”
HOW CHINA COULD OPEN THE U.S. AG SPIGOT: There’s still plenty of skepticism about whether China realistically can buy between $40 billion and $50 billion of U.S. farm products in a year, considering ag exports to the country peaked at roughly $25 billion under the Obama administration. But if Beijing aims to make good on that piece of the partial trade deal, here’s how it might work, according to Trump administration officials:
China will keep making goodwill purchases between now and mid-November when Trump meets with Chinese President Xi Jinping at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Chile. The plan is for China to scale up its purchases to record levels in 2020, reports Pro Trade’s Adam Behsudi. And by 2021, Beijing will have removed non-tariff barriers tied to food safety and GMO approvals, opening China’s floodgates to a surge of U.S. farm goods.
But, but, but: A person briefed on the trade talks said China is only expected to significantly ramp up ag purchases once Trump removes his threat to impose a new round of tariffs on Dec. 15. And Beijing would have leverage in negotiations if it reestablishes itself as a dominant buyer of U.S. ag product.
“They’re going to be playing the farm card in 2020, even after starting and fulfilling their agriculture purchases,” the person said. That could include shutting off purchases in response to U.S. actions on other fronts (e.g. support for pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong).
China has also indicated that any increase in imports will depend on market demand, as well as compliance with global trade rules and the removal of U.S. tariffs. Ken Morrison, a commodity markets expert who worked in China for years, suggested those preconditions could prove to be deal-breakers. “This sets up a replay of May when Trump accused China of reneging on the ‘deal,’” Morrison told MA earlier this week.
DEMOCRATS DECRY DELAY ON SNAP RULE ANALYSIS: USDA posted a report late Tuesday night estimating that about 982,000 low-income students would no longer automatically qualify for free meals under the department’s proposed rule to limit so-called broad-based categorical eligibility in SNAP. That’s nearly twice the number that USDA had informally told congressional staff when the rule was first rolled out in July — a number that the department for months refused to publicly confirm.
Democrats on Wednesday questioned why it took USDA so long to make public the higher estimates, our Helena Bottemiller Evich reports. “After waiting months for this analysis, we now have learned that this rule will be even worse for students and families than we originally understood,” Rep. Suzanne Bonamici (D-Ore.) said at a House Education and Labor hearing with Brandon Lipps, USDA’s deputy undersecretary for Food, Nutrition and Consumer Services.
By the numbers: USDA’s analysis showed that out of 982,000 kids who would lose automatic enrollment for free meals based on their families participation in SNAP, 445,000 students or 45 percent would still be eligible for free meals; 497,000 (51 percent) would be eligible for reduced-price meals; and 40,000 (4 percent) would no longer qualify for either.
What’s next: USDA reopened the comment period after posting the new analysis, giving the public an additional 14 days to weigh in on the proposed rule.
TARIFFS COULD SPARK U.S.-EU TRADE WAR: The U.S. is poised to impose duties on $7.5 billion in European goods starting Friday, including a wide range of food and farm goods. But moving forward with those tariffs could trigger a damaging trade war, Italian President Sergio Mattarella warned Trump on Wednesday, reports Pro Trade’s Doug Palmer.
During an Oval Office meeting, Matterella said the two sides should seek a negotiated solution, “because the alternative to that would be tariffs, followed by retaliation, followed by further tariffs.” Italian cheeses are among the targeted products, but Trump suggested on Wednesday that his administration could reconsider hitting Italy as hard.
ICYMI: A recent WTO ruling allows the U.S. to impose the duties in retaliation for EU subsidies for Airbus. Brussels has filed a counter-complaint over U.S. support for Boeing, but a decision isn’t expected for eight months, and U.S. officials suggest the potential award wouldn’t be nearly as high.
— Nearly 50 ag, environmental and rural groups are calling out “U.S. obstructionism” in global agroecology efforts. “We are deeply concerned by and condemn the U.S.’s repeated obstruction within the [U.N. Committee on World Food Security] and demand that the U.S.’s delegates respect the multilateral process on agroecology,” the National Family Farm Coalition and other organizations wrote in a letter to U.S. representatives on the panel. “We know that the U.S. government often blocks pro-family farmer and pro-rural community policy discussion at the U.N.”
— House Agriculture Chairman Collin Peterson joined a chorus of critics blasting Trump’s new biofuels plan intended to help corn growers and ethanol producers hurt by the administration’s heavy use of blending exemptions for oil refineries. “The EPA’s announcement [on Tuesday] falls short of the promises made by the president, and doesn’t undo the damage done to farmers and biofuel producers,” the Minnesota Democrat said in a statement.
— House Republicans filed a bill to replace the Renewable Fuel Standard by requiring higher octane in standard gasoline. The legislation has been pitched as a way to move past the annual arguments over RFS, but ethanol producers say the octane level isn’t high enough to force refiners to use their biofuel instead of petroleum. (h/t POLITICO’s Afternoon Energy. )
— A further escalation in trade tension could pose a significant risk to the global financial system, including a no-deal Brexit at the end of October, the IMF warned on Wednesday. Pro Financial Services’ Victoria Guida has more.
— The Senate next week might begin debating appropriations bills, potentially including the Agriculture-FDA measure , according to a person with knowledge of the plan, Pro Budget’s Caitlin Emma reports.
— New Jersey legislators will introduce a bill that would require the state to pay for reduced-price meals for eligible students. It’s part of a broader effort to stop “lunch shaming,” or punishing students with cafeteria debt. Our Pro New Jersey colleagues have the story.
— Western Growers Executive Vice President Dave Puglia will be the group’s next president and CEO, starting in February after current CEO Tom Nassif retires. Read the announcement.
