Parliament on Monday passed the Finance Bill 2020 reducing the lock-in period of investing black money in the share market.
In the 2020-21 fiscal budget, Finance Minister AHM Mustafa Kamal proposed three years lock-in tenure for investing black money in the capital market. But it has been reduced to one year while passing the Finance Bill.
The imposed tax on zero coupon bond has been taken back to its previous position, which is zero.
The Finance Bill also waived three wheelers from giving 15 percent supplementary duty on BRTA fees and charges.
It also made mandatory depositing 20 percent of a disputed VAT amount which was imposed by any VAT official while filing any appeal. But no deposit is required for going to Customs, Excise and VAT Appellate Tribunal. Previously it was 10 percent for filing appeal while another ten percent for going Tribunal.
The Finance Minister moved the bill in the House.
Finance Minister AHM Mustafa Kamal in his winding-up speech expressed his high optimism to implement the budget in this adverse situation.
"Asian Development Bank projected our GDP growth as 7.5 percent which is closer to our projection of 8.2 percent, Inshallah we will be able to implement the budget, to implement this budget people of our country will come forward," he said.
He said that people of the country got the highest priority during this pandemic as the government wants to save people and revive the affected economy.
He mentioned that the Prime Minister already announced 19 stimulus packages which are under implementation level.
The Minister said that in this budget the government has given highest importance to  the health sector and allotted Tk 29,247 crore. Besides, to face the COVID-19 pandemic additional Tk 10,000 has been proposed.
He said that at the beginning of formulating budget the Prime Minister asked him to give priority to the roots of the country.
"Our root is our agriculture, our rural economy, for that we have given extra importance to agriculture sector where 40 percent of our employment is generated," he said.
He believed that this agricultural sector would be the unique area of country's advancement.
The Finance Minister said that people  of different sectors are now facing a critical time due to the stagnant economic situation in the country and this budget is for all.
"I can’t exclude anyone from this budget, if I could left anyone then the size of the budget could have been small with the budget deficit, but the truth is very much tough, and we have loved the truth knowing everything," he said.
Opposition bench members Pir Fazlur Rahman, Harun Ur Rashid, Shamim Haider Patwari, Fakhrul Imam, Begum Rawshan Ara Mannan, Kazi Firoze Rashid and Mujibul Huq proposed publishing the Finance Bill for eliciting public opinions.
In response, the Finance Minister expressed his firm stance not to spare anyone involved in any anomaly in the banking sector.
"We have to go long way, we have to walk far, but this path is not smooth, we can do that if we get help from all," he said.
Later, the bill was passed by voice vote.
The bill was introduced in the House on June 11 where Finance Minister AHM Mustafa Kamal set an ambitious 8.2 percent GDP for the next fiscal stepping up on a comprehensive plan includes four main strategies although he himself admitted that all calculations about the global economy have been turned upside down under the impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic.
Firstly, the government will discourage luxury expenditures and prioritise government spending that creates job.
Secondly, the government will create loan facilities through commercial banks at subsidised interest rate for the affected industries and businesses so that they can revive their economic activities and maintain competitiveness home and abroad.
And finally, the government will increase money supply to the economy while making a delicate balance between increased money supply and possible inflationary pressure.
The House accepted some minor amendments to the Finance Bill, 2020 from Pir Fazlur Rahman, Kazi Firoze Rashid, Mujibul Huq Chunnu, Abu Hasan Mahmud Ali, Prof Ali Ashraf and Mashiur Rahman Ranga.
Later, the proposals for publishing the bill for eliciting public opinions and other amendments were rejected by voice vote.
