In the third tranche, Finance Minister, Nirmala Sitharaman on Friday covered a total of 11 meaures covering farmers, animal husbandry, fisheries, dairy allocations  etc. Finance Minister has also changed the Essential Commodity Acts. She has taken 8 infrastructural measures and 3 for the governance and administration. Finance  Minister has also taken some unique measures like encouraging the honeybee business and herbal farming on the banks of the river Ganga. ETBFSI has crafted the 11 key highlights of the Finance Minister’s third package.
A fund of Rs 1 lakh crores for aggregators, FPOs, primary agriculture co-operative societies for strengthening the farm-gate infrastructure is being introduced. This will be used for the development of cold chains, post-harvest management infrastructures, storage centers, etc.
A fund of Rs 10,000 crores is being set up for the formalisation of Micro Food Enterprises (MFEs). This scheme will get executed with a cluster-based approach. Marketing products globally will also be facilitated through this. Health, nutritionary, hygiene products, etc. 2 lakh MFEs will benefit from this move.
Rs 20,000 crore is being assigned for fisheries through the Matsya Sampada Yojana. This money will be provided for all activities related to fisheries and aquaculture. This will help in doubling India's exports to reach 1 lakh crores. Out of this, Rs 9,000 crore is being assigned for infrastructure, i.e., New vessels, fishing harbours, etc. For the holiday period as well they will be given assistance. Personal and boat insurance will be provided. The government expects an additional fish production of 70 lakh tonnes in the next 5 years. 55 lakh people will get jobs through this initiative.
A National Animal Disease Control Programme is being launched aimed at doing a 100% vaccination of all cattle, which constitutes about 53 crore animals. Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) has to be eradicated. The commitment of over Rs 13,000 crores has been made for this since Jan.
Rs 15,000 crores will be spent for an Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund. This will be done to support private investment in the dairy industry and provide incentives for establishing plants for the export of niche products.
Rs 4,000 crores will be used to promote herbal cultivation on 1 lakh hectares of land in the next 2 years. This will lead to an income generation of Rs 5,000 crores for farmers .
Rs 500 crores are being provided for bee keeping initiative, from which 2 lakh bee keepers will benefit and the quality of honey being produced will increase.
Operation Green, which was earlier dedicated only to Tomatoes, Onions and Potatoes (TOP) is now being extended to all fruits and vegetables. Rs 500 crores are provided for this scheme under which 50% the subsidy will be provided on transport from surplus to deficient markets along with a 50% subsidy on storage as well.
The government will make amendments to the Essential Commodities Act of 1955 in order to enable better price realisation for farmers by attracting investments and making the agricultural sector more competitive.
Agricultural marketing reforms will be made to provide adequate choices for farmers to sell their produce. A framework for e-trading of agricultural produce will also be designed.
A facilitative legal framework will be created to enable farmers to engage with processors, aggregators, retailers, etc in a transparent manner. This framework will include certain essential aspects such as risk mitigation, assured returns, and quality standardisation for farmers.
