The Global Food & Agriculture Technology and Products Market is expected to exceed more than US$ 731.5 Billion by 2024 at a CAGR of 8.42% in the given forecast period.
Market Research Engine has published a new report titled as “ Food & Agriculture Technology and Products Market Size by Industry (Animal, Agriculture, Cold Chain, Food & Beverages), By Region (North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, Rest of the World), Market Analysis Report, Forecast 2018-2024.”
FYI, You will get latest updated report as per the COVID-19 Impact on this industry. Our updated reports will now feature detailed analysis that will help you make critical decisions.
Food & agriculture technologies square measure used for production of machines to be utilized in farming and to form food merchandise. Varied technologies like wet and temperature sensors, robots, aerial pictures, GPS technology, et al square measure utilized in agriculture and food industries. The robotic systems and advanced devices provide economical, eco-friendly, safe, and profitable business. The food & agriculture technology and merchandise market is driven by varied factors like a rise in demand and consumption of livestock-based merchandise and food.
Increased demand for livestock-based merchandise, food, and processed food are a number of the factors that contribute to the expansion of the food & agriculture technology and merchandise market. The food & agriculture technology and product market is growing in parallel to the increasing demand and consumption of livestock-based product and food. Increasing demand for convenience, packaged, and processed food product and government support to adopt trendy agricultural techniques are a number of the driving factors for the food & agriculture technology and product market. Use of huge information in agricultural farms and new technologies used for food process is making profitable opportunities for key players within the market globally.
The global Food & Agriculture Technology and Products market is segregated on the basis of Industry as Animal, Agriculture, Cold Chain, Food & Beverages, and Others.
The global Food & Agriculture Technology and Products market report provides geographic analysis covering regions, such as North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, and Rest of the World. The Food & Agriculture Technology and Products market for each region is further segmented for major countries including the U.S., Canada, Germany, the U.K., France, Italy, China, India, Japan, Brazil, South Africa, and others.
ADM, United Technologies, John Deere, Daikin Industries, Evonik, DSM, Signify Holding, SGS SA, Zoetis, Eurofins, and others are among the major players in the global Food & Agriculture Technology and Products market. The companies are involved in several growth and expansion strategies to gain a competitive advantage. Industry participants also follow value chain integration with business operations in multiple stages of the value chain.
The Food & Agriculture Technology and Products Market has been segmented as below:
Food & Agriculture Technology and Products Market, By Industry
