There were also suggestions to have an agriculture credit guarantee scheme, and a stronger institutional network to prevent multiple lending in the agriculture sector
Last Updated at August 29, 2019 00:51 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
In view of the significant stress in the agriculture sector, bankers at the state-level consultancy meet in Kolkata have called for longer repayment periods for loans under Kisan Credit Card (KCC) from 12 months to 36 or 48 months. There were also deliberations on allowing farmers to take fresh loans even if they fail to repay the entire loan, as long as they service the interest.
Based on direction from the department of financial services, public sector banks started a three-stage consultation process last week. They focused on nine issues, including digital banking, credit ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
