farMart started with an Uber-like model for tractors, but is now providing credit loan to underserved farmers and addressing some basic farming woes.
Alekh Sanghera’s grandfather was an active farmer for nearly six decades and passed away last year. Sanghera was fond of him and would often visit him in his village near Jalandhar. During those visits, the octogenarian would talk about the plight of the farming community and believed that given all the hard work the farmer puts in to produce the food we eat, he or she does not receive the due share. He once said, “Farming is no longer a respectable and profitable business. With all the technology revolution happening in India, no one is solving problems of farmers .”
Inspired to change this narrative, Sanghera, along with his friend Mehtab Hans and mentor Lokesh Singh launched an affordable Uber-like model named farMart for agri-machinery in 2016. The platform had a simple objective – connecting farmers that needed tractors, rotary tillers, and other agri-machineries to other farmers who could provide it on rent. However, it did not take them long to understand that the bigger challenge stinging the farming community was the inability to get financing for their farming needs.
Upon initial market research, Sanghera found that in India, less than 20% of smallholder farmers, which constitute over 85% of the market, have access to credit from formal financial institutions.
“Smallholder farmers are unable to acquire loans from banks and NFBCs as the financial institutions have no mechanism to assess their creditworthiness, track utilization and collect small ticket size payments from farmers. Agriculture is a seasonal activity and informal lenders tend to exploit farmers as capital is scarce during particular periods in cropping cycles,” the 28-year-old told ET.
This led to the co-founding team pivoting its Uber model to an agri-fintech one in April 2018.The platform, along with providing agri-machineries to farmers on rent, now helps smallholder farmers get access to low cost digital credit by providing them a virtual credit card through which they purchase farm inputs at its offline retail channels. This means the farmer does not get any cash, but the virtual credit card like system allows him to extend the funding available to him to rent farm equipments.
The reason behind farMart’s digital credit lending instead of cash disbursement is to ensure zero diversion of funds and to enable a cashless system. Further, the firm does proper screening to assess the creditworthiness of farmers. It has its own proprietary credit underwriting model which analyses over 50 data points about the farmers. The data gathered is basically on four broad categories- personal information, supplementary income of the family, details of their agricultural profile such as land size and types of crops they own and household assets such as tractors, cars, and the TV they own.
The credit lines are valid for one crop cycle (6 months) and when the time comes to return the loan, farmers are given the option to pay either through small ticket repayments between the season or after harvest in a single payment.
While farMart is on the journey of driving the digital payment concept in remote areas, it took note of the fact that due to poor digital literacy in the areas, it would need more analog efforts to facilitate their services. Since most of the customers use feature phones, the firm engages with them using WhatsApp or a missed call service. farMart has a toll free number on which farmers can give a missed call and they will receive a call back from the team within 30 minutes to address the order or inquiry.
While farMart has a smartphone light app which is in beta testing phase, Sanghera explained that farmers and retailers prefer Whatsapp and the missed call service since they carry low-end smartphones with less than 2 GB storage and do not like to save too many apps on their phones.
The missed-call service can also be used to avail agri-machineries for rent. Once the farMart team receives an order for machinery, it directs the service to the closest machinery on its platform. It is then the owner’s responsibility to send the tractor with a driver to plough the land and complete the order. The owner receives the full amount for the service, while farMart receives a commission for facilitating the transaction. Similarly, the startup earns its revenue by charging a fee from the farmers and the lending organization for their services.
The firm partners with local level retailers who sell farm inputs and on-board them on its platform. They work like farMart’s point of sale on-ground network.
“We have partnered with more than 100 such retailers who are our exclusive service partners. Further, over the last one year, we have disbursed over Rs 2 crore to more than 3000 farmers with less than 1% in NPA,” Sanghera quipped, adding that 87% of their customers are first time borrowers.
One such first-time borrower is Dhirendra from Rudauli village in UP’s Ayodhya district. He was convinced of farMart’s services when the latter’s team came into his village last year to give a demonstration. “I have been using farMart’s services for the last one year and have been able to buy seeds, pesticides, and manure easily and on time. farMart also helps in acquiring machines on rent and I can get tillage done on my fields when needed,” he said, adding that there are at least 23 farmers in his village who gain farm inputs using farMart.
The startup also made sure women farmers are not left behind. Interestingly, 10% of farMart’s customer base are women farmers. Babita, a 38-year-old widow from Bhitura village of UP’s Barabanki district, was struggling to arrange money to buy her farming needs after her husband’s death. “I wanted to give my land on rent after my husband’s death as it is hard for women to borrow money for farming needs. But since the time farMart has come to our area, I am able to order all the necessary inputs on credit simply by giving a missed call.”
While the firm’s ambitions are certainly empowering, it is riddled with a myriad of challenges. One of the foremost and fundamental challenges is digital infrastructure. Low level of digital literacy, smartphone penetration and low internal bandwidths act as roadblocks in farMart’s aim of smoothly running a digital credit lending platform. “Even after a major influx of smartphones in the country, there is a sizeable amount of the population that still owns a feature phone and not a smartphone, especially among the rural population,” Sanghera lamented.
Another challenge is the completely broken forward linkages which require massive investment. “Not many investors want to deal with business dealing with farmers directly,” he said, adding that due to this, players like farMart are open to the vagaries of weather and price fluctuations.
But this did not dampen the team’s spirits, who was able to raise an undisclosed amount of seed investment in March 2017 from the Indian Angel Network and LetsVenture.
In the next one year, the agri-fintech, which is currently operating in over 500 villages under four UP districts- Barabanki, Hardoi, Ayodhya and RaeBareli, is targeting to disburse loans worth Rs 100 crore to 1 lakh farmers. It envisages becoming the first agri-focused digital bank of the country. “Our aim is to be the go-to financial institution for the next generation of farmers,” said Sanghera.
farMart believes that its biggest competitor is not the financial institutions, but the informal market, which is deeply rooted into agriculture and is currently financing almost the entire value chain. “Our value proposition needs to be 100 times better and easier to use than offline market. That’s when we’ll be able to challenge and disrupt the ecosystem in true sense. For farming to become more profitable and efficient we have to make the farmer move away from local money lenders to formal sector,” the entrepreneur quipped.
