"In order to ensure that farmers do not have to face the situation of paying penal interest and they can continue getting the benefit of short term crop loans at a 4% interest rate, the government has decided to further to continuity the availability of 2% interest subvention to banks and 3% prompt repayment incentive to farmers," the ministry of agriculture said in a note.
The government has extended the benefit for loans falling due between March 1 and May 31.
The government said that farmers will get the 3% concession on interest rate on crop loans even if they fail to repay loans till May 31. This is sync with Reserve Bank of India 's three-month moratorium scheme for stressed borrowers.
Farmers get a 3% concession on crop loan interest for prompt repayment . Loans up to Rs 3 lakh are considered for this benefit. This helps borrowers with good repaying habit get loans at 4% annual rate.
"In order to ensure that farmers do not have to face the situation of paying penal interest and they can continue getting the benefit of short term crop loans at a 4% interest rate, the government has decided to further to continuity the availability of 2% interest subvention to banks and 3% prompt repayment incentive to farmers," the ministry of agriculture said in a note.
The government has extended the benefit for loans falling due between March 1 and May 31.
"Many farmers are not able to travel to bank branches for payment of their short term crop loan dues," the ministry said, inviting attention of Reserve Bank of India and the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development .
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
