Data from the FCI shows the combined stock of rice and wheat at more than 71 million tonnes.
NEW DELHI: The government is struggling to find storage space for expected rice stocks before procurement season starts this month, as granaries are overflowing and there is no plan to reduce stock.
“Storage is a big problem for us,” said a senior food ministry official, who did not wish to be identified. “Most of the procurement for the central pool happens in Punjab and Haryana, where godowns are brimming with grain. Since rice needs covered storage, unlike wheat that can be kept in makeshift plinth storage, there is a need to liquidate old stock to create space.”
Data from the Food Corporation of India (FCI), the agency that buys grains for the central pool for public distribution and other welfare schemes, shows the combined stock of rice and wheat at more than 71 million tonnes (mt), apart from 8 mt of unmilled paddy – the highest for August. This is almost three times the minimum stock needed to run welfare schemes.
National storage capacity is around 88 mt — 75 mt covered and 13 mt covered area plinth (CAP). “Around 75% of wheat procured from Punjab is stocked under CAP, which is partly exposed to rains and weather.
This time, more wheat will be exposed to rains as we expect heavy procurement,” said the official.
The liquidation of stock has become even more important as the cost of storage for FCI is increasing year by year. “FCI spent Rs 3,610 crore for foodgrain storage in 2017-18, which went up to Rs 4,358 crore in 2018-19. Cost is estimated to go up to Rs 5,201 crore in 2019-20. It makes sense to liquidate stock for some welfare programmes,” said another official.
In April, open auctions were launched for millers and biscuit manufacturers to dispose of 10 mt wheat and 5 mt rice from FCI godowns.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
