Under the PMFBY, which was launched in February 2016 by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, it is mandatory for loanee farmers to take insurance cover under this scheme. Currently, 58 per cent of the total farmers are loanee.
The Agriculture Minister said the PMFBY scheme has been made optional.
NEW DELHI: The government on Wednesday approved major changes in the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana ( PMFBY ) making it optional for farmers with a view to plug loopholes in the farm insurance scheme.
Under the PMFBY, which was launched in February 2016 by Prime Minister Narendra Modi , it is mandatory for loanee farmers to take insurance cover under this scheme.
Currently, 58 per cent of the total farmers are loanee.
The Union Cabinet has approved many changes in the PMFBY programme as farmers' body and states were raising some concerns, Agriculture Minister Narendra Singh Tomar told reporters here.
The minister said the PMFBY scheme has been made optional.
Highlighting the achievements of this scheme, Tomar said the insurance programme has covered 30 per cent of cultivable area.
The minister said insurance claims worth Rs 60,000 crore have been cleared, while Rs 13,000 crore premiums have been collected.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
