Dave Demerling and Roberto Meza are prime examples of the kind of people Colorado Agriculture Commissioner Kate Greenberg and her staff are trying to cultivate as they pursue their major initiatives.
“We call them WIGS, or wildly important goals,” Greenberg said at a symposium in the fall that focused on her department’s priorities. A central one is supporting the next generation of farmers and ranchers.
Meza was one of the speakers at “The Next Generation of Ag” event. The 32-year-old represents that new crop of farmers and ranchers that Greenberg is trying to encourage as she strives to ensure that agriculture remains one of Colorado’s primary economic drivers. Agriculture contributes about $40 billion annually to the state’s economy.
Support from the state Department of Agriculture through its Colorado Proud Program, which promotes Colorado-grown products, has been important, said Meza and his partner, 33-year-old Demerling. The two, who’ve known each other since high school in North Canton, Ohio, officially launched Emerald Gardens Microgreens in 2017.
RELATED: Agriculture symposium takes look at what’s on the horizon for Colorado farmers, ranchers
The business on a 35-acre site near Bennett, which includes a 3,000-square-foot greenhouse, supplies a growing number of customers from Denver to Fort Collins with several varieties of microgreens, radishes, peas, kohlrabi, arugula, broccoli and amaranth among them. The plants are tiny, edible greens harvested from 10 to 14 days after germination.
Researchers with the U.S. Department of Agriculture say microgreens can contain several times the level of vitamins and carotenoids, which act as antioxidants, of the fully grown versions.
Emerald Gardens’ customers include area restaurants, farmers markets, a Boulder Valley School District program and the grocery store chains Alfalfa’s Market and Lucky’s Market. Meza and Demerling, who don’t have farming backgrounds, are happy to spread the word about the product that is becoming attractive to health-conscious consumers as well as chefs in upscale restaurants.
“Microgreens are essentially tiny plants or baby versions of mature plants that are older than sprouts,” Meza said. “A lot of people call them sprouts by mistake.
Purple kohlrabi microgreens are seen at Emerald Gardens Microgreens’ farm in Bennett Dec. 9, 2019.
“The main difference between sprouts and microgreens is when you harvest microgreens, the seed and root stay in the medium,” Meza added. “Whereas with sprouts, you are actually technically consuming a germinated seed that hasn’t been able to photosynthesize or experience the wonderful process of growing in a greenhouse.”
All the Lucky’s Markets in Colorado sell microgreens, said Armando Arias, the company’s regional produce and floral merchandising specialist. He said Lucky’s decided to buy produce from Emerald Gardens because of the way the plants are grown. Meza and Demerling follow organic practices are seeking organic certification.
Microgreens are increasingly popular with customers, largely because of their nutritional benefits, Arias said. It’s important to have a local supplier so the produce is as fresh as possible, he said.
The greenhouse where Meza and Demerling grow hundreds of trays of plants per week uses passive solar as well as geothermal energy for cooling and heating. Until a couple of months ago, they were still using a shipping container with an addition to grow, clean and prepare the plants for delivery.
Before that, Meza said his landlord in Broomfield allowed him to raise microgreens in a 150-foot-square greenhouse. He sold the plants at farmers markets.
Meza’s love of gardening and healthy food developed when he left the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he was pursuing a master’s degree after time in New York as a video artist. He was having health problems and went home to Ohio. There, he got interested in hydroponics, started growing some of his own food and started feeling better.
“After the end of my first season there, I had a renewed sense of purpose. I knew what I wanted to do, and I was healthier than I had ever been in my life,” Meza said.
From left, Roberto Meza and Dave Demerling, Emerald Gardens Microgreens co-founders and farmers.
One of Emerald Gardens’ mission is to help build a sustainable local food system, he added.
Demerling, who got to know Meza in a high school video production class, was also nurturing a  passion for growing plants. While working as a video editor in Los Angeles, he began a small hydroponics operation in the kitchen and moved it into a closet when his roommates complained.
“Half my room turned into tomatoes and peppers and other things,” Demerling said. “I ended up feeding myself off that.”
His interest in gardening and plans grew as his enthusiasm for the editing work waned.
“I just didn’t want to sit behind a computer. It’s weird, you go to California, you start surfing, you sit on the beach and then end up behind a computer all the time,” said Demerling, who attended college in California.
During a trip to Ohio, Demerling reconnected with Meza, who was working on a farm. The two who had bonded in the video-production class solidified their friendship over their new-found passion for agriculture. Talking to Meza, Demerling became convinced that the two of them could make his long-simmering plan to go into farming succeed.
“I gave him a business plan. He kind of looked it over and helped me out a little bit,” Demerling said. “I guess I convinced him to come out here. I don’t think it was too hard.”
Roberto Meza, co-founder and farmer at Emerald Gardens Microgreens, walks into the greenhouse at their farm in Bennett Dec. 9, 2019.
