via NEWMEDIAWIRE -- Hemp, Inc. (OTC PINK: HEMP) a global leader in the industrial hemp industry with bi-coastal processing centers, including the largest multipurpose industrial hemp processing facility in the western hemisphere, shared today, a message of hope and solidarity with hemp farmers, the hemp industry, and hemp businesses during the current COVID-19 outbreak.
“We want to extend our praise to the hemp industry for being resilient in spite of the circumstances we are all currently experiencing. If there is any industry that has faced and overcome adversity it is the hemp industry -- this praise and resilience can be extended to the cannabis industry as well,” said Bruce Perlowin, CEO of Hemp, Inc. “As long as we take the appropriate safety measures, are resourceful, and remain inspired we will come out of this as leaders and drivers of economic recovery and growth. We’ll lead in creating greener, more sustainable communities and economies. Hemp, Inc.’s Veteran’s Village Kins Community is a testament to our commitment to cultivating hemp for wellness, self-sufficiency, and industry.”
The Veteran’s Village Kins Community is a facility for rehabilitation, healing, refuge, and economic empowerment through its back-to-nature initiatives and sustainable operational practices. It was implemented to grow hemp and produce hemp CBD and CBG products to benefit veterans. It is the first kins community geared towards rehabilitating veterans by providing them a place to live, a source of income, and access to various health professionals.
It also stands as one of the safest places to be while state governments across America encourage social distancing. Each kins domain is 2.5 acres with a “living fence” around the perimeter consisting of two rows of trees, including fruit trees and olive trees, organic gardens, a beehive, a family tree, a sustainable off grid house, and a pond; each domain can also support 1 acre of hemp.
Hemp, Inc.’s Great American Hempathon is the first project to kick start the revenue model for the kins community with each grow dedicated to a veteran or veteran’s group. Veterans have the opportunity to earn a share of the profits from the farms, which they can then use to buy land to start their own kins community.
The global industrial hemp market size is expected to reach USD 15.26 billion by 2027, exhibiting a revenue-based CAGR of 15.8% over the forecast period, according to a new report published by Grand View Research, Inc. This growth can be attributed to the burgeoning preference for eco-friendly products and creating greener, more sustainable communities.
According to a recent article by Fox News, “ Natural light, fresh air could keep coronavirus out of workplaces, scientists suggest ,” researchers from UC-Davis and the University of Oregon published a report in the journal mSystems and came up with some recommendations for healthier work spaces in the age of COVID-19.
Two of their suggestions were opening windows for better air circulation and opening blinds or drapes for more natural sunlight. The article explains that the researchers mention, "daylight exists as a free, widely available resource to building occupants with little downside to its use and many documented positive human health benefits.”
During the 1918 Influenza Pandemic, medics found that severely ill patients who were nursed outdoors recovered better than those treated indoors. Research shows that outdoor air is a natural disinfectant that has the capability to kill the flu virus and other harmful germs. Equally, sunlight is germicidal and there is now evidence it can kill the flu virus. This is a testament to the importance of seeking solutions that are connected to the environment.
To see one-minute videos of Hemp, Inc.’s current activities, visit Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook page , where he shares daily posts of Hemp, Inc.’s activities around the country. Additionally, follow Hemp, Inc. on Facebook, here ; on Instagram, here ; and on Twitter, here .
Those interested in The Great American Hempathon , the Company’s first ever grow contest, click here for more information and to download the entry form.  Hemp growers can demonstrate their skill and share in the $50,000 prize money. To watch “The Great American Hempathon” in real time, click here .
What is Hemp, Inc.? With a deep-rooted social and environmental mission at its core, Hemp, Inc. seeks to build a business constituency for the American small farmer, the American veteran, and other groups experiencing the ever-increasing disparity between tapering income and soaring expenses. As a leader in the industrial hemp industry with ownership of the largest commercial multi-purpose industrial hemp processing facility in North America, Hemp, Inc. believes there can be tangible benefits reaped from adhering to a corporate social responsibility plan.
Hemp, Inc. has been helping to build the industrial hemp infrastructure that was basically non-existent in America. There are now ten divisions:
The Industrial Hemp Infrastructure (Division One) currently consists of two hemp processing facilities across the country, with two more under development, which will include an in-house third party testing laboratory.  The largest of the two is its multi-purpose industrial hemp processing facility and milling operation in Spring Hope, North Carolina . It’s the largest “industrial hemp processing center” in the western hemisphere and has grown to become one of the pre-eminent centers of the industrial hemp industry. The 85,000 square foot facility sits on 9-acres. It is environmentally sustainable and was built from the ground up in hopes of “Making America Hemp Again."  With a patent pending manufacturing process, the North Carolina facility is operating full time to process millions of pounds of our unique kenaf-hemp blend, to manufacture all-green natural loss circulation material (LCMs), called DrillWall ™ that is to be sold to the oil and gas drilling industry, along with an all-green natural oil spill absorbent, a second industrial kenaf-hemp product called Spill-Be-Gone ™.
In addition to the company’s industrial hemp processing facility in Spring Hope, North Carolina, Hemp, Inc. also has one of the most sophisticated local processing centers (LPC) in Medford, Oregon which focuses on hemp harvesting, drying, curing, trimming, bagging, storing, and in some cases selling high CBD hemp for local farmers and the Company’s own hemp grows in that area, and post processing for the CBD industry.  The Company’s main focus is the “King of Hemp™” pre-rolls and high CBD smokeable buds… a new phenomenon of smoking hemp which has caught the marketplace by storm.
Hemp, Inc. and their associates also have 4,500 acres of land in Golden Valley, Arizona (100 miles from Las Vegas, 20 miles north of Kingman, AZ).  Out of the 4,500 acres of land, 500 acres are designated for the Veteran’s Village Kins Community (VVKC) for Arizona.  Hemp, Inc. is preparing 80+ acres, of the 500 acres, for hemp cultivation. The company aims to boost the economies of these towns by offering affordable hemp processing services, which incentivizes local growers to add hemp to their crop rotation. The company is continuing to scout new locations for local processing centers in Florida, Kentucky, West Virginia, Puerto Rico, and several other states.
Thus far, Hemp, Inc.’s Local Processing Center (LPC) in Oregon has employed over 200 employees  during its 2018 harvest season and over 300 employees during its 2019 harvest season to further support the infrastructure necessary for local and large scale farmers operating in the industrial hemp space.
The Hemp Farming Infrastructure (Division Two) consists of hundreds of acres of hemp and kenaf growing in multiple locations, farm equipment, cloning rooms, clones and seeds, grow rooms, greenhouses, hemp drying facilities and a huge amount of peripheral farming tools and equipment. The progress Hemp, Inc. has made in its agricultural endeavors, over the course of four years, has been amazing. The year 2020 marks the fifth year that Hemp, Inc. has been growing hemp. (To see Hemp, Inc.’s agricultural progress from 2016 through 2019, visit Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook page at www.facebook.com/kingofpot and scroll through posts from 2016 to the present. Visit www.hempincpresents.com to see the videos of Hemp, Inc.’s grows in multiple locations.)
Hemp, Inc. also has two “Small Family Hemp Farm” models.  The “Small Family Hemp Farm” in North Carolina is situated on 12 acres and consists of a cloning room, a greenhouse, and enough land to grow 2,000-3,000 high CBD hemp plants. (This model farm can be seen on Bruce Perlowin's Facebook page, in the Aug. 22nd - 26th, 2018 posts.) The model shows farmers how to grow high CBD hemp plants, operate a greenhouse and turn a barn into a cloning room to earn up to $100,000+ a year.  This shows an example of how the “Small Family Hemp Farm” can be duplicated and reappear on the American landscape. After all, the original small family farms in America were able to survive economically by growing hemp as their main cash crop and the first five presidents of the United States were all hemp farmers.
Hemp, Inc.’s other “Small Family Hemp Farm” is located Dolan Springs, Arizona.  This “Small Family Hemp Farm” is referred to as “The Orchard” since it has a sizable organic orchard.  There are: 2 acres on which hemp will be grown on; a cloning room; cold storage; and greenhouses that are currently being installed.
This year, according to Perlowin, the company is preparing to grow on up to 342 acres of land in Oregon, 300 acres in Arizona, hundreds of acres in North Carolina (a combination of hemp and kenaf), and an undetermined amount in other states. He says collective sales from all of these grows will be extremely significant in terms of pre-rolls, high CBD buds, distillate, isolate and biomass. “This year, we anticipate the main function of the company to be sales and marketing as we will have completed the infrastructure to support sales and marketing. Right now, I believe we have the largest footprint of bio-diverse hemp products with vertical integration in the hemp industry in America today. We are always looking for joint ventures where we have or can expand our footprint,” commented Perlowin.
Moreover, “A to Z” services for the farmers are available - from harvesting to drying, curing, bucking, machine trimming, hand trimming, bagging, storing, nitrogen sparging, and selling… creating a “one stop shop” for the small to large family farms.
·       High premium CBD buds from the Rogue Valley in Southern Oregon, North Carolina and Arizona
Hemp, Inc. is also hosting the Hempathon at the Veteran Village Kins Community in Arizona.  Contestants are growing 1 acre of hemp in a contest with other growers from around the country. Hemp, Inc. is providing land, water, security, and live streaming video coverage for participants. The Hempathon entry fee is $5,000 and a 50/50 revenue split. Several awards and prizes will be given to the winners. Those interested in signing up for the Hempathon should contact Devi Barnard dbarnard@hempinc.com.
The Hemp CBD Oil Extraction & Pre-Roll Blending Infrastructure (Division Three) originally consisted of a Supercritical C02 Extractor. After operating for over a year it has been determined that Hemp, Inc. will not be involved in the extraction industry and has changed its direction to focus primarily on the King of Hemp pre-rolls and The King of Hemp high CBD smokeable flower. The CBD oil that was extracted from the 2018 hemp grows in North Carolina has been made into pure crystalline CBD isolate which will add to our “King of Hemp™” branded line of pre-rolls to take to the marketplace and a pre-roll fortified with pure crystalline CBD isolate.
In lieu of building its own extraction laboratories, Hemp, Inc. plans to utilize the facilities of other labs in the industry to manufacture its own line of CBD oil products while they continue to build and expand the infrastructure for pre-rolls and high CBD smokeable buds. The Company will hire or joint venture with other, already existing, labs to manufacture CBD, CBG, CBC, CBN, and other products in its future cannabinoid line. With 150 different cannabinoids, over 300 terpenes, and more of each being discovered almost monthly, the product range and possibilities in this area are endless.
The Hemp Educational Infrastructure (Division Four) includes Hemp, Inc.'s Hemp University which focuses on educating and empowering Hemp farmers and entrepreneurs with knowledge, processing, infrastructure and support.  The educational seminars , through the Hemp University, are held periodically and teach farmers and landowners how to create a profitable income stream by maximizing the per-acre crop revenue. Through this division, Hemp, Inc. has trained well over 500 farmers in its first two years by doing a total of nine Hemp University seminars in North Carolina and Oregon, thus far, which include:
The New Leaf Symposium and Golden Grow Awards Gala - January 26, 2020 (Jacksonville, Oregon)
“The New Leaf Symposium’s” focus was “Regeneration" to celebrate optimism and resilience in the industry, the power of the plant, and faith in the hemp-producing community. The event sold out with over 180 attendees. The feedback from attendees was overwhelmingly positive and the speakers were hailed as the best yet. The educational symposium concluded with the “Golden Grow Awards Gala”. The Golden Grow Awards Gala honored Oregon's top cultivars and put Oregon’s best farmers head-to-head for some of the most prestigious hemp-industry accolades. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook post on 1/28/20 for a short video on this symposium.)
The Pre-Harvest Symposium – September 8, 2019 (Oregon)
“The Pre-Harvest Symposium” workshop at Southern Oregon University was expertly designed for both farmers and entrepreneurs of all experience levels, focused on harvesting, processing and profit channels within the hemp industry. The third edition of the Southern Oregon Hemp University brought an abundance of insight into innovations within the realm of harvesting and processing to the forefront. Additionally, the symposium touched on traditional practices in agriculture. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook post on 9/9/19 for a short video on this symposium.)
Pre-Plant Support Workshop – May 4, 2019 (Oregon)
“The Pre-Plant Support Workshop” was an incredible success that filled the entire venue to capacity with attendees. In total, there were close to 200 attendees, including 20 vendors in attendance. The workshop was designed to help hemp farmers or those who are interested in the hemp industry learn the best pre-planting practices prior to the planting season. The Hemp University Pre-Planting Support Workshop was an interactive and informative workshop that covered the various details hemp farmers should know prior to planting in the 2019 season and beyond. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook post on 5/9/19 for a short video on this workshop.)
The Hemp University Educational Seminar - March 23, 2019 (Oregon)
This was the first Hemp University held on the West Coast.  The seminar provided attendees with a full day of networking, education, and support. The seminar helped others in the area who were interested in the hemp industry learn more about the “Industrial Hemp Revolution” and how this movement can not only transform Southern Oregon’s economy, but also revive family farms and small businesses in the surrounding areas. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook post on 3/28/19 for a short video on this seminar.)
Growing Hemp for Profit – March 10, 2018 – (North Carolina)
The Hemp University’s first educational symposium event of 2018 entitled “Growing Hemp for Profit” took place on Saturday, March 10, 2018. Attendees learned from the University’s industrial hemp experts as they shared their lessons from their experiences in growing industrial hemp. “Growing Hemp for Profit,” which took place from 8:30am to 5 pm at the Hilton Garden Inn in Charlotte, North Carolina. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook post on 3/17/18 for a short video on this symposium.)
Hemp Money Event: Economics, Lessons & Planning for 2018 – December 2, 2017 – (North Carolina)
The fifth most vital and anticipated educational symposium of the year was Hemp Money Event: Economics, Lessons & Planning for 2018. This symposium was held on Saturday, December 2, 2017 from 8:30am to 5:00pm at the Shrine Club (320 Airport Rd, Rocky Mount, NC 27804). Attendees learned the economics of growing industrial hemp for fiber, seeds, and CBD; learned about other master POD growers’ experiences and lessons; and, learned how to prepare for the 2018 industrial hemp growing season with a well-defined blueprint for success. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook post on 12/23/17 for a short video on this symposium.)
The Hemp Oil Event: The Art and Science of CBD Oil – September 30, 2017 (North Carolina)
The Hemp Oil Event (The Art & Science of CBD Oil) was The Hemp University’s fourth symposium in North Carolina, held on Saturday, September 30, 2017 from 8:30am to 5:00pm at the Peachtree Hills Country Club, 3512 Peachtree Hills Road, Spring Hope, NC 27882.  The symposium brought attendees up to speed on all business and scientific aspects of Industrial Hemp CBD cannabinoids by disseminating current, reliable information that continues to shape the revolutionary CBD market. Attendees also got a chance to go to Hemp, Inc.’s, then, 70,000 square foot multipurpose industrial hemp decortication facility for the first live public demonstration of its Supercritical CO2 Extraction System using North Carolina-grown CBD industrial hemp. Representatives from NuAxon Bioscience were also on-site to allow those interested in purchasing their own CBD extraction system. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook post on 9/30/17 for a short video on this symposium.)
The Art and Science of CBD Greenhouse Growing – June 24, 2017 (North Carolina)
The 3rd Hemp University educational symposium held on June 24, 2017 focused on The Art and Science of CBD Greenhouse Growing. The educational symposium was held at Louisburg College in Louisburg, North Carolina. A team of experts engaged attendees through the greenhouse and indoor growing process from cultivation to harvest and from processing to distribution. Dr. Robert Bruck, Dean of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics and Distinguished Professor of Environmental Science at Louisburg College, was The Hemp University’s special guest who lectured on soil microbiology during the symposium. Attendees were able to spend half of the course at Hemp, Inc.’s, then, 70,000 square-foot Industrial Hemp Hub, in a 3,000 square-foot cloning room. There, attendees had the opportunity to experience a more hands-on learning approach. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook post on 6/30/17 for a short video on this symposium.)
Farming Hemp for Profit™ – April 29, 2017 (North Carolina)
Hemp, Inc. ’s second, sold out, educational symposium ( Farming HEMP for Profit™ ), through its Hemp University, was a phenomenal success. The symposium took place on Saturday, April 29, 2017, from 8:30am – 5:00pm, at the Hampton Inn & Suites located at 3920 Arrow Drive, Raleigh, NC 27612 and drew over 100 attendees. The one-day educational symposium and tour of Hemp, Inc.’s, then, 70,000 square-foot multipurpose industrial hemp facility was an opportunity for landowners and farmers to learn how to apply real business building tactics with a “specific step-by-step blueprint” on how to grow, sell and profit from farming industrial hemp. This event accomplished its mission to help landowners and farmers add a new viable and profitable income stream by maximizing the per-acre crop revenue. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook post on 4/30/17 for a short video on this symposium.)
Farming Hemp for Profit™ – March 18, 2017 (North Carolina)
This was Hemp, Inc.’s first Hemp University symposium .  The symposium was a sold out event and was a huge success with 100 attendees who rated the quality of information presented as excellent. The symposium took place on Saturday, March 18, 2017, from 8:00am – 5:00pm, at Hemp, Inc.’s wholly owned subsidiary, Industrial Hemp Manufacturing, LLC , located at 1436 Highway 581 North, Spring Hope, North Carolina, 27882. The one-day educational symposium was an opportunity for landowners and farmers to receive a “specific step-by-step blueprint” on how to grow, sell and profit from farming industrial hemp by using real business tactics and principles, presented by industry experts. (See Bruce Perlowin’s personal Facebook posts on 3/18 -19 and 3/21-26, 2019 for a short videos on this symposium.)
To listen to past Hemp University workshops, please visit hemp-university.teachable.com . Also visit https://www.hempincpresents.com to see highlights from Hemp, Inc.’s inaugural Hemp University held in North Carolina, which sold out in two weeks.
The Hemp University’s twelve online educational masterclasses are $10 each and each masterclass is under an hour in length. The online courses include lectures from industry leaders who have educated attendees at the Hemp University workshops in Oregon. These online masterclasses provide farmers who were either not able to attend the first Hemp University or who would like to revisit certain topics presented by the event speakers.
Those interested in being part of our online courses, including experts in any aspect of the industrial hemp industry, should contact Chris Tinney on (855) 554-6834 or via email at (ctinney@hempinc.com).
“Since The Hemp University’s initial launch with the educational symposium, the number of attendees has grown tremendously and it has been an overwhelming success, each time. The interactive, hands-on learning approach is invaluable. By learning in an interactive cohort format , students gain the necessary skills they need to immediately implement them on their farm or in their organization. It’s the perfect mix of quality instruction, relevant educational content and a high level of commitment, to ensure the educational success of each attendee,” said Perlowin.
Thus far, The Hemp University has helped transform the livelihoods of North Carolina and Oregon farmers transitioning from tobacco and other crops to industrial hemp by providing them with the tools and support needed to gain a foothold in this burgeoning industry.
While marketing is a critical facet of any business operation for increasing revenues, Hemp, Inc. believes there must be a keen focus on the infrastructure first.  The demand for CBD and hemp products is massive, some even say the demand is insatiable.  In order to supply that type of volume/demand, there has to be a strong foundation or infrastructure in place.  While Hemp, Inc. is poised to grow a rock solid Hemp Marketing Infrastructure, CEO Perlowin reminds us that this infrastructure has to be able to support a meteoric industry growth.  The cannabidiol (CBD) market is on track to grow to $23.7 billion through 2023, according to the Brightfield Group .  The firm also estimated the smokeable hemp market to be valued at $11.5 million in 2018, a growth of 250% from 2017. “This is why we focus on infrastructure, at the moment, more so than specific marketing activities,” says Perlowin. “Specific marketing activities isn’t the issue.  The ability to grow, process and produce what the marketplace is demanding is the issue and hence the reason we focused on creating the infrastructure first.”
Late January, 2020 the first King of Hemp Store™ had a soft launch in Kingman, Arizona with a grand opening, red ribbon, lots of media coverage planned for early March 2020.  This 5,000 square foot Wells Fargo bank building is in the heart of Old Town Kingman next to historic Route 66 and will showcase everything hemp, including Hemp Blue’s hemp denim jeans ( www.hempblue.com ).
The company has also recently joint-ventured with the retail store “Hemp Healthcare”, in Dolan Springs, Arizona, to sell high-end cannabidiol (CBD) and hemp-based products. “Hemp Healthcare” is home to an array of renowned CBD and hemp products, including Hemp, Inc.’s cosmetic and wellness line that includes shampoos, conditioners, lotions, candles and more. The retail storefront is conveniently located off Highway 93 in Arizona, in a highly trafficked tourist area. Specifically located on Pierce Ferry Road, “Hemp Healthcare” is next to “Dolan Station” – a location that welcomes numerous tour buses daily with visitors from around the world that stop there on trips to the Grand Canyon. On some days, up to 40 tour buses stop at this location, filled to the brim with tourists on their way to the Sky Walk at the western realm of the Grand Canyon.
A second health care store will be opened in 2020 at Gateway Station in Dolan Springs, Arizona on Highway 93 about a quarter of mile before the turn off to go the Sky Walk at the western realm of the Grand Canyon. Like Dolan Station, Gateway Station will have numerous tour buses.  The store is set to sell shampoos, conditioners, lotions, candles and more.
Division Six focuses on the sale of hemp industry accessories such as the sale of extractors, harvesters, storage bags, containers, fertilizer, soil amendments, humidifiers, dehumidifiers, balers, greenhouses, and greenhouse equipment; the drying, trimming, curing, storing and brokering for other farmers harvesting hemp; and ultimately anything else a hemp farmer may need to be successful.
“What we found is that people are always looking for hundreds of items. New harvesting equipment, irrigation equipment of all kinds, soil amendments, organic soil fertilizers, organic pest control products, new extraction technologies and more,” said Perlowin. “As we expand this Division, we will strive to become the Amazon of the hemp industry.”
According to Perlowin, Hemp, Inc. is currently building out a new section of its website that will list all of the products. This information will be available in the next 30 days.
While Research and Development has been an integral part of Hemp, Inc. since day one, a more formal research and development project is planned after significant revenues are created. This division will then start and expand rapidly. The Company originally planned for Puerto Rico to be a research and development hub, but found the barrier to entrance was much too great and has therefore changed its position to focus its research and development division on states where hemp is already legal. Hemp, Inc. is proud to have been a pioneer and leader in the early stages of the hemp industry in America with our strategy to build infrastructure even before legalization occurred in a state such as what was done in North Carolina and Arizona.
According to Hemp, Inc.’s CEO, Bruce Perlowin, “Currently, it is now economically more advantageous to operate in a state that already has several years of legalization behind it and thus, further down the road, making it easier for hemp companies to thrive as we have done in North Carolina, Arizona, Nevada and especially Oregon.  We’ve hit a grand slam in Oregon, so to speak, in our growing operations for 2 consecutive years. We may revisit Puerto Rico once they have straightened out their legal red tape, and their rules and regulations.”
Hemp, Inc. recently established the eighth division (Industrial Hemp Investments and Joint Ventures).  Since the passing of the 2018 hemp bill, Hemp, Inc. has been flooded with inquiries of people who want to invest in the hemp industry but don’t know where to start. As the Avant-guard of the industrial hemp industry, Hemp, Inc. has put together numerous joint venture investment opportunities for the medium to large-scale investor. Those who are interested should email ir@hempinc.com. Multi-million dollar investors, and in some cases billionaires and billion dollar hedge funds, are aggressively trying to get into the hemp industry since the passing of the 2018 Farm Bill. Our joint venture agreements are that they put up the money and we put up the expertise in a 50/50 revenue share (after all the initial investment money is paid back first).  This will save the large-scale hemp investor often two years and dozens of multi-million dollar mistakes that they “WILL” often make without an expert in the hemp industry. This is where Hemp, Inc.’s vast network of experts and resources in the industrial hemp industry come into play because this is something we can easily provide to those interested in entering this industry.
Hemp, Inc.’s Industrial Hemp and Medical Marijuana Consulting Company (IHMMCC) was recently restructured as its ninth division and is now “Division Nine - Industrial Hemp Consulting”.  With an influx of public companies wanting to expand into the industrial hemp industry, Hemp, Inc. has been inundated with potential consulting agreements. To keep up, Hemp, Inc. revamped its consulting division to work hands-on with each company to provide its years of expertise. According to Perlowin, there is definitely a sense of a “Community of Companies” whereby a lot of companies are working together to pool their resources, marketing connections and strategies in order to grow simultaneously.
Typically, companies seeking in depth consulting services from Hemp, Inc. pay mostly in stock since cash flow is oftentimes tight during the developmental stage of start-up companies in this industry. Through Hemp, Inc.’s Division Nine – Industrial Hemp Consulting, a wide range of services are forged from the experiences of creating the first publicly trading company in the cannabis sector (Medical Marijuana, Inc.) and having well over a decade of experience in the industrial hemp industry’s public sector. Perlowin, Hemp, Inc.’s chief executive officer, also has over five decades in the industry.
Hemp, Inc.’s newest division, Entertainment, will cover everything from investing in the movie “The Adventures of the King of Pot” ( http://www.kingofpotthemovie.com/ ) and other historical movies, books and documentaries representing our industry up to the current docuseries being made on “The Modern Day History of Hemp”.  Those interested in investing in any one of these ventures should contact the division’s Project Manager, Chris Tinney, at 855-554-6834 or via email, ctinney@hempinc.com.
To see the livestream feed for the Veteran’s Village Kins Community Arizona, visit www.hempinc.com/arizona and click on “View Live Feed”.
The company’s 500-acre strategic growing partner Veteran Village Kins Community in Golden Valley, Arizona, is designed to grow hemp and produce CBD products to benefit veterans as well as generate revenue for Hemp, Inc., the Veteran Village and individual veterans living in the community.
The Veteran Village Kins Community in Arizona has completed its final site plan blueprints for its 500-acre site in Golden Valley, Arizona (20 miles north of Kingman, AZ and 90 minutes from Las Vegas, NV). The site plan was submitted to the Mohave County Building Department for final review. The Company is also in the final stages of completing the necessary infrastructure to support an off-grid, renewable, energy system.
As soon as all the live streaming video cameras are up and operational, the world can actually see the way the Veteran Village Kins Community is designed and watch it being built. According to Perlowin, the basic framework or overall plan of the Veteran Village Kins Communities is to create a holistic healing and learning center that is designed to educate and heal veterans with PTSD, alcoholism, meth addiction, opioid addiction, and other psychological conditions while at the same time training them on the numerous aspects of being part of the emerging multi-billion dollar hemp industry. To see the first live streaming video, click here .
The Company will also build hemp-growing communities for other groups such as “Abused” Women & Children Village Kins Communities, the “Orphaned” Children Village Kins Communities, “Homeless” Village Kins Communities, and the “Healers” Village Kins Communities (the healers are professionals who are knowledgeable in the modalities to treat these traumatized groups). These particular communities are all synergistically aligned to work simultaneously supporting each other.
For example, the “Healers” heal the traumatized veterans and women & children; the women support orphan children, and orphan children want to see people living in homes and not homeless. Thus, a portion of the hemp grown in each community goes to create and support another community, giving everybody a sense of giving back and helping others as they help themselves. This circles back to the healers who also work to heal the veterans and the other traumatized groups. This is the economic foundation on how the sale of the hemp products operates as a “quantum economic matrix” or an example of “symbiotic economics” which is more complex than this brief description allows.
Dwight Jory, the Project Manager for the “Veteran Village Kins Community Arizona, Inc.”, said, “We are very happy with the progress. Our Kins Community is really beginning to come together.” In anticipation of planting to begin during the spring, 300 acres have been fenced, 16 overnight trailer park sites are under construction, and six 40×40-ft organic vegetable gardens have been planted and are currently producing food and kenaf, according to Jory. These organic gardens double as experimental growing modules using an entire array of different growing technologies to see which modalities grow the best in a desert environment. As for the 6 geodesic domes mentioned in an earlier press release, 1 is structurally complete with only the electrical and plumbing to be completed. The rest are on site awaiting final site plan approval.
“We are now accepting volunteers who have expressed an interest in helping to build the first Kins Community for our veterans,” said Jory. Those interested in making the first hemp growing CBD-producing “Veteran Village Kins Community” become a reality should contact Ms. Sandra Williams via email (swilliams@hempinc.com).
One thousand trees, on 36 of the 500-acres, have also been planted, with an additional 1,000 trees on order. The “Veteran Village Kins Community” will include a 100,000-square foot GMP compliant, central processing plant, a state-of-the-art testing laboratory, and various health and wellness centers to support veterans who may have psychological, emotional or health issues.
“As Hemp, Inc. positions itself on the forefront of America’s industrial hemp revolution, we see our partnership with ‘Veteran Village Kins Community Arizona, Inc.’ being paramount in supporting the small family farm movement that we are confident will reshape the American landscape,” said Perlowin. “As we work toward getting our eco-village up and running in Arizona, we are also aggressively scouting strategic locations in other states including North Carolina, South Carolina, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Tennessee and West Virginia. Giving veterans and other Americans a place to learn new skills and take part in this multi-billion-dollar hemp CBD market is very exciting. It’s a big part of our mission to give back.  Recently we have expanded our Kins Community concept internationally focusing, but not limited to, Israel, New Zealand, Canada, Africa, and Uruguay.”
Hemp, Inc. executives are also continuing to scout new locations nationwide to open additional hemp processing centers in legal markets.
Between the Hemp University, the hemp processing center and Bruce Perlowin himself, the Company has created an enormous amount of media coverage. See below for the list of press hits the Company has received up to the end of this quarter:
Hit: “ Hemp: the burgeoning industry of southern Oregon ” - (NBC) KOBI-5, December 22, 2018
