Also Read: Five key reasons set to give bumper agri growth in FY21; Indian economy may not shrink this year
The strong assurance from better than expected monsoon, 40-60 per cent higher water availability in the reservoirs, and 5 per cent higher offtake of fertiliser during the first four months of this year are the major signs indicating a bumper production this year. Adding to it, 20 per cent increase in the sale of seeds and high food prices show a better term of trade and more encouragement to the farmers to produce.
By May 10, kharif sowing was higher by 44 per cent over last year’s acreage and rabi procurement is in full flow in respect of oilseeds, pulses and wheat, benefiting from the bumper harvest. These developments will support farm incomes, improve the terms of trade facing the farm sector and strengthen food security for the country, also, these would have a salutary effect on food price pressures further, RBI said in its statement today.
Also Read: How RBI repo rate cut, loan moratorium will help economy; what Shaktikanta Das could have done more
Meanwhile, Finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman has announced nearly Rs 1.5 lakh crore package for agriculture and allied sectors aiming at strengthening infrastructure, logistics and capacity building at farm gate. The government has also rolled out reforms for the farm sector including a new central law to allow farmers to sell their produce freely and get better prices. The Essential Commodities Act is also amended to deregulate trade in cereals, edible oils, oilseeds, pulses, onion and potato.
Do you know What is Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) , Finance Bill , Fiscal Policy in India , Expenditure Budget , Customs Duty ? FE Knowledge Desk explains each of these and more in detail at Financial Express Explained . Also get Live BSE/NSE Stock Prices , latest NAV of Mutual Funds , Best equity funds , Top Gainers , Top Losers on Financial Express . Don’t forget to try our free Income Tax Calculator tool.
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
