How Much Of Wide Open Agriculture Limited (ASX:WOA) Do Insiders Own?
Simply Wall St February 21, 2020
A look at the shareholders of Wide Open Agriculture Limited ( ASX:WOA ) can tell us which group is most powerful. Large companies usually have institutions as shareholders, and we usually see insiders owning shares in smaller companies. Warren Buffett said that he likes ‘a business with enduring competitive advantages that is run by able and owner-oriented people’. So it’s nice to see some insider ownership, because it may suggest that management is owner-oriented.
Wide Open Agriculture is not a large company by global standards. It has a market capitalization of AU$8.8m, which means it wouldn’t have the attention of many institutional investors. Our analysis of the ownership of the company, below, shows that institutions are noticeable on the share registry. Let’s take a closer look to see what the different types of shareholder can tell us about Wide Open Agriculture.
What Does The Institutional Ownership Tell Us About Wide Open Agriculture?
Many institutions measure their performance against an index that approximates the local market. So they usually pay more attention to companies that are included in major indices.
As you can see, institutional investors own 18% of Wide Open Agriculture. This can indicate that the company has a certain degree of credibility in the investment community. However, it is best to be wary of relying on the supposed validation that comes with institutional investors. They too, get it wrong sometimes. If multiple institutions change their view on a stock at the same time, you could see the share price drop fast. It’s therefore worth looking at Wide Open Agriculture’s earnings history, below. Of course, the future is what really matters.
We note that hedge funds don’t have a meaningful investment in Wide Open Agriculture. Commonland Foundation., Endowment Arm is currently the largest shareholder, with 17% of shares outstanding. Anthony Robert Maslin is the second largest shareholder with 11% of common stock, followed by Ben Cole, holding 11% of the stock. Ben Cole also happens to hold the title of Member of the Board of Directors.
On studying the facts and figures more closely, we found that the top 5 shareholders control 56% of the company which implies that this group has considerable sway over the company’s decision-making.
Researching institutional ownership is a good way to gauge and filter a stock’s expected performance. The same can be achieved by studying analyst sentiments. Our information suggests that there isn’t any analyst coverage of the stock, so it is probably little known.
While the precise definition of an insider can be subjective, almost everyone considers board members to be insiders. The company management answer to the board; and the latter should represent the interests of shareholders. Notably, sometimes top-level managers are on the board, themselves.
I generally consider insider ownership to be a good thing. However, on some occasions it makes it more difficult for other shareholders to hold the board accountable for decisions.
Our most recent data indicates that insiders own the majority of Wide Open Agriculture Limited. This means they can collectively make decisions for the company. Given it has a market cap of AU$8.8m, that means they have AU$4.6m worth of shares. Most would be pleased to see the board is investing alongside them. You may wish to discover (for free) if they have been buying or selling.
The general public holds a 23% stake in WOA. While this group can’t necessarily call the shots, it can certainly have a real influence on how the company is run.
We can see that Private Companies own 7.6%, of the shares on issue. Private companies may be related parties. Sometimes insiders have an interest in a public company through a holding in a private company, rather than in their own capacity as an individual. While it’s hard to draw any broad stroke conclusions, it is worth noting as an area for further research.
It’s always worth thinking about the different groups who own shares in a company. But to understand Wide Open Agriculture better, we need to consider many other factors. Like risks, for instance. Every company has them, and we’ve spotted 5 warning signs for Wide Open Agriculture (of which 4 are a bit concerning!) you should know about.
If you would prefer check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, backed by strong financial data.
NB: Figures in this article are calculated using data from the last twelve months, which refer to the 12-month period ending on the last date of the month the financial statement is dated. This may not be consistent with full year annual report figures.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
