The “Intelligent Fall Armyworm Monitoring Team” of National Chung Hsing University (NCHU) participated in the World Bank 2020 Agriculture Innovation Challenge organised by the World Bank in April and stood out from 120 teams of 33 countries. The team was selected as one of the top eight of the “Animal and Plant Insect Pest Prediction and Monitoring” Group, won the “Top Innovator Award” allowing Taiwan’s intelligent agriculture to shine in the world.
This year’s theme is to assist the livestock industry in southern Africa. The NCHU team is jointly composed of Professor Bo-Jein Kuo from the Department of Agronomy, Professor Tzong-Ru Lee from the Department of Marketing and Tano Secure Inc. The team participated in the competition with the title of “Intelligent Monitoring, Analysis and Early Warning System for Fall Armyworms”.
The innovative solution proposed by NCHU uses small detection equipment to collect microclimate data in the field, combined with technology of artificial intelligence (AI) and Internet of Things (IOT), to build an intelligent monitoring, analysis and early warning system for fall armyworms.
This system can provide farmers with the early warning before insect pests appear, and can also suggest suitable agricultural materials for farmers to use, so that farmers can be wiser to prevent fall armyworms and reduce agricultural damage during the golden period three to seven days before the fall armyworms appear on a large scale.
Professor Bo-Jein Kuo said that the fall armyworms are not only harmful to Africa, but Taiwan is also currently heavily attacked by the fall armyworms. Through participation in the competition this time, the team proposed an innovative plan for insect pest monitoring and the market operation model of this system, which was affirmed.
In the future, we also hope to cooperate with specialist teachers such as those of the Department of Entomology and intelligent agriculture area to make the system more complete. At the same time, the World Bank also announced the award-winning innovative solution on the Internet platform, so that interested units can directly conduct follow-up cooperation with the participating team, and using the agriculture technology to solve the sustainability problems we met.
Professor Tzong-Ru Lee said that facing the agriculture sustainability issues under climate change, NCHU combined with intelligent agricultural technology to propose solutions. NCHU has various fields of expertise such as the College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the College of Engineering, the College of Management, and the College of Life Sciences. After integration, it will be able to help build intelligent farms of different crops and become a global demonstration field of intelligent agriculture.
International Association for Agricultural Sustainability (IAAS) is a non-profit international organisation that aims to use science and technology to solve the problems of agricultural sustainability. Visit our webside http://iaas.org.sg
