If the bet is on rural booster from Union Budget, these are the stocks to watch
Rural distress and boosting consumption in the economy are expected to be a key focus.
With indirect taxes out of the ambit of the Union Budget, the government’s annual fiscal roadmap has largely ceased to be material for stock investors.
The Indian economy is showing clear signs of a major slowdown and any effort to revive the same in the Union Budget will not be complete, unless the issues in the hinterland are resolved.
With indirect taxes out of the ambit of the Union Budget, the government’s annual fiscal roadmap has largely ceased to be material for stock investors. They now only look for policies and schemes that can have trickle-down effect on any sector or stock.
And the rural theme, with implications for a number of sectors, is in focus this time around.
The agriculture sector contributes about 17 per cent of India’s GDP but employs over 50 per cent of the total workforce, and thus has a key place in the demand-supply equation.
Economists point out that despite various efforts by the government, gross value addition of the agriculture (agri-GVA) sector has been declining in recent times and the share of investment to agri-GVA has been falling consistently (See chart).
Therefore, there is a need to make some structural changes in agriculture starting from marketing to exports to double farmers’ income by 2022.
An over 30 per cent slump in BSE Auto index since the Union Budget, unveiled on February 1, 2018 against a 10 per cent rise in benchmark Sensex has been partially attributed to a rural distress, which has also dented demand for FMCG goods. The BSE FMCG Index is up just 5 per cent.
The gap between rural and urban growth came down to 10 per cent in FY19 from the historical median of 30 per cent.
Addressing rural distress and boosting consumption in the economy are expected to be a key focus of Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman ’s full Budget on July 5, and should that happen, it may give FMCG and consumer sector stocks an easy lift.
The rural economy is facing the heat of the slowdown due to a heady mix of lower realisations for farm output and slowing demand, says Mayuresh Joshi, Portfolio Manager Angel Broking.
“Management commentaries of consumer staples/FMCG specifically hinted at moderation and sluggishness in rural consumption,” he said.
The agriculture sector has been one of the focus areas since the first tenure of the NDA government. Some of the steps taken by the government included introduction of a crop insurance scheme, a mission to improve farm productivity, a scheme to plug holes in the procurement system and hiking of minimum support prices for crops to 1.5 times the cost of production besides a revolutionary income support scheme.
There are hopes that the forthcoming Budget will have a plethora of measures for the agriculture sector which can boost consumption-linked stocks.
Arun Thukral, MD & CEO, Axis Securities, believes the government may look at providing interest-free credit cards to farmers, as mentioned in its election manifesto, for short-term new agriculture loans up to Rs 1 lakh at 0 per cent interest rate with tenures of 1-5 years on the condition of prompt repayment of the principal amount. He expects the Budget to have schemes that would benefit pharma, banking, FMCG and housing finance stocks.
SBI ‘Ecowrap’ report said financial institutions and the government should lend their helping hands to farmers by providing market support right from cultivation to sales.
The report also highlighted that capital formation in the agriculture sector has stagnated significantly. A trend reversal there can help achieve the objective of doubling farm income by 2022.
“This can be achieved by providing an incentive to agri-term loans for investment purpose through an enabling mechanism of either interest subvention or credit guarantee fund,” it said.
At present, the crop insurance scheme called PM’s Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) covers three types of crops, namely food crops (cereals, millets, and pulses), oilseeds, annual commercial or horticulture crops, which account for only 30 per cent of the total crop loans of banks.
“Government should cover all types of crops under PMFBY, which will help banks manage risks and also make a statement of intent in the Budget to increase income support from Rs 6,000 to Rs 8,000 over next five years. This will create a feel-good factor and boost consumer sentiments,” the SBI Economic Research said.
Consumption-related stocks like Emami, LT Foods, Bajaj Hindusthan, Vadilal Industries, Prataap Snacks and Future Consumer are down over 20 per cent since Union Budget, 2018. However, stocks like Nestle, HUL, Marico, Britannia and Dabur are up between 12 per cent and 60 per cent in the same period.
None of the stocks in the BSE Auto index has delivered positive return to investors since February last year. Tata Motors NSE 1.87 % , TVS Motor, Eicher Motors NSE 3.43 % , Hero MotoCorp, Maruti Suzuki, Ashok Leyland NSE 0.00 % and M&M are down between 20 per cent and 60 per cent.
“Two factors can help improve rural demand. First, the monsoon and schemes or measures that the government is expected to announce in Budget to stem deteriorating rural demand. Any revival in rural sector will boost stocks like Colgate and ITC,” said Mustafa Nadeem, CEO, Epic Research.
The two stocks have delivered a meagre 1 per cent return to investors since February 1, 2018.
Parth Nyati, COO & Co-Founder, TradingBells said even a minor increase in rural income can benefit FMCG stocks like HUL, Dabur, Britannia, Nestle, while any significant improvement in rural income can lead to demand growth in auto sector, especially for tractors and two-wheelers, which can be a positive for Escorts, M&M, Heromoto, TVS Motor.
