Farmers and ranchers are committed to rising every day to grow the food we all depend on. But we can’t do that work alone. It takes all of us safely working across the supply chain from the workers harvesting crops to the grocery store employees stocking shelves.
Empty shelves can be frightening, but empty fields and barns would be devastating.
Times like these remind us all of the importance of ensuring our nation’s food security, and we want to assure Americans that agriculture remains on call 24/7. I am reminded of and grateful for the tireless hours farmers and ranchers put in all year long to supply healthy, affordable food to be processed and packaged so stores can restock shelves, produce bins, and meat and dairy cases.
Like you, I am praying for an end to this pandemic. I also have faith that great stories of service, of neighbors helping neighbors and communities working together to protect one another will shine brightly across this country.
One of the best things our government can do to help kickstart the farm economy is commit to long-range policies. We’ve had enough uncertainty. It will take time to re-establish supply chains and markets. We need a clear, sustained focus on stimulating economic growth.
Americans Support COVID-19 Aid to Farmers; Trust Remains High
Trust in America’s farmers and ranchers remains high amid the devastating blow delivered by the COVID-19 pandemic. A new American Farm Bureau Federation poll shows 84% of Americans trust the nation’s farmers and the same overwhelming majority support financial assistance from the government for farmers struggling to keep from going under because of the pandemic.
From mandatory masks and sanitization of facilities to social distancing and regular self-checks, farmers, like Washington Bulb Company’s Polly Welch, are putting their employees’ wellness front and center during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Rural roads’ significant deficiencies have created many challenges -- and opportunities -- to improving the efficiency of the agricultural supply chain. However, America’s ability to address its rural transportation challenges is threatened by a significant decrease in state transportation revenues due to the COVID-19 pandemic, an existing backlog of surface transportation projects and the continued need for regulatory flexibility.
Whether they’re readying the soil for spring planting, tending to crops that have already sprouted, feeding and milking their dairy cows or looking after their cattle, chickens and pigs, farmers and ranchers take very seriously their commitment to fill grocery store shelves with safe, affordable food.
We remain committed to providing safe and healthy food for neighbors near and far.
From our farm to our medical practice, my family is still on the frontlines as we feed and care for our community.
We continue to press on, animals still need care, crops still need to be harvested and families still need food.
I’m honored to continue my family's legacy of growing food for my family and yours through these uncertain times.
Search #StillFarming on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter to find hundreds of posts from farmers and ranchers like the ones featured here.
Below are resources and communications tools to help farmers and their employees continue to work safely and prevent the spread of COVID-19 in rural communities. Please contact your local Farm Bureau for up-to-date guidance and state-specific resources.
