In absence of federal action, farm workers’ coronavirus cases spike
Florida, North Carolina and Washington preview further spread as harvest season advances.
A farm worker harvests zucchini in Florida. Advocates for the agricultural workforce say not enough farming operations have taken steps to protect workers from coronavirus. | Joe Raedle/Getty Images
Coronavirus outbreaks among farm workers are popping up in rural communities across the country, sparking fears within the agriculture industry that cases will skyrocket as harvest season stretches into summer.
In the coming weeks, more crews will be sent into fields to pick, pack and ship ripening crops. About a quarter of the 2.5 million-person workforce follows the harvest into other regions, bringing concerns that migratory workers could spread the disease to more farms and states.
Like meatpacking plant employees, farm workers have been deemed essential for their role in the nation’s food supply. But the federal government has not made safety rules mandatory, leaving it to farmers’ discretion whether to enact any safety measures at all.
Advocates for the low-income, mostly immigrant workforce say not enough farming operations have taken steps to protect workers, warning that pickers of the nation’s fruits and vegetables could trigger Covid-19 contagions in new places just as they are reopening their economies.
“It’s very concerning given that there have been several outbreaks at farm labor camps this early in the season in North Carolina,” said Lori Johnson, managing attorney of the Farmworker Unit of Legal Aid of North Carolina .
Farm industry groups insist they are capable of keeping workers safe, noting that many farms have rebuilt workers’ housing to provide more separation among sleeping laborers. Many have also added hand-washing stations and mask requirements.
But evidence around the country indicates that those efforts have been sporadic and may not be sufficient to prevent outbreaks.
Farms in nearly every region are seeing a spike in positive cases. More than 100 workers at two large produce operations in New Jersey contracted the virus in May, as the state develops an aggressive testing campaign for migrant workers. In North Carolina, a strawberry farm in Guilford County temporarily closed after eight workers tested positive.
Fruit-packing workers in the Yakima Valley of Washington state have been protesting for weeks for personal protective equipment and other precautions. They successfully pressured Washington Gov. Jay Inslee to issue safety requirements that went into effect last week. Nearly 500 farm workers in Yakima, which produces most of the nation’s tree fruit, have gotten sick during the pandemic.
Do you work for a hospital? Tell us what you're seeing
Concerns about reopening schools are only intensifying as coronavirus cases begin to skyrocket.
Kim Guilfoyle is the latest person close to the president to test positive for coronavirus.
Coronavirus threatened to make a mess of Kentucky’s primary — but it could be a model instead.
“People are really scared, there are a lot of unknowns,” Lupe Gonzalo, a longtime farm worker in Immokalee, Fla., told POLITICO via a translator. At the beginning of May, there were 44 confirmed cases of Covid-19 in Immokalee, a major tomato growing region in South Florida. Today there are near 1,000 cases, according to the Florida Department of Health. There is evidence that an outbreak is spreading in Belle Glade and Homestead, two other large farm worker towns in the area.
“We’re still seeing a lot of issues here in Immokalee where people still have to go to work, still have to provide for their families, and don’t have that access or ability to be able to socially distance from one another not only in work but also their living situations,” Gonzalo said.
The medical organization Doctors without Borders set up a mobile clinic in Immokalee in mid-April to provide testing for migrant workers, as well as to distribute sanitation products and promote public health practices. It’s the first time the organization, which serves high-need patients mainly in conflict zones, has worked in the U.S.
In May, the clinic, which travels from farm to farm testing workers after shifts end, saw a whopping 35 percent positive rate, evidence that community spread was occurring, said Jean Stowell, head of the group's Covid-19 team in the U.S. The national positive rate is only around 6 percent.
Stowell said the high rate is of “deep concern” to the medical team.
The rising numbers of reported cases is adding urgency to requests by labor leaders to government and farm industry representatives for expanded testing at individual farm sites and labor camps, contact tracing on farms where outbreaks are discovered, and industry-provided benefits like health care, hazard pay and safer housing accommodations.
But the workers lack clout: As many as half of them are estimated to be undocumented, and a significant portion of the rest are in the country on temporary work visas.
A spokesperson for the Labor Department said that the agency "is acting to keep America’s workers safe and healthy during the coronavirus pandemic." The department's Occupational Safety and Health Administration "has preexisting requirements and standards that not only remain in place and enforceable, but also apply to protect workers from the coronavirus." The spokesperson cited the the general duty clause, which requires employers to provide a work environment that is free from safety and health hazards, as well as guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, when determining if violations of workplace safety requirements are taking place.
In the absence of federal action, advocates are turning to state governments with their pleas for more support to be provided to farm workers who form the bedrock of the U.S. food supply chain.
Crop-pickers work and live in close quarters, making it difficult to follow social distancing guidelines. So health care providers in Immokalee have been educating workers on how to protect themselves as best as possible, such as instructing those who become sick to shield themselves from others if total isolation is not an option.
Tomato season is wrapping up in Florida, and pickers are beginning to move north to follow harvests in other states. Stowell said the mobile clinic is evaluating where to travel next.
“Covid is here for the foreseeable future, so the issue of not having access to safe isolation will continue to be a problem for this community wherever they move, whether it’s Immokalee or Michigan,” she said.
A daily briefing on agriculture and food policy — in your inbox.
By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
Hindered by limited testing and stigma around the virus, public health and labor groups have faced difficulty measuring the severity of coronavirus outbreaks. In North Carolina, hot spots have emerged in farm worker camps across the state, but not all positive cases are being reported, said Anna Jensen, executive director of the North Carolina Farmworkers Project.
Jensen said the lack of access to comprehensive, clear test results is why she believes "things are going to get worse."
The CDC and OSHA, the nation's public health and worker protection agencies, last week issued additional guidance for farm workers during the pandemic.
The joint guidance noted that "agriculture work sites, shared worker housing, and shared worker transportation vehicles present unique challenges for preventing and controlling the spread of Covid-19." It recommended that farmers screen laborers for coronavirus risk, take temperatures and separate workers exhibiting symptoms when possible.
But Farmworker Justice , an advocacy group, said the guidance "seems to adopt language to make sure that essential workers are back to work as soon as possible," and repeated its call for OSHA to issue mandatory rules requiring more extensive protections, along with more investment in health resources for rural communities.
Marc Schenker , a public health professor at the University of California, Davis and founder of the Western Center for Agricultural Health and Safety, said that “all the characteristics of farm workers are risk factors,” such as an inability to keep distance from coworkers, lack of readily available clean water and housing accommodations. And he said that OSHA has a long history of a “hands off attitude” that doesn’t adequately oversee the safety of agricultural workers.
“Some farms are trying to implement safety and precautions, and that’s to be recognized, but the challenges are enormous," he said.
