Number of large-scale, intensive farms with upwards of 40,000 birds or 2,000 pigs is increasing, driven by demand for cheap meat
Broilers crammed together in an intensive farming environment.
New figures reveal that the number of large industrial-sized pig and chicken farms in the UK continues to rise, with close to 2,000 across the country.
In 2017, the then environment secretary Michael Gove told MPs : “One thing is clear: I do not want to see, and we will not have, US-style farming in this country.” However, the number of industrial-sized pig and poultry units in the UK has risen by 7% from 1,669 in 2017 to 1,786 this year.
Chicken farms are classed as “intensive” if they have capacity to house at least 40,000 poultry birds, while pig farms must have 2,000 pigs raised for meat or 750 breeding sows. Intensive pig and poultry facilities require a permit from the Environment Agency to operate, which is not the case at present for intensive beef and dairy units, so their numbers are not monitored.
In England alone, according to 2020 data obtained by the Guardian and Bureau of Investigative Journalism, the number of permitted intensive livestock facilities in England has risen 7% since 2017 to 1,313 as of February this year. Of these, 1,092 are poultry and 221 are pig units, up from 1,016 and 210 respectively. Scotland has seen a rise of 10% and Wales has seen the highest rise, up 21% since 2017. Northern Ireland’s figures have not shown any increase.
There is concern that Brexit and new trade deals might further fuel intensification if farmers are forced to stay competitive in the face of cheap, low-welfare imports. At present, the new agriculture bill offers no legal guarantees to prevent this.
Driven in part by supermarket pressure to keep prices low and consumer demand for cheap meat, the growth of industrial farming remains divisive.
Intensive pig and poultry farms have been linked to local biodiversity damage from ammonia emissions and to detrimental impacts on local communities including noise pollution, increased traffic, and potentially harmful bacteria, viruses and air pollutants. It is also seen as a driver of deforestation in South America, through its reliance on protein-rich crops such as soya as animal feed.
A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: “The UK has some of the highest animal welfare and environmental standards in the world. This means all livestock farms, regardless of their size or scale, must meet our high standards and comply with robust legislation.”
However, animal welfare charities say 70% of UK farm animals , more than 1 billion animals every year, are now kept in intensive indoor units that Philip Lymbery, chief executive of Compassion in World Farming calls “the biggest cause of animal cruelty in Britain today”.
Chicken is our most popular meat, with 20 million birds slaughtered every week in the UK. The vast majority (86%) of industrial-sized farms are in the poultry sector, with 1,534 industrial-sized farms. Previous research from 2017 found seven out of the 10 largest farms in the UK housed more than 1 million birds.
