Wet weather is delaying the harvest in the U.S.
Corteva, which sells seeds and crop-protection chemicals, is dropping for a second day after reporting results that disappointed the market. The stock (ticker: CTVA) fell 4% Thursday, worse than the 0.5% decline of the Dow Jones Industrial Average .
      Shares were down another 1.6% at $25.96 Friday after J.P. Morgan analyst Jeffery Zekauskas downgraded the stock from the equivalent of Buy to Hold, cutting his target price from $30 to $27 for the shares.
FMC (FMC), another maker of farming chemicals was up 3.1% at $94.33. That follows on a 7.1% jump on Wednesday after the company reported its numbers. If FMC holds Friday’s gains, it will be the eighth straight daily rise.
For Corteva, “we had previously thought there was a possibility that domestic corn yields might be significantly impaired in 2019 due to adverse weather conditions that led to a very late planting season,” wrote Zekauskas in a Friday research report. “Domestic corn yields are coming in lower in 2019 than in 2018, and may further decrease, but yields have not been sufficiently low to either lift grain prices or seed prices.”
The prices of crops such as corn are critical to what Corteva can charge for seeds. Weather plays a role in the size of the harvest.
It has been a tough year in the U.S. A wet spring delayed planting, and a wet fall is holding back the harvest, yet futures for corn to be delivered in 2020 are down from their levels six months ago, when weather problems were on the rise.
FMC is riding out trouble. “Above-market growth for continues from persistent incremental Rynaxypyr/Cyazypyr insecticide traction,” wrote BMO analyst Joel Jackson in a Thursday research report, referring to two FMC products. “Into 2021, FMC could also see an uptick from its [new product] pipeline.”
Jackson rates shares the equivalent of Buy and has a $105 price target for the stock.
FMC’s slate of new products is one reason its quarterly result looked better than Corteva’s. FMC raised its forecast for full-year earnings, while Corteva didn’t. (Corteva did narrow the range of potential results it had forecast.)
“Increased guidance was due to strong performance from new products and proactive pricing actions,” an FMC spokesperson told Barron’s. The company raised local prices on goods sold overseas, offsetting the potential damage from a stronger dollar. Brazil’s currency, the real, weakened in the third quarter, reducing the U.S. dollar value of sales made there. Brazil is an agricultural powerhouse so it is a key consumer of farm chemicals.
Barron’s wrote positively about FMC shares in May. Since then, FMC stock has risen more than 33%. Corteva stock stumbled out of the gate after being spun off from DuPont de Nemours (DD).
Barron’s pointed out in June that shares from spinoffs often perform poorly soon after achieving independence because legacy shareholders—DuPont in this case—sell their positions, preferring not to hold the new stock. We didn’t recommend Corteva, but the stock is up 5% since that article appeared.
It’s Been a Tough Year in Agriculture. Farm-Supply Stocks Take Different Paths.
Two companies that supply farmers—Corteva and FMC—are on different paths as investors assess their quarterly results.
