Under Liberian law, only Liberian citizens or qualified foreigners can own land. Foreign companies investing in agriculture in Liberia may sign a long-term lease, renewable for the life of their investment. In September, 2018, President George Weah, who took office in January, 2018, signed a land reform law giving local communities greater rights over “customary land” and lets foreigners and charities own property. First drafted in 2014, the Land Right Act has nonetheless been criticized by some who say it weakens the rights of Liberians who live in rural areas, notably women. Previously, the government could grant private companies long-term leases on non-titled lands that cover most of the west African country settled by former slaves from the United States and Caribbean.
Monrovia – In 1923, a delegation from Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL)  paid a visit to Liberia to seek President Charles D.B. King’s approval to allow the purchase of land for settlement and agriculture purposes as well as assess conditions in Liberia for UNIA members interested in living in Africa.
Nearly 100 years later, Michael Duncan, brother of First Lady Clar Duncan-Weah is leading a movement to revisit the arrangement in hopes of rekindling a promise which President King later reneged on to Garvey.
The First Lady’s brother, Michael, currently the President General of the UNIA-ACL, was in the news recently amid allegations the Armed Forces of Liberia was using troops and resources donated by the government of China to mine gold on behalf of Duncan and the First Lady.
The AFL issued a stern denial that it’s troops are not working on mines but building roads.
In his capacity, as head of the UNIA,  Mr. Duncan, who has led the organization since August 2016,  is responsible for the entire working and carrying out of all commands.
Last week, talk show host Henry Costa, in a Facebook Live displayed photographs he says showed the use of recently-donated trucks by the Chinese government to the AFL being used to mine gold in Grand Kru County. “I have evidence that Mr. Weah and his brother-in-law, Michael Duncan, the brother of Clar Duncan Weah are engaged in illicit gold mining.
Mr. Costa alleged that the mining operation is taking place in Grand Kru in a village called Ma Mary Village, Parluken City, Forpoh District.
But speaking to FrontPageAfrica Monday via phone from his farm, Mr. Duncan who launched an unsuccessful  2013 bid for the 31st Council District seat in New York, has been frequenting Liberia of late pursuing various interests.
Said Mr. Duncan: ‘Since I was 17-years-old – after reading Marcus Garvey’s book, it was my vision to live in Liberia. I first visited in 2015, and prior to that, I traveled to South Africa in 1996. It has always been my dream to not just visit but to live and become a citizen and spend to rest of my life in Liberia. We have to work to bring back the Garvey mission. We are not interested in mining, We are interested in agriculture. My idea is to help develop Liberia anyway I can; to develop our people and use the Garvey vision to self-empower Liberians to work with the people as Mr. Garvey prescribed.”
Mr. Duncan explained that he learned about Marcus Garvey in high school and has been a Garveyite ever since.  At that point I learned about Garvey’s interest to form a city or start a program in Liberia as it relates to the black man,” Mr. Duncan said Monday. “What we did in 2015, we started the UNIA local Division,  James Stewart.”  Stewart, from  the US state of Ohio, moved the Association’ s headquarters to Monrovia, where it remained until his death in 1964, when it was again moved to Youngstown, Ohio. But by then, the organization was a shadow of its former self, and disoriented.
Asked whether he has made any effort to reach out to the Senate or the national legislature, Mr. Duncan said: “This is not to deal with the government. We are working through the people. It is our idea to build it from the ground up. I am the 11th President General of the UNIA. We are taught to respect the local laws and we intend to respect the laws of the government and abide by those laws. Everything we do we will make sure it is legal. We want to reach the common men and women and help them realize their fullest potential. Now, I have farm that I am working on right now. We do not have an office per se but we intend to have an office space soon. we have a structure on the farm where we can take care of the community.”
He further explained that the emphasis is on the elders and the indigenous people. That’s why we are here for. My objective here is to reach the common men and women and from there, we will grow. We are not only doing this in Liberia but in other countries as well. We are in Ghana, Sierra Leone, working in Guinea, Zambia, South Africa and in Zimbabwe. Our objective is to organize humanitarian programs to build communities in countries wherever we are. It entails creating local missions and influencing people to control their economies. Liberia has a very fertile soil. Agriculture. There was a lot of farming here before but the war took a toll. Currently, we have hired 27 people and as we growing. We will hire a lot more people. We are doing this jointly with the chiefs, the community elders to help make their communities better, that’s the main objectives.”
Asked what kind of farming he is involved in, Mr. Duncan said: They currently have 15,000 heads of cabbages, 4,300 of kilos of watermelon, 15,000 plants of cucumbers and 7,000 heads of sour-sour.
According to him, twenty percent of the sour-sour is being processed for export. While the others will be used for the communities.  “I have a local business in the US and the produce from the farm will be used to supply that business. We have a distribution business in US and we can supply them from right here. The rest of the produce, including corns, is for the local market. We already started distributing and we will soon start harvesting the cabbage. So, our concentration is on agriculture because it  can help the local people and connect the local villages. We are working and training them to farm. What we have done so far is to train the local with seeds so they can farm on their own.”
It is unclear whether the property was purchased from the villagers or obtained through concession rights.
Under Liberian law, only Liberian citizens or qualified foreigners can own land. Foreign companies investing in agriculture in Liberia may sign a long-term lease, renewable for the life of their investment.
In September, 2018, President George Weah, who took office in January, 2018, signed a land reform law giving local communities greater rights over “customary land” and lets foreigners and charities own property. First drafted in 2014, the Land Right Act has nonetheless been criticized by some who say it weakens the rights of Liberians who live in rural areas, notably women. Previously, the government could grant private companies long-term leases on non-titled lands that cover most of the west African country settled by former slaves from the United States and Caribbean.
Under the new law, local communities can now claim ownership of customary land based on oral testimonies of community members, maps, signed agreements between neighboring communities and other documents.
The law allows foreigners, missionaries, educational and charitable organisations to own land as long as it is used for the purpose given at the time of purchase. Previously, the Liberian constitution provided that only “people of colour” can become Liberian and only Liberians can own property.
During his inaugural address in January 2018, President Weah, described archaic clauses in the land law as  as ‘unnecessary, racist and inappropriate for the 21st century and pledged to push for all races to apply for Liberian citizenship and for foreigners to be allowed to own property.
Liberia, Africa’s oldest republic, was established by freed slaves from the United States and declared independent in 1847.
“Since I was 17 years old – after reading Marcus Garvey’s book, it was my vision to live in Liberia. I first visited in 2015, and prior to that, I traveled to South Africa in 1996. It has always been my dream to not just visit but to live and become a citizen and spend the rest of my life in Liberia. We have to work to bring back the Garvey mission. We are not interested in mining. We are interested in agriculture. My idea is to help develop Liberia anyway I can; to develop our people and use the Garvey vision to self-empower Liberians to work with the people as Mr. Garvey prescribed.”
The UNIA-ACL) is a black nationalist fraternal organization founded by Garvey a Jamaican immigrant to the United States.  The Pan-African organization enjoyed its greatest strength in the 1920s and was influential prior to Garvey’s deportation to Jamaica in 1927. After that its prestige and influence declined, but it had a strong influence on African-American history and development. The UNIA was said to be “unquestionably, the most influential anticolonial organization in Jamaica prior to 1938.”
The organization was founded to work for the advancement of people of African ancestry around the world.
