Government of India eased ways to secure credit for farmers to purchase agriculture land in India. Government is striving to confront the problems faced by farmers in agriculture sector. To ensure liquidity in the agriculture sector banks provide loans at low rates to purchase land for future and current farmers in India.
Realizing the plethora of problems, the government initiates an array of the solution employing agricultural loan schemes. One such loan scheme is banks offering term loans for Agricultural land Purchase. Consequently, this improves productivity in the agricultural sector aiding in the economic advancement of the country. Further, most importantly assists marginal, individually small, tenant farmers with acquisitions of land for agriculture purposes. Moreover, helps to use uncultivated and wasteland for farming. Thus, the bank offers loans from Rs 50,000 to 10 lakhs with longer repayment options.
In certain cases, farmers obtain a loan against their land. That is, using the land they possess as collateral security to acquire a loan. In contradiction to the Agriculture land purchase that is issuing the loan to acquire a cultivation land. Accordingly, pledging a land for the loan is easily distinguishable from the loans to attain land.
Individuals that have taken up farming and allied sectors are eligible for loans. Thus, the following are eligible to concur a loan via agriculture land purchases:
Security- in case of loans below Rs 1,00,000 hypothecation of assets and crops from the finance. However, loans above that also require a mortgage of properties.
Considering the complications of farmers and cultivation, the repayment takes longer than usual. Thus, this loan scheme for agriculture land purchase allows ample time for a refund. Accordingly, the applicant should settle the loans in a period of 7 to 10 years. This time would include the moratorium period (gestation period). Further, interest may be issued during this gestation period, but interest will be issued yearly or every ½ year during the rest of the repayment payment. Furthermore, on extra development of land, the bank shall extend the loan repayment schedule. Note, fix the repayment schedule in the initial stages to avoid the commotion.
The processing charge will be nil for loans up to Rs 25,000 but above that, the decision is taken by the banks.
The Agriculture land purchase loan is offered by many banks including:
