Editor’s Note: Morning Agriculture is a free version of POLITICO Pro Agriculture’s morning newsletter, which is delivered to our subscribers each morning at 6 a.m. The POLITICO Pro platform combines the news you need with tools you can use to take action on the day’s biggest stories. Act on the news with POLITICO Pro .
— Farmers are still being squeezed out of small business loans even after Congress tried to fix the issue in its most recent stimulus package. It’s the latest glitch in Washington’s attempt to save the farm economy.
— Meatpacking plants are reopening, or preparing to do so, following President Donald Trump’s executive order to keep the industry operating despite a spike of infections at slaughterhouses across the country.
— Dairy Farmers of America finalized a deal to purchase Dean Foods, uniting the country’s largest milk supplier and processor, respectively. But first DFA will need to sell a trio of milk processing sites.
HAPPY MONDAY, MAY 4! Welcome to Morning Ag. Between the coronavirus and murder hornets , your host might never leave his apartment again. Send tips to [email protected] and @ryanmccrimmon , and follow us @Morning_Ag .
Sign up for POLITICO Nightly: Coronavirus Special Edition , your daily update on how the illness is affecting politics, markets, public health and more.
LOAN LOCKOUT THE LATEST SNAG IN FARM RESCUE: Congress is growing anxious over shortfalls in its agricultural aid programs, from fears that the Agriculture Department’s direct payments to producers are too small and restrictive to frustration that farmers haven’t been able to access forgivable loans aimed at keeping workers on their payroll. The latest issue? A long line of applicants is keeping ag producers from getting Economic Injury Disaster Loans, even after lawmakers specifically shoehorned them into the program less than two weeks ago, your host reports.
Congress in late April approved an extra $50 billion for the loans, which can offer up to $10,000 in advance for business with fewer than 500 employees that are losing revenue amid the pandemic. The legislation, H.R. 266 (166) , included language ensuring that ag operations qualify for the loans.
But even with the added funding, the Trump administration isn’t accepting any new applications because of a backlog leftover from the first round. That’s not sitting well with farm-state lawmakers who pushed to make sure farmers and ranchers were eligible.
Sound familiar? The issue is separate from (but similar to) farmers’ difficulty accessing the Paycheck Protection Program, another Small Business Administration program, which has been rapidly depleted by heavy demand from companies across every sector.
Now what? The Senate is back in session today, and negotiating a new coronavirus response package is the top priority. The next round of legislation could address what many members see as missing links in the current suite of relief options for farmers. First and foremost, Republicans and Democrats are looking to supersize USDA’s direct aid to farmers and ranchers — but there’s growing debate over how many strings should be attached to the future funding.
Lawmakers are looking for ways to encourage farmers to participate in carbon markets. | AP Photo
BRINGING MEATPACKING BACK ONLINE: Several meat processing sites that paused operations because of coronavirus outbreaks among their employees are now reopening, including a Smithfield Foods plant in Monmouth, Ill., and a Tyson Foods facility in Logansport, Ind., that’s set to resume slaughter this week after nearly 900 of its 2,200 workers tested positive.
Trump ordered meatpackers to keep working amid the pandemic to stave off the threat of a meat shortage at grocery stores. But slaughterhouses are still reporting huge numbers of cases, like a separate Tyson beef plant in Dakota City, Neb., where 669 employees were infected. In Texas, a “federal strike force” is responding to a surge of cases tied to meatpacking plants in Amarillo.
There’s fear that rushing to reopen could lead to another wave of infections. Nearly 50 House Democrats wrote to Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue and other officials on Friday asking them to spell out how the administration plans to protect workers from getting sick — a key factor that was not explained in Trump’s executive order.
Iowa’s three House Democrats sent a separate letter asking Trump to utilize the Defense Production Act to compel manufacturers to make more personal protective equipment for meatpacking workers. “If we are now expecting employees to return to work amid a national shortage of PPE, we must use all tools available to ensure the availability of PPE,” they wrote.
POLITICO Pro is here to help you navigate these unprecedented times. Check out our new Covid-19 Coverage Roundup , which provides a daily summary of top Covid-19 news coverage from across all 16 federal policy verticals as well as premium content, such as DataPoint graphics. Please sign up at our settings page to receive this unique roundup sent directly to your inbox every weekday afternoon.
GIANT DAIRY MERGER IS A DONE DEAL: Under the final agreement, the Dairy Farmers cooperative is required to sell milk processing plants in Harvard, Ill., De Pere, Wis., and Franklin, Mass., and federal prosecutors will need to approve the buyers, reports POLITICO’s Leah Nylen.
DFA last month was the highest bidder to buy Dean’s assets after the milk processing giant filed for bankruptcy in November. The co-op offered $433 million for 42 facilities owned by Dean, but grocery chains and dairy co-ops in several states objected, and the Justice Department filed an antitrust complaint against the mega-merger.
DOJ also said Friday that it would allow Prairie Farms Dairy in Illinois to buy milk processing plants from Dean in the South and Midwest because those facilities would otherwise shut down.
Big picture: Long before the coronavirus pandemic shut down schools and restaurants and forced farmers to start dumping milk, dairy producers were struggling with years of low milk prices, excess supply and growing competition from plant-based alternatives like soy and almond milk. Borden Dairy, the second largest milk processor, has also filed for bankruptcy.
TRACKING SNAP APPROVALS: Minnesota is the latest state approved by USDA to allow Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program recipients to use their benefits to buy groceries online through select retailers like Amazon and Walmart. The pilot program is up and running in several states, and about a dozen others have been authorized to set up online purchasing in the near future. Nearly 400,000 individuals (or 200,000 households) in Minnesota are enrolled in SNAP.
While we’re here: USDA also approved Delaware and Oregon for the Pandemic Electronic Benefit Transfer program, which offers extra nutrition benefits for families with children who normally qualify for subsidized school meals.
TODAY AT 1 p.m. EDT - A POLITICO TOWN HALL: AMERICA AT A TIPPING POINT: The killing of George Floyd sparked demonstrations against police brutality and racial injustice around the world. One month later, join POLITICO Live for a town hall to reflect on the past and reckon with what is next to come. Featured guests include Julián Castro, former secretary of HUD and Democratic presidential candidate; Vanita Gupta, president and chief executive of the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights; Rashad Robinson, civil rights leader and president of Color of Change; and Rep. Karen Bass (D-Calif.), chair of the Congressional Black Caucus. REGISTER HERE .
TRADE TALKS (VIA ZOOM?) ON TAP: Formal trade negotiations between Washington and London will launch on Tuesday with a video call between U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer and U.K. International Trade Secretary Liz Truss, report POLITICO Europe’s Emilio Casalicchio and Pro Trade’s Doug Palmer.
Make sure to mute your lines: More than 100 officials from both sides will be listening in. The first round of talks is expected to last two weeks, with further talks every six weeks or so.
What they want: The U.K. is pushing for lower tariffs on its exports to the U.S., while the Trump administration wants London to accept American agricultural and food production practices, most famously “chlorine chicken.”
— Trump on Sunday night said he will “terminate” the "phase one" deal with China if Beijing fails to buy an additional $200 billion worth of U.S. goods and services over the next two years as promised, our Pro Trade friends tell MA. During a town hall on Fox News, Trump danced around a question from a food products business owner about whether he would consider reducing or eliminating the tariffs on $350 billion worth of Chinese goods. “We’re looking at a lot of things, but you have to remember I’ve taken those tariffs and given a lot of them to the farmers,” Trump said, referring to slightly more than $23 billion in direct payments USDA has made to farmers amid the trade war.
— Blue Bell Creameries agreed to plead guilty and pay more than $19 million for shipping contaminated ice cream linked to a listeriosis outbreak in 2015. The Texas-based company’s former president was separately charged with seven felony counts related to a scheme to cover up the incident from the public, DOJ announced on Friday.
— Some farmers are securing hotel rooms and housing for potentially contagious ag laborers to quarantine. In general, crowded housing and transportation to and from the fields has left many farmworkers at greater risk of infection. The Wall Street Journal has the story.
— Democratic state attorneys general are suing the Trump administration over its Waters of the U.S. rule, which dramatically shrinks the number of protected streams and wetlands. The coalition warned that the proposal is especially problematic for dry Western states that rely on rainfall to replenish ephemeral waterways, reports Pro Energy’s Annie Snider.
— New York and New Jersey’s $11 billion seafood industry is facing revenue losses as high as 30 percent because of the shutdown of restaurants and a preference among many grocery shoppers for meat, poultry and produce over fish, writes POLITICO’s Michelle Bocanegra .
— House members are asking USDA to quickly provide the findings of its investigation into potential beef price-fixing. The probe started in August 2019 and expanded earlier this year amid the wide disparity in live cattle and retail beef prices. Read the bipartisan letter.
WINNERS PLAY THE LONG GAME: With so much going on in the present, it is more important than ever to look ahead to how society will thrive in the future. "The Long Game" is a newsletter designed for executives, investors and policymakers leading that conversation. Engage with the sharpest minds on our biggest challenges, from pandemics to environmental justice, climate change to renewable energy, inequality and the future of work. Subscribe today for a nuanced look at these issues and possible solutions. Subscribe today .
