They hope to expand their CSA program by about 30 percent this year.
And then there are the carrots: They grow about 100,000 pounds of them each year. Doherty said they know they can’t move that volume without the big orders that schools and restaurants bring.
He knows the conventional wisdom is that you don't plant a crop unless you have a market.
But right now, they’re planting lettuce that’s usually sold to schools, which are closed at least until early May.
"All those uncertainties are weighing heavily on us as we're planting,” Doherty said. “We decided to go ahead and plant. But you know, in addition to the usual uncertainties of farming, we've got a much bigger market uncertainty now, too."
Anna Racer and her husband, Pete Skold, are planting, too. They grow vegetables on about 5 acres near Webster, just south of the Twin Cities. They also raise hogs and sell pork.
Last week they started moving lettuce, beets, cucumbers and other cool-season crops into plastic-covered hoop houses, where the soil warms quickly, giving the plants a head start on the growing season.
Their Waxwing Farm sells to restaurants and direct to consumers, through a CSA.
Anna Racer plants vegetable seeds in a hoop house at Waxwing Farm near Webster on Monday.
The restaurant market has largely disappeared for now, but more people are signing up for weekly deliveries of produce through the farm’s CSA.
“We’ve had six to 10 people sign up in a day,” said Racer.
Last year, they delivered 100 boxes of produce a week. This year, they hope to increase to 130.
"That, in turn, obviously helps us, because we're getting money right up front now,” she said. When people subscribe to a CSA, they pay for the full season before it begins. “We're feeling a little bit more financial security moving into a season of having more employees (working) here and especially not knowing how restaurant sales will go."
Racer and Skold are trying to strike a balance by selling more of what they grow through CSA shares, but not committing to CSAs so heavily that they can’t supply their restaurant customers if and when they reopen.
"We have some really great relationships with a couple of accounts in the Cities and we want to make sure that we're getting them food they may need, but it's a little bit of a gamble right now," said Racer.
Vegetable seedlings sprout on Monday at Waxwing Farm near Webster, as the farm owners prepare for spring planting.
Doubting Thomas Farms near Moorhead took a gamble when nearly half of their markets disappeared overnight.
Noreen Thomas and her family grow organic grains and sell flour and rolled oats. Thomas said many of their customers were restaurants and other companies like bakeries that bought in bulk.
In an effort to make up for lost sales, they quickly shifted to direct-to-consumer sales through their website.
Online sales quickly took off.
A pound of flour to go? Restaurants are selling groceries now
"As consumers were running out of flour in the stores, they started to make that jump right to the farm, where can they get that direct," Thomas said. “We’re hearing from people we've never heard from before — [in] California or [on] the East Coast. It's been very robust. We don't know how long that's going to last.”
The farm had to shut down online sales temporarily, after orders overwhelmed the small operation.
Selling directly to consumers is more labor-intensive than selling in bulk. Instead of delivering large totes to commercial customers, there's much more time spent packaging and shipping when the grains are going to people’s houses. Those extra sales help, but Thomas said they haven’t made up for losing larger customers.
Many larger operations in Minnesota have also been overwhelmed by consumer demand.
“It’s been pretty crazy-busy here,” said Aaron Purvis, who works with Natural Way Mills, an organic milling operation near Middle River in northwest Minnesota. “We’ve had to stop orders on our website so we can keep up with our other distributors, bakeries and producers that have doubled their orders, as well.”
The 40-year-old business distributes flours, grains and legumes across the country. Business had been steadily growing, until it exploded in late March.
“We have been just overrun,” said Purvis. “We’ve had to limit some items like beans, rice, baking yeast, of all things, so that some people didn’t become hoarders at the cost of others going without.”
