Morning Market Review for June 30, 2020
Grains rise ahead of USDA reports. (Comments are updated by 7:30 a.m. Central Time.)
Jacqueline Holland | Jun 30, 2020
Chicago wheat down 3 cents; Kansas City & Minneapolis wheat up 1-3 cents
*Prices as of 6:55 am CDT.
Editor’s Note: Our “Feedback from the Field” series is live! Click here to share your crop reports with other growers around the country via a short survey with freshly updated questions this week! We will update the interactive Google map with results throughout the day. Thank you!
Good morning! It’s Quarterly Stocks and Acreage report day! Below is a brief preview of what could happen this morning in the markets following the release of USDA’s reports at 11 a.m. CDT. A full preview is available by clicking here . Stay tuned to FarmFutures.com for the latest results and analysis of today’s reports.
All eyes will be on corn and soybean acreage in today’s acreage report. High November ‘20 soybean futures prices in the early days of planting led some farmers to switch acreage from corn at the last minute this spring. Another troublesome planting season in North Dakota could see shifting corn and spring wheat acreage into soybeans.
Corn markets have already priced in high acreage. Average trade estimates place USDA’s projection at 95.2 million acres so a figure on the lower end of the trade range – likely between 93-94 million acres – that could potentially send final production estimates under 16 billion bushels would likely give corn markets upward price momentum.
Soybeans could face lower prices if USDA’s acreage estimates come in at or above 95 million acres. But market prospects still remain strong for soybeans amid increasing demand from China and expected seasonal increases in exports.
North Dakota’s rocky start to spring wheat planting could help reduce overall wheat acres. If spring wheat totals dip much below 12.4 million acres, falling prices may see some stability. But with a 28.4 billion-bushel record global production high forecasted this year and a weaker dollar, U.S. wheat prices could continue to struggle through harvest season.
Corn usage is expected to decline from previous consumption rates between March and June. The pandemic eroded ethanol demand as global citizens reduced their travel to limit the spread of coronavirus. The average trade estimate of 4.95 billion bushels for June 1 corn inventory will reflect one of the lowest third quarter usage rates – 37.7% - in the past 7 marketing years.
Despite record domestic crush demand, third quarter soybean usage is only expected to total about 861.3 million bushels amid lower export demand in the early days of the coronavirus pandemic. Third quarter usage was slightly higher than the same period last year due to increased soybean meal demand as livestock producers temporarily shifted away from DDGS during April, so today's report could show lower than expected soybean stocks.
Though export demand lagged in the fourth and final quarter for the 2019/20 wheat marketing year, an increase in human consumption of flour and bread products due to coronavirus -related stockpiling will likely result in the lowest June 1 wheat stock inventory of around 980 million bushels – the lowest since the fourth quarter of 2015/16.
Corn: Corn futures rose this morning on lingering rumors over a possible export purchase from China. Slow silking progress and heavy rains also underpinned strength in the corn market this morning. July futures were up $0.04/bushel to $3.3025 as traders finalized positions ahead of today’s reports. September futures also rose $0.04/bushel to $3.3275.
Cash corn prices were mostly steady across the Corn Belt yesterday. A Cedar Rapids, Iowa processor strengthened basis $0.02/bushel to $0.05 below July futures prices. A Decatur, Illinois processor also rose basis $0.02/bushel to $0.15 over September futures prices. Farmer sales were slow despite nearly a $0.10/bushel rise in July futures, which closed at $3.2625 yesterday. An Iowa merchandiser reported that farmers were waiting on a price rally from today’s reports as well as hopes for a dry weather forecast before booking new sales.
Slower than expected silking progress in the nation’s corn crop lent strength to rising corn prices yesterday afternoon according to the latest Crop Progress report from USDA released yesterday afternoon. As of June 28, only 4% of U.S. corn had begun silking, lower than the five-year average of 7%.
Texas was the only state ahead of the five-year average, with 62% of its crop silked as of Sunday. Most other states had just begun reporting silking advancement, though progress was slowed by dry weather and a rocky start to planting.
But even though the crop stumbled in the early stages of silking, the crop remained in good condition otherwise. Corn ratings rose 1% from the previous week to 73% good to excellent after rains across the Midwest this weekend alleviated dry soils.
Corn exports continued a second straight week in a row of strong shipment volumes . Despite falling 2.4 million bushels from the previous week, corn weighed for export inspection for the week ending June 18 measured 48.6 million bushels, according to weekly export inspections data from USDA. The 48.6 million-bushel weekly pace keeps 2019/20 corn export estimates in line with USDA’s 1.775-billion-bushel forecast.
Japan was the top destination for U.S. corn last week, with exporters reporting 12.1 million bushels loaded out to the Land of the Rising Sun as of last Thursday. China, who has noticeably lagged behind in their Phase 1 corn purchase commitments thus far in 2020, booked 5.9 million bushels of U.S. corn exports last week and are rumored to be buying more corn this week.
Soybeans: The soy complex followed corn higher this morning despite concerns that more acreage may go into soybeans this year. July soybean prices rose $0.045/bushel to $8.71 as July soyoil followed $0.20/lb higher to $27.82. July soymeal futures added $0.8/ton to $281.3.
Cash soybean bids held steady across the Midwest yesterday. Farmer sales were slow after fractional gains were reported in the futures market yesterday.
Soybean conditions improved 1% from the previous week to 71% good to excellent in the most recent Crop Progress report. With the majority of the crop emerged – 95% as of June 28 – attention shifted focus to blooming progress. As of Sunday, 14% of the U.S. soy crop had bloomed, 3% ahead of the five-year average.  Strong crop conditions and potential yields ahead of this morning’s report could result in lower prices if today’s USDA reports find higher soybean acreage or June 1 soybean stocks.
How early is too early to start marketing new crop grain? Fred Dietz from Advance Trading writes that June and July are historically the months that feature the highest December versus October futures price spreads. Dietz points out that with a 3.3 billion bushel new crop carryout on the horizon, being proactive about selling new crops now can help improve profit margins as far as a year out in the latest Ag Marketing IQ column .
U.S. soybeans weighed for export inched up 2.5 million bushels to 11.9 million bushels for the week ending June 18. The week’s sparse shipments primarily went to Egypt (4.9 million bushels). Egypt is on track to be the third-largest buyer of U.S. soybeans in the 2019/20 marketing year with 118.0 million bushels shipped to the North African country in the current marketing year to date.
Over 160,000 bushels of soybeans were exported to China last week. While the movement was welcomed by U.S. exporters and growers, the volume remains woefully below Phase 1 commitment levels.
Soft wheat prices fell this morning as harvest pressure in Russia forced export prices lower. Technical buying continued to prop up hard wheat prices while spring wheat futures in Minneapolis were underpinned by deteriorating crop conditions. A rising dollar offered little support to the wheat complex this morning as the ICE Dollar Index rose 0.19% to $97.690.
Cash offerings for soft and hard red winter wheat across the Midwest and Plains was unchanged yesterday. Chicago SRW futures backed off Friday’s nine-month low yesterday as Kansas City HRW futures recovered from a six-month low. The depressed prices discouraged farmers with recently harvested wheat from moving bushels from storage onto the market.
Protein premiums for hard red winter cash wheat delivered to or through Kansas City by rail dropped for all levels of protein content yesterday, as shown below:
Rains across the Plains and Midwest last weekend slowed the winter wheat harvest according to the most recent Crop Progress report. As of June 28, 41% of the winter wheat crop had been harvested, matching the five-year average for the same time period. Texas and Oklahoma are on track to finish harvesting activity this week, significantly ahead of the five-year average. But conditions remained steady at 42% for the second week in a row as combines dodged rain.
Spring wheat ratings wilted on dry weather across the Northern Plains last week. As of June 28, the nation’s spring wheat crop was rated at 69% good to excellent, down from 75% the week prior. Dry conditions, particularly in Idaho, Minnesota, and North Dakota, had enabled only 36% of the crop to head as of Sunday, 9% below the five-year average for the same time period.
After posting two strong weeks of export activity, wheat shipments weighed for exports dropped 6.3 million bushels in yesterday’s grain inspections for export report to 18.9 million bushels. In the fourth reporting week for the 2020/21 wheat marketing year, shipments were just above even with average shipping pace to meet USDA’s 950-million-bushel export forecast for new crop wheat demand.
The Philippines was the week’s top destination for U.S. wheat after 6.1 million bushels of wheat were weighed for export to the southeast Asian country last week. Over 633,100 bushels of U.S. wheat were shipped to China last week as well. While increased wheat movement to China was welcomed by U.S. exporters, last week’s volume hardly put a dent in China’s 183.7-million-bushel Phase 1 commitment for U.S. wheat.
International wheat demand is picking back up this week amid low wheat prices and recovering global economic conditions. South Korea booked 2.2 million bushels of feed wheat from optional origins overnight. Iraq will need to import 36.7 million bushels of wheat this year to support the 220.4 million bushel of local production and boost reserves amid the pandemic.
India’s state-guaranteed wheat pricing program has led the country to purchase a record amount of wheat from its local farmers. 2020/21 Indian wheat production is pegged at a staggering 3.94 billion bushels, of which the Food Corporation of India (FCI) will purchase up to 1.5 billion bushels, which will likely send grain bins overflowing.
Durum prices led Canadian farmers to plant more 1.5% wheat acreage this year. The coronavirus pandemic will create more challenges and supply chain bottlenecks for growers and merchandisers this year for the 25-million-acre Canadian wheat crop, according to Statistics Canada.
Weather: More rain is expected across the Northern Plains and Eastern Corn Belt today and tomorrow, according to NOAA's short-range forecast . Central Illinois and North Dakota could see up to two inches of rain in the next 24 hours though temperatures in the 80’s and 90’s should help dry up any excess rain.
Financials: Coronavirus cases in the U.S. rose by 41,513 to 2,590,582 cases as of this morning according to the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center as testing across the country increases. The death toll increased by 338 lives to 126,141 deaths as of press time.
This author’s all-time favorite quote is, “If you want to hear God laugh, tell him your plans.” However, that does not have to necessarily apply to your farm! Even when the best-laid plans don’t work out, there is immense value in the planning process. Analyzing your operation’s data and planning for multiple scenarios each year provide farmers the ability to easily pivot when times are tough. Darren Frye of Water Street Consulting points out that farmers should also look at the big picture and stay up to date on market news to maintain a high degree of flexibility in the latest Finance First column .
As the July grains contracts approach expiration, few deliveries are expected to be made to futures delivery locations today, which is the first notice day for July futures contracts. Firm cash prices are likely to deter short holders from making deliveries. Construction on five locks and dams along the Illinois River will limit corn deliveries at CBOT delivery points until repairs are completed around October 1.
The Chicago Board of Trade estimate zero to 200 deliveries on the July soft winter wheat contract today. July corn and hard wheat deliveries will likely range between zero to 400, soybeans are expected between zero to 250 contracts, and July spring wheat in Minneapolis is estimated between 200 and 800 contracts. During the contract delivery period, a small number of deliveries supports current futures prices while a large number could pressure the nearby contract price.
Father’s Day meat sales saw a staggering 31.9% increase from the previous week amid the strongest retail meat assortment in weeks and despite elevated prices. Recovering restaurant purchases helped support the summer holiday purchase increase as consumers sought out higher quality cuts of meat to celebrate dads across the country. Volume jumped up 13.5% for Father’s Day week with the largest volume gains reported from fresh lamb cuts.
U.S. stock futures are expected to rise ahead of the opening bell this morning. A new round of lockdowns suppressed gains, which were supported by strengthening manufacturing figures out of China. U.S. consumer confidence data for June will be released today, providing fresh insights to household-level willingness to spend amid the pandemic. The virus resurgence will continue to weigh heavily on the markets, Seema Shah, chief strategist, at Principal Global Investors notes. She expects stocks to “see a slow consolidation” in coming weeks, rather than a strong rally or a sharp correction in a Tuesday morning Wall Street Journal interview .
Rising uncertainty over the coronavirus resurgence took a toll on the energy sector this morning. The global benchmark Brent crude dipped $0.51/barrel lower to $41.20. U.S. sweet crude oil futures fell $0.41/barrel to $39.29.
