Do you think investing in Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies could be a good idea, because everything is becoming digital and that is the new digital for transaction?
Money is going to be on the computer, no doubt about it. It is already happening. You cannot take a taxi in China with money. You cannot buy ice-cream in China with money. You have to have it on your phone. All the money is going to be on the computer. But it is going to be government money, not Bitcoin, it is not going to be some of the cryptos. In the 1930s, you could use anything including sea shells as money, and banks could print their own money. The Bank of England came out and said from now on it is an act of treason to use anything for money, except our money; and treason meant they will execute you. So people stopped using them. The crypto guys will say listen we are smarter than the governments, but the governments have the guns. I do not like it that the governments are going to have more and more control and knowledge about all of us, but the governments do have guns. If they say, it is an act of treason to use cryptocurrencies, except our cryptocurrencies, you are not going to do it. All governments are going to have their own cryptocurrencies and they are not going to let you use anything else.
If you have to, let us say, choose one market to invest between India and China, which way would you lean and your thoughts on why would you lean that way?
I love India. If you read my book, you know I always said India is one of my favourite countries in the world. Everybody should visit it. At the moment I am not investing in India. I do have some investments in China. I bought Chinese shares yesterday. At the moment perhaps, it is a good question. I have not looked at India recently, but it must be down a lot. Some Indian companies have great futures. I have to do some homework.
So my follow-up question is simple: what is the future for oil NSE -2.09 % producing countries and nations -- Saudi Arabia or Russia? They are now reaching bankruptcy levels in terms of finances and we know that some of these countries run a lot of sovereign funds which have invested in emerging markets and some major startups. So are we looking at a big change in the equilibrium because now the Arabs and the Russians and the Kuwaitis and the Iraqis will have to liquidate some of their investments?
Well, Saudi Arabia has certainly got a problem now, a huge problem. Because they have built up debt, because they have all those people whom they have to support. Russia is different. It is a huge oil producer. But they have other things. Russian agriculture for instance, I own shares of Russian agriculture and fertiliser as we speak. They have got a great future. America put sanctions on Russia; and every morning Russian farmers wake up and say, thank you, Mr Trump. Russian agriculture is booming. Also, Russia has metals and other things besides oil and gas. So yes, they will suffer, but there are some parts of Russia which will boom. Most oil producers like Kuwait and Qatar will have serious problems going forward, mainly because they have built up huge cost structures. It is very expensive to do anything because they had so much money for so long. I would not rush off to Mexico to make investments right now, or Nigeria. But it is going to be great for some of the places like India, China and Korea who use a lot of oil. These guys are waking up every morning and cannot believe how lucky they are.
What is your view on the dollar?
I own a lot of US dollars. I own US dollars, because in times of trouble and turmoil, people look for a safe haven. Now they think this US dollar is a safe haven for historic reasons. It is not a safe haven. But then, why do you own it? I own it because people think it is. The US is the largest debtor nation in the history of the world. No nation in the world history has been this deep in debt, and it is getting worse every day. But I still own it because people will turn to the US dollar thinking it is a safe haven. If they look at the euro or the British pound or other currencies, they do not see anything worth that they think is worth investing in. So I own a lot of US dollars.
What is going to happen is it is going to go higher; it is going to get overpriced during the turmoil, during problems, it might even turn into a bubble at which point I will have to sell my US dollars, and put them somewhere else, maybe gold, maybe silver. Often when the dollar gets very strong, gold and silver go down a lot or go up a lot. So maybe I will sell my US dollars and put it into gold and silver. But the US dollar is going to go much higher, because people are going to be very scared and they think the US dollar is a safe haven.
You always mention that markets follow a pattern -- it was Japan in ’80s, the US in ’90s, it came back to China, last 10 years were dominated by the US. Do you think this coronavirus impact is going to ensure that the US economy remains in a tailspin for the next couple of years and other economies will make a comeback?
Well, some people who use oil, such as India, are going to be in much better shape now. There is going to be a shift. You are going to see a serious shift. Japan is going to benefit. Japan has many other problems, but this is going to help Japan. There are major countries in the world that are going to benefit from this. It is going to cause a shift towards those countries while oil producers are going to be in trouble. Some of them are going to collapse. But places like India look solid. So I am looking for investments in India, Vietnam, China, Japan, Korea. These are places that are certainly going to have a gift from the fact that oil is down, and oil is going to stay down for a while. What is going to happen is oil is going to make a complicated bottom. Look back in a few years: in 2018-18-20-21-22 oil made its bottom, then oil would go higher again. But in the meantime, this is nirvana for many countries and many companies, unexpected by the way, completely unexpected. If you had said on ETNOW a year ago that oil will be $20 a barrel, people would have hung up, but here it is.
What could be implications of coronavirus on international trade relationships? Do you think a geopolitical war could be simmering now or I am getting too cautious right now?
No. It is already leaving a bad taste in some people’s mouths. In America, there are many people who are strongly anti-China and this is just encouraging them. Whether they have solid foundation for being anti-China is irrelevant, it is increasing the anti-Chinese feeling in the US and in some other countries. So you are going to see Mr Trump will come back with the trade war. He thinks trade wars are good, he thinks he can win, he does not know history. If he does know history, then he thinks he is smarter than history. But Mr Trump will come back with more trade wars, especially against China but also Japan, Germany, Mexico everybody. He is not going to blame the problems on Mr Trump; he has never said he made a mistake. So he is going to blame it on other people and the trade war is going to get worse. I believe, he was having a trade war with India too for some strange reasons.
But the countries that have not been devastated by the virus can continue to produce. And consumers of oil, such as India, are going to be in better shape when this gets over.
If you have to identify one long-term structural shot, where do you think asset prices will go? Will then keep on going lower and lower in the coming years? What would be that asset trade?
The US bond market, the US government bond market.
