Indigenous knowledge and agricultural science are uniting to help support a renaissance in Aboriginal agriculture in western NSW. The winners will include farmers looking for additional income streams.
Bruce Pascoe (centre) with workshop participants Rhonda Ashby from Lightning Ridge (left) and Bernadette Duncan from Boggabilla. Photo: Rebecca Cross
In a glorious mess of flour, culture and ideas, a group of 20 Aboriginal people representing six communities in western New South Wales met on Gamilaraay Country at the University of Sydney’s Plant Breeding Institute outside Narrabri last week.
Together, they made johnnycakes (flame-grilled bread) with flour made from six species of native grass grain. The group discussed how to make possible the emergence of a native grain industry and support the revival of culturally significant food sources in the region.
Dr Angela Pattison is leading a research group at the University that is assessing how best to support such an industry. She says that Indigenous involvement in the project is vital for its success.
“We are honoured to be working alongside and under the guidance of such a knowledgeable group of Aboriginal people,” she said.
“The group includes trained linguists, school teachers, medicinal plant experts, and CEOs and chairpersons of Aboriginal land councils. They all have amazing insights into not only the past but what they would like to see for the future.”
People from Mungindi, Wee Waa, Moree, Narrabri, Boggabilla and Lightning Ridge attended the daylong workshop.
The event was also attended by Bruce and Lyn Pascoe and Noel and Trish Butler from Mallacoota in northeast Victoria. They shared their cultural and practical knowledge on the role grains are playing in their community and the journey of their company, Black Duck Foods, to bring back the ancient culture and practice of producing native bread to provide employment for local people and rejuvenate the country.
Cooking johnnycakes on the barbie.
Dr Angela Pattison (left) with Bruce Pascoe.
