The one of its kind index, the AGRIDEX tracks and replicates the performance of the ten most liquid commodities traded on the NCDEX’s platform.
Kolkata: NCDEX on Wednesday launched return based agricultural futures index . The exchange has partnered with NSE Indices Limited, a leading index service provider, as a third party to maintain and disseminate real time NCDEX AGRIDEX values. The one of its kind index, the AGRIDEX tracks and replicates the performance of the ten most liquid commodities traded on the NCDEX’s platform.
Announcing about the partnership, Kapil Dev , EVP, NCDEX said, “NCDEX has always taken lead to offer innovative products in Indian agriculture ecosystem. We are extremely delighted to collaborate with NSE Indices Limited. It’s a significant collaboration which will finally fulfill the dream to serve benchmark for Indian agriculture ecosystem. The NCDEX AGRIDEX will act as a robust indicator of the broader market and its strong surveillance will give enough confidence to the traders.”
NCDEX will launch tradeable futures contracts on AGRIDEX on receipt of SEBI Approval. These contracts will be cash settled as per SEBI’s guidelines. These index futures contracts will not only provide the opportunity to hedgers to hedge their position in more dynamic way but will also provide unique trading & arbitrage opportunities for market participants. As index represents a diverse basket of commodities, it’s a less risky & more predictable compared to individual commodity. Futures trading on AGRIDEX will also enhance overall liquidity on exchange platform.
“We are pleased to partner with NCDEX for providing real time index computation of NCDEX AGRIDEX. NSE Indices is a leading index player in the Indian capital markets and this is one more engagement through which we have demonstrated our strengths in the indexing space.” said Mukesh Agarwal, CEO, NSE Indices.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
