The NCDEX AGRIDEX futures contracts expiring in the months of June 2020, July 2020, September 2020 and December 2020 shall be available for trading from May 26, 2020.
The rollover will be done on the first 3 days of the expiry month and the index would be rebalanced annually on the first business day of April.
The NCDEX AGRIDEX futures contracts expiring in the months of June 2020, July 2020, September 2020 and December 2020 shall be available for trading from May 26, 2020.
Announcing the launch, Vijay Kumar, MD & CEO, NCDEX said, “Agriculture is key pillar of the Indian economy and contributes significantly to employment and economic growth. NCDEX has always played an important role in providing risk management tools for the Indian agricultural value chain. The introduction of AGRIDEX Futures is another important step in the same direction. AGRIDEX Futures contracts will provide investors one more tool for trading and risk management at a composite level.”
AGRIDEX is a return-based index comprising of ten liquid commodities traded on NCDEX.
It has commodity-wise and sector-wise floors and caps, with no single commodity or sector dominating the index. AGRIDEX has very low correlation with other asset classes and indices. To ensure diversification, no group of related commodities may constitute more than 40% of the total weightage in the index.
The rollover will be done on the first 3 days of the expiry month and the index would be rebalanced annually on the first business day of April. AGRIDEX is a comprehensive agri-commodities index which provides a holistic view over this segment.
Kapil Dev, Head- Business, NCDEX said, “Futures on AGRIDEX are an important addition to the agricultural derivative products on NCDEX, and the first tradeable commodity index based on Indian domestic prices. Since AGRIDEX Futures Contracts provide a diversified cash settled instrument it will help in widening participation on the Exchange from both institutional and retail investors.”
NCDEX has partnered with NSE Indices, a leading Index service provider, to maintain and disseminate real-time NCDEX AGRIDEX values.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
