SM Malls, in collaboration with the Department of Agriculture and Resto PH, launches its newest project “Farmers’ Produce” which is dedicated to supporting farmers whose businesses have been adversely affected by COVID-19. Farmers’ Produce will act as a bridge connecting consumers directly to the farmers and fishermen, giving the F&B sector a much-needed boost. The partnership means granting farmers and cooperatives to utilise unused mall spaces as a venue to sell their goods free of charge.
“Many individuals and businesses have felt the economic impact of the current pandemic. This project will allow our shoppers to enjoy fresh and organic products while helping farmers, small communities, and local restaurants get back on their feet as the country adapts to the new normal,” said SM Supermalls President Steven Tan.
Mallgoers will get to enjoy fresh vegetables, fruits, meat products, dairy products, homemade condiments and seasonings, not to mention local drinks such as coffee, teas, and wines straight from its source.
Resto PH restaurants will also roll out new dishes incorporating the local produce that are available during the project’s launch in SM Aura Premier, Bonifacio Global City. Thai restaurant Mango Tree Bistro will be creating special dishes for the launch as well as other restaurants namely: Icebergs, Mamou, Genki Sushi, King Chef, Scouts Honor, Pizza Express, and Monga.
President of Resto PH and Mango Tree Restaurants, Eric Teng, believes that utilising the mall’s vast space would greatly and conveniently empower both the farming and restaurant industry.
“The farms have the produce and the restaurants are reopening–we just wanted to connect the two. The malls provide the venue because they have the most space. When you have space, the farms, and the restaurants can work together to help each other out,” shares Eric.
Farmers’ Produce will also be made available in other SM Malls nationwide in the coming months. For more information visit smsupermalls.com .
