ALBANY — The New York State Farm Bureau Saturday said it awaits more information on the $19 billion in aid United States Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue announced for farm families around the country.
The USDA’s Coronavirus Food Assistance Program (CFAP) will take several actions to assist farmers, ranchers, and consumers in response to the COVID-19 national emergency. Perdue said President Donald Trump directed USDA to form this immediate relief program to provide critical support to farmers and ranchers, maintain the integrity of our food supply chain, and ensure every American continues to receive and have access to the food they need.
State Farm Bureau President David Fisher said in a statement that the bureau appreciates the USDA’s announcement to provide emergency economic aid to farmers in light of the serious market disruptions and collapsed commodity prices related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
“New York Farm Bureau wrote a letter this month to Secretary Sonny Perdue requesting the direct assistance and a federal food purchase program to help stabilize prices. $16 billion will now be directed to our farm families along with $3 billion to purchase meat, dairy products, fruit and vegetables,” he said.
“We also applaud the initiative to get more food from the farm to food banks to help New Yorkers in need. No farmer wants to see food go to waste but is sometimes left with no other choice considering the major challenges confronting the food distribution chain,” Fisher said.
The Farm Bureau president said like most small businesses, New York’s farm families are trying to cope the best they can while they continue to make sure food production doesn’t stop.
“The USDA announcement is an investment into food security for this country,” he said. “We look forward to learning more details about the aid package and will work with the USDA and our farmers to get the assistance quickly to where it needs to go.”
Genesee County Farm Bureau President Bruce Naas said he has not heard the breakdown of aid.
“I’m glad that they are providing aid for everybody. I just hope it rolls out sooner rather than later. Everybody needs something at this point,” Naas said. “As the announcements come out we hear about it. Everything we would get from the county Farm Bureau side comes from the state Farm Bureau.”
“I think every aspect of agriculture needs some support, between the virus and the tariff issues. It’s great that everybody is going to get something from this round of payments,” he said.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Coronavirus Food Assistance Program (CFAP) will take several actions to assist farmers, ranchers, and consumers in response to the COVID-19 national emergency. President Donald Trump directed USDA to craft this $19 billion immediate relief program to provide critical support to farmers and ranchers, maintain the integrity of our food supply chain, and ensure every American continues to receive and have access to the food they need.
“During this time of national crisis, President Trump and USDA are standing with our farmers, ranchers, and all citizens to make sure they are taken care of,” Perdue said. “The American food supply chain had to adapt, and it remains safe, secure, and strong, and we all know that starts with America’s farmers and ranchers. This program will not only provide immediate relief for our farmers and ranchers, but it will also allow for the purchase and distribution of our agricultural abundance to help our fellow Americans in need.”
CFAP will use the funding and authorities provided in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES), the Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA), and other USDA existing authorities. The program includes two major elements to achieve these goals.
