SPRINGFIELD — The Dairy Business Innovation Alliance (DBIA) is a newly announced program that will provide Midwestern dairy farmers and dairy-related businesses with financial and technical support. This initiative, a joint effort coordinated by the Center for Dairy Research (CDR) and the Wisconsin Cheese Makers Association (WCMA), was designed to support and promote the diversification and addition of value-added products to the Midwest dairy industry.
Goals of this program include:
"We want to allow dairy farmers and processors to be innovative for their futures. We hope to improve the situations on dairy farms, processing plants, and cooperatives," said DBIA Program Director Karen Nielsen.
Grant applications are available on the DBIA website. The grant application period is now open. Funds totaling $220,000 will be disbursed and awarded with individual projects receiving up to $20,000. The deadline to complete and return applications is Friday, Aug 14. Selected producers and business owners will be notified on September 4th. DBIA is also coordinating online webinars and compiling resources for dairy producers and processors.
Nielsen noted that a grant proposal is currently being written to the United States Department of Agriculture for funding for subsequent years. Future plans for the program include expanding the resources available to dairy producers and processors and learning more about U.S. consumers’ dairy product buying preferences.
For more information, call the Illinois Department of Agriculture at 217-524-9129, visit their website at www.agr.state.il.us or call the Dairy Business Innovation Alliance at 608-265-1491 or visit their website at https://turbo.cdr.wisc.edu/dairy-business-innovation-alliance/ .
1965: The school is housed in the former Humble Oil Co. building on Route 45 on the south side of Mattoon.
1950: Proof that flash photography has become a national hobby is the Mattoon plant of the General Electric Co. which manufactures flash bulbs almost exclusively. A few incandescent or regular light bulbs in larger wattages are made here also.
1989: Pat and Rodney Williamson are ready to dine. Owner Leonard Losch looks on at Ellen Kay's.
1992: A bicyclist pedals along East Rudy Street where a row of new duplexes were built, next to a subsidized housing project.
1992: A group of children wait in line to challenge the winner to a game of tether ball at the E. Rudy Street housing project.
1985: aerial view of downtown Mattoon.
1977: Acquisition of the Douglas Nursing Center will complete another phase in Wesley Tower's total care package.
1991: The CTA office is carpeted, air conditioned, well-lit and features work stations designed around employee needs. Telemarketers generated $435 billion in sales last year. For each customer who says yes, 99 say no.
1959: The Eastern Division of the CIPS is completing a move into the new building in Mattoon. The structure has 36 offices and 23,000 square feet of office space.
1988: Burtschi is the first store in Illinois south of Springfield to offer Hummel figurines.
1963: A new line of paving equipment is exhibited by the Mattoon Blaw Knox plant at the Construction Equipment Exposition and Road Show, Chicago.
1959: In an effort to better serve the growing needs of the Midwest, Southwest and Far West market for flexible metal hose and tubing the American Brass Co. built its American Metal Hose Division plant in Mattoon.
