Dublin, Jan.  21, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- The "North America Agriculture Tractors Market-Size, Trends, Competitive Analysis and Forecasts (2019-2024)" report has been added to ResearchAndMarkets.com's offering.
Agriculture in North America is mechanized and heavily dependent upon an integrated system of supporting agribusinesses. In the United States and Canada, most farmers and ranchers depend heavily upon technology. The introduction of new technologies has resulted in an increase in both farm size and agricultural output, a decrease in the demand for farm labor, making agriculture more profitable for the farmers. The Governments, especially in Mexico are providing subsidies to buy tractors and farm equipment to promote mechanization. This along with low-interest rates on tractor finance is expected to push the sales of the tractor.
North America is the matured market for tractors and is forecasted to grow at a CAGR of 5.6% during 2019-2024. Driverless tractors are the opportunity segment in North America.
The U.S. accounts for major market share in North America. The country is the origin of most of the technological advancements in the tractor industry in the region. Due to the reduced farm labor supply and drive for greater productivity the use of tractors in Canada has been continuously increasing. The agricultural economy in Mexico is large and modernizing rapidly. Mexico currently employs around 15% of the workforce for agriculture, however, the number has been rapidly declining since the last decade. The push from Government for mechanization to increase farm output indicates a strong potential for tractors market. Mexico is the major exports market of tractors and its parts for the U.S.
The market has been segmented based on the:
Deere and Company, CNH Global NV, Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., AGCO Tractor, Massey Ferguson, and Escorts are a few key players in the market. Aggressive marketing and strengthening the distribution network are major strategies adopted by key players.
