Pity the millennials. Of all living generations, people born between 1980 and 1994 have faced exceptional economic uncertainty.
The 2020 coronavirus-driven recession ushers in the third serious downturn in their working careers.
“Many millennials — if not most — entered the job market during one of these recent recessions, struggling to find work and build a career in an incredibly competitive labour market,” says UBS investment strategist Justin Waring in a note.
Studies have shown that graduating in a recession can have negative repercussions that last for decades. Stanford University research shows that the effects are lower earnings and higher unemployment over a career.
Being unable to work immediately after graduation can be devastating, said Waring. Many are unable to qualify for unemployment benefits because they lack job history, then find it harder to get a job later because of the gaps in their employment. The research shows that graduating during a time of high unemployment increases the odds of longer spells of unemployment later in life.
Sure millennials have it tough, but it’s not all bad, said Waring.
The best thing millennials have going for them is time, he said. Bear markets, like we are in now, are a “blessing in disguise” for young investors because it gives them the opportunity to buy equities at bargain prices and wait out the downturn.
In fact, in this respect, baby boomers are more likely the unluckiest generation, said Waring. “Due to sequence risk, bear markets pose a far greater threat for retirees … for many baby boomers, 2020 has seen the third bear market during what should be their retirement years.”
Waring offers three ways millennials and Gen Z can weather the recession. Invest in your human capital through education and skills development. College graduates can expect to earn on average $1 million more than those with less education, equal to about a 15% rate of return. Save all you can, and make the most of those savings by budgeting and investing.
Looking for more advice? Check out Spent , a new column in which the Financial Post’s Victor Ferreira takes an entertaining and insightful look at the financial lives of everyday Canadian millennials.
A VERY DIFFERENT CANADA DAY It was a Canada Day like no other. Cancelled public events were replaced by backyard gatherings, digital shows and virtual fireworks as Canadians observed social distancing amid the coronavirus pandemic. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau spent part of the day with his family harvesting broccoli at the farm operated by the Ottawa Food Bank. The organization told Canadian Press that demand has levelled out after an initial surge early in the pandemic, but it expects another spike once Canadian Emergency Response Benefit cheques (CERB) run out. Reuters/Blair Gable
Today’s Data: Canadian international merchandise trade figures, U.S.non-farm payrolls, U.S. initial jobless claims, U.S. factory orders, U.S. goods and services balances
