“Demand for perishables has declined as bulk demand has stopped. However, there is more demand for vegetables that have longer shelf life, such as onions, potatoes and tomatoes,” said Rajinder Sharma, former chairman of Azadpur Agricultural Produce Market Committee in Delhi.
Pune: Prices of agricultural commodities such as perishable vegetables, grapes and sugar have fallen 15-20% as bulk demand from hotels and restaurants has nosedived and there is uncertainty over exports. Various industry bodies, including those representing textile and poultry, have started approaching the government, seeking loan restructuring and financial incentives to survive.
Traders across the country are struggling to combat rumours about closure of markets and attempts to create artificial shortages.
“Demand for perishables has declined as bulk demand has stopped. However, there is more demand for vegetables that have longer shelf life, such as onions, potatoes and tomatoes,” said Rajinder Sharma, former chairman of Azadpur Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC) in Delhi.
There is no shortage of fruits and vegetables and the market is not closed, said Sharma.
Except chicken, demand for agricultural commodities has not been affected due to coronavirus either in India or in the international market. However, farm-gate prices have fallen due to scare of Covid-19. “The export price of grapes at farm gate has fallen from about Rs 100 per kg to Rs 70-75 per kg. However, packaging and dispatches for exports have not decreased,” said Jagannath Khapre, president, All India Grape Exporters’ Association.
Wholesale sugar prices too have fallen 4% during the past fortnight.
There is no shortage of grains and pulses in the country. “As of now, there is no dearth of material lying in the supply chain as most of the importers and the traders across the country generally keep a buffer stock of 45-60 days. As of now, the supply chain is fully geared up with abundance of material and it is hoped that for the next 15-20 days, the supply chain will be able to deliver goods. It is only after 15 days that the heat may be felt,” said Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT).
Industry associations have appealed to the government for financial assistance and restructuring of bank loans. “Due to the awareness created by the government to fight against the coronavirus pandemic, majority of workers are not reporting for work and migrant workers are also returning to their native places. This situation is likely to intensify and result in mass stoppage of production,” said Ashwin Chandran, chairman, Southern India Mills Association.
Chandran further said, “With the expected steep reduction in demand due to sudden stoppage of exports and imports and also domestic sales due to the closure of malls and retail showrooms, the industry is likely to face unprecedented and severe losses. It needs immediate financial relief to mitigate the crisis.”
The poultry industry, which has suffered the most due to coronavirus related rumours, has requested the government for restructuring of bank loans and moratorium on interest and principal payments.
