Wheat was set for a 3.5% plunge for the week, its biggest weekly loss in a month.
US wheat futures dropped to a near three week low on Friday, as forecasts for ample global supplies set the grain on track for a weekly loss of 3.5%.
In addition, Corn also dropped in value, and soybeans were set for their first weekly slide in three weeks.
The most-traded one-month wheat contract on the Chicago Board Of Trade lost 0.5% at $4.96-3/4 a bushel at the time this report was drafted near the trading session low of $4.96-3/4 a bushel – its lowest since May 20. Wheat closed down 1.4% on Thursday.
It was set for a 3.5% plunge for the week, its biggest weekly loss in a month.
READ MORE: Dangote, BUA Cement drag Nigerian Stock market down, investors lose N154.28 billion
Importance of tracking Grain Futures; Farmers around the world want to sell their grain produce at the most profitable price available, so they hedge their produce by the help of investment banks. A grain futures contract is legally designed naturally to make the farmer and other parties involved agree for the delivery of grain in the future at an agreed-upon price. The grain contracts are standardized by a futures exchange as to time quality, quantity, and place of delivery.
Experts explained that the U.S. Agriculture Department’s (USDA) predictions were weighing on wheat.
“The USDA’s crop report has sunk the wheat because it added a hefty amount to their global wheat inventory estimate,” Tobin Gorey, director of agricultural strategy, Commonwealth Bank of Australia told Reuters.
The U.S. Agriculture Department’s fixed wheat ending stocks at 983 million bushels for 2019/20, 5 million higher than May, and 925 million bushels for 2020/21, 16 million higher than May.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
Your email address will not be published.
Bonny light sold for $43.33, far below the price Nigeria sold its crude months ago.
Crude oil prices for lighter Nigerian grades have not experienced the rally its category is presently having, despite significant draws on stockpiles in Europe, as cheaper substitutes like U.S Shale continue to be more attractive to importers, according to a report released by Reuters .
Bonny light, according to oilprice.com, sold for $43.33, far below the price Nigeria sold its crude months ago, at a discounted rate to attract buyers. However, consistent Indian buying continued to buoy Nigerian differentials, especially for some medium grades.
Quick fact: Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils. The international benchmark is used to set the price of crude oil of about of two-thirds of the world’s traded crude oil, including Nigeria’s crude.
Africa’s largest producer of crude oil and gas, Nigeria, gets most of its oil from the Niger Delta area, and its relatively classified under two specification based on its lightness and gravity, the heavier grade with a specification of, 20–25 gravity. The lighter grade with a specification of 36 gravity and both Nigerian grade types are low in sulfur and paraffinic.
Examples of Nigerian grades include Bonny light, Brass River and Qua Iboe.
Recall that three months ago the price of Bonny Light, one of Nigeria’s crude grades, had dropped to about $12–$13 a barrel because the major market for Nigerian Crude, had experienced economic depression triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Also, it went so bad that even with lower oil prices, long-haul buyers from Asia did not want Nigerian oil cargoes because of shipping costs to pay and no real need for the oil barrels since demand has plunged.
The NSIA recorded an increase in total assets to N649.84 billion at the end of the financial year.
The Executive Director, Nigeria Sovereign Investment Authority (NSIA), Stella Ojekwe-Onyejeli, announced in a virtual briefing to newsmen on Friday that the NSIA recorded a Total Comprehensive Income (TCI) of N36.1 5 billion in 2019.
She revealed that the 2019 income was less than the TCI for 2018, which was N44.34 billion. However, the NSIA recorded an increase in total assets to N649.84 billion at the end of the financial year, as opposed to that of 2018 which closed at N617.70 billion.
Ms Ojekwe-Onyejeli said that TCI income for 2019 included foreign exchange gains at N1.26 billion compared to N18.05 billion in 2018, noting that the gain in forex was due to changes in Nigeria’s official exchange rate from N305 to a dollar to N325.
“As of year-end 2019, NSIA’s core capital remained at 1.5 billion dollars.” She said. “The Authority continues to manage 3rd party funds on behalf of some government institutions. We currently manage funds for the Debt Management Office (DMO) and the Ministry of Finance.
“For DMO, the current value of Assets under Management (AuM) is 124.03 million dollars. For 2018, this fund stood at 122.60 million dollars in AuM.
“For the Nigeria Stabilisation Fund, managed on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, the Fund Balance was N33.365 billion. As of 2018, this balance increased to N20.814 billion.”
“However, the National Economic Council voted for an additional capital contribution of 250 million dollars in 2019, which was received on April 8,” she explained.
She added that the group’s strategy to invest in diversified products across the yield curve provided returns and that the Stabilisation Fund (SF), which had been fully invested by the end of 2019, returned 5.81%, outperforming its benchmark by 381 basis points .
She also stated that the Future Generations Fund (FGF), deployed by the NSIA across multiple global equities, hedge funds and other diversifiers, returned 6.45% at the end of 2019, outperforming its benchmark of 6.43%.
“As of year-end 2019, we had deployed over 90 percent of the capital in the Future Generations Fund,” she said.
