Badal said that the under its flagship programme “Crop Loan Waiver Scheme” Punjab has waived off the entire crop loans of all small and marginal farmers (upto 5 acres) having loans upto Rs 2 lakhs. For the next phase, a total allocation of Rs. 2000 crore including Rs 520 crore specifically for waiving off the loans of Landless and Farm workers is being provided during 2020-21.
CHANDIGARH: Punjab finance minister Manpreet Badal in annual budget 2020-21 today announced Rs 2000 crore for the next tranche of debt waiver for farmers and landless farm workers in the state. The minister also announced to set up Agricultural Marketing Innovation Research and Intelligence Centre (AMIRIC) at Mohali, Rs 200 for crop diversification and Rs 8257 for free power for farmers in the next financial year.
Badal said that the under its flagship programme “Crop Loan Waiver Scheme” Punjab has waived off the entire crop loans of all small and marginal farmers (upto 5 acres) having loans upto Rs 2 lakhs. For the next phase, a total allocation of Rs. 2000 crore including Rs 520 crore specifically for waiving off the loans of Landless and Farm workers is being provided during 2020-21.
The budgetary outlays included two new Agricultural colleges at Gurdaspur and Balachaur (SBS Nagar) with the initial allocation of Rs. 14 crore during the year 2020-21. Four new horticulture estates namely Pear Estate in Verka (Amritsar), Litchi Estate in Sujanpur (Pathankot), Guava Estate in Wajidpur (Patiala) and Horticulture Estate in Kotkapura (Faridkot).
Under the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVY), an outlay of Rs 200 crore has been made to ensure more inclusive and integrated development of agriculture and allied services. Schemes cutting across various related departments i.e. Agriculture, Water Resources, Rural Development have been converged under the umbrella of PMKSY and an amount of Rs 141 crore has been allocated for PMKSY in 2020-21.
The announcements includes installation of Micro Irrigation system, underground Pipelines: an allocation of Rs 100 crore, installation of 12,000 solar pumps in the next 3 years.
The state plans to boost crop diversification: by providing an incentive scheme worth Rs 200 crore to grow alternative crops especially maize. Agricultural Marketing Innovation Research and Intelligence Centre (AMIRIC) at Mohali (SAS Nagar) under PAU, Ludhiana shall be set up with an allocation of Rs 10 crore.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
