JAIPUR: The abrupt removal of chief secretary D B Gupta hardly three months before his retirement has come as a surprise to many even in the bureaucratic circles.
The unceremonious exit of Gupta has raised many eyebrows and people kept wondering what he did to invite such an action from the chief minister, who is otherwise known to be very considerate to the officialdom.
According to sources, Gupta may be given appointment as chairman of a statutory commission, which is the only face saver.
Sources indicated that he may be accommodated in the post of chief information commissioner, which has been lying vacant for a long time.
Gupta on Friday handed over the charge of chief secretary to his successor Rajeeva Swarup in the afternoon. A sombre-looking Gupta when asked about his future plans put the ball in chief minister’s court. He said,“It is the chief minister’s prerogative.”
Soft-spoken Gupta, known for his reputation of an efficient officer, has been in the good books of both the BJP and the Congress governments . He was appointed to the highest bureaucratic post during the previous BJP government. There were talks of his replacement when the Congress was voted to power in December 2018.
But the chief minister decided to continue with him in the post knowing his reputation as a good administrator. Under his stewardship, the Congress government’s pet scheme of agriculture loan waiver was successfully executed.
Gupta, who was very close to former chief minister Vasundhara Raje , was the JDC when a controversy had erupted over allotment of prime land at C-scheme at throw away price to the Deen Dayal Upadhayay Trust headed by Raje. Finally, the land allotment was cancelled. It was during the first term of Raje government (2003-2008).
Though sidelined initially, he managed to make a comeback in the Congress government under Gehlot in his second term of chief ministership holding important posts like agriculture, planning etc. In the BJP government that followed, he was handling the important post of additional chief secretary PWD, Finance , before he was elevated to the post of chief secretary.
Start Your Daily Mornings with Times of India Newspaper! Order Now
