RBI panel questions efficacy of populists schemes for farmers, in favour of more structural changes
The group is also in favour of revising the sub-target for small and marginal farmers to 10% from the existing 8% of adjusted net bank credit with a roadmap of two years.
The suggestions include completion of digitisation of land records by state govts and setting up of a federal institution.
KOLKATA: A Reserve Bank of India working group on agricultural credit has questioned the efficacy of populist measures such as debt waiver and interest subsidy on crop loans, while suggesting a slew of structural changes to boost farm loan delivery uniformly across regions.
The internal group led by deputy governor Mahesh Kumar Jain has called for replacement of interest subvention by direct cash transfer with an overall limit of Rs 3 lakh per farmer, and suggested setting up of a credit guarantee fund to encourage banks to step up lending.
The group is also in favour of revising the sub-target for small and marginal farmers to 10% from the existing 8% of adjusted net bank credit with a roadmap of two years.
“The sector still faces challenges such as lack of capital formation, regional disparity, dependence of farmers on non-institutional sources of credit at significantly higher rates, non-realization of the fair price for agricultural produce causing farmers’ distress and farm loan waivers impacting credit culture and weakening state finances,” Jain said.
The credit guarantee fund can be set up by the government on the lines of credit guarantee schemes implemented in the MSME sector, the report said.
“Government of India and state governments should undertake a holistic review of the agricultural policies and their implementation, as well as evaluate the effectiveness of current subsidy policies with regard to agri inputs and credit in a manner which will improve the overall viability of agriculture in a sustainable manner. In view of the above stated, loan waivers should be avoided,” the committee said in its report which was made public Friday.
The contribution of agriculture to GDP has fallen to 16.14% at current prices in 2018-19 from 52% in 1950s and 30% in 1990s while the agriculture and allied sector still employs 55% of India’s total workforce.
“Loan waivers, which often happen at the time of elections, are not the panacea to address the underlying risks (to farmers). In fact they destroy the credit culture which may harm the farmers’ interest in the medium to long term and also squeeze the fiscal space of governments to increase productive investment in agriculture infrastructure,” the report said.
It also said that subsidised interest rates has resulted in skewed distribution of agricultural credit in favour of production credit against crop-related investment credit. As a result, the share of short term crop loan is on a consistent rise whereas the share of crop-related investment credit is on a decline.
Farmers used to get crop loans to Rs 3 lakh at a sub-vented 7% rate in normal course which comes down further to 4% on prompt repayment.
The suggestions include completion of digitisation of land records by state governments and setting up of a federal institution, on the lines of GST Council, to suggest and implement agricultural reforms.
A technology driven portal for the banks to facilitate ease of credit to the farmers on the lines of 59 minutes loans to MSMEs have also been mooted.
Some of the states are getting much higher share of farm loans, as high as 10 per cent of total agricultural credit compared to other states getting as low as 0.5%. The eastern states such as Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, West Bengal, do not get bank credit proportionate to their share in agricultural output.
