The La Trinidad Srawberry Farm, located in Barangay Betag of La Trinidad, Benguet, March 2, 2015. Owned and maintained by the Benguet State University, the average annual harvest of the farm as of 2018 is 1,775 metric tons harvested by 660 farmers.
NEARLY four decades ago, artist Rody Vera sang about Tano, a
civilized society that the State issued policies addressing usury. The latest
When the 10,000th law was signed in 2009, the government
intended to pursue equal access to opportunities for farmers and fishermen, in
an effort to promote rural development. The spirit of the law is on enhancing
increase market efficiency and promote the modernization of the farm sector.
level of bank funds to the farm sector.
agricultural sector reached only 12.95 percent.
the 15-percent mandate for the agricultural sector.
sector, data from the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) showed.
with the agri-agra lending quotas, their share in this sector has been
By end-September of last year, the rural and cooperative
percent for the agricultural sector. This is versus their allocation in
total loan portfolio to agrarian reform credit, way above the 10-percent mandate.
their loan portfolio to this sector, also exceeding the 15-percent quota.
developing country like the Philippines especially in terms of food security,
overall decline in NPLs of the whole banking industry. From an NPL ratio of 4
the banking industry, which posted a ratio of 2.3 percent in 2014, 1.7 percent
in 2017, and between 1.83 percent and 1.87 percent in 2018.
in channeling funds to the agri sector, it does pose serious implementation
challenges and financial stability risks.
of pushing funding into specific sectors in the economy.
of the mandated credit quota under RA 10000.
infrastructure, improving capacities of both borrowers and lenders, and other
official said. “As a financial system regulator, BSP’s main interest in the
not simply from the perspective of agri-agra compliance but also, and perhaps
HOWEVER, the problem of financing the agricultural sector,
the BSP official further explained, is not just a banking issue, but an issue
agricultural sector because of the given risks to the sector’s ability to earn,
such as seasonality and susceptibility to weather conditions, the BSP argued
productivity and absorptive capacity of the sector,” the BSP official said.
P598.3 billion in September 2018.
“While compliance rates to the Agri-Agra Law actually fell,
loanable funds,” the BSP official said.
comprehensive study on financing agriculture value chains in the country. The
farmer-based organizations to effectively engage in value chain financing.
In response to the findings of the study, the BSP official
involve a bank or several banks, and value-chain players and government
trade and industry (DTI) and the Cooperative Development Authority, among
said. “For the BSP in particular, the pilot implementation can provide useful
for banks and design of a training program for agriculture-focused bankers,
documents from the BSP revealed.
FOR the Philippine Chamber for Agriculture and Food Inc.
have the Agricultural Guarantee Fund Pool (AGFP). However, he said the
The AGFP, together with other state guarantee funds, was
agriculture sector due to risks. And the government could intervene to mitigate
risks by providing guarantee to banks,” Fausto said. “In this way, farmers
providing guarantee to borrowers from the farm sector. Fausto chided the
housing sector than to the agriculture sector.
compared to the P180 billion for housing sector. If you just do to the
agriculture sector what you did with the housing sector then, for sure, the
farm sector would expand by leaps and bounds,” he said.
the fund for housing guarantee,” he added.
agriculture sector is only about 30 percent, with 7 percent being directly
granted to farmers or producers.
This, according to him, is far from what China, Thailand and
other Asian countries’ LandBank-counterpart financial institutions are doing: a
100-percent loan exposure to their farm sector.
“LandBank was built for the agriculture sector,” he said. “Why
Farmers groups like the Philippine Maize Federation Inc.
“The anomalous approval is an outrageous act, a mortal sin
and an act of treason to the farming and fishery sector, which [LandBank]’s
mandate emanates,” Navarro said in the letter, which was sent to Duterte and
other government officials on January 17.
agriculture, its foremost beneficiary,” he added.
officers (CEOs) that would reach out to Filipino farmers, especially those who
go to the farmers and not the other way around.
of its branches which he estimates are around 380.
This means that LandBank would hire 1,900 CEOs and, at a
conservative estimate of P20,000 monthly wage, the state-run financial
institution would only have to spend at least P456 million.
plans, be financial literate and be knowledgeable on credit,” he explained.
“So what is P500 million in relation to their income? That’s
advantage of them easily,” he added.
state universities and colleges to teach financial literacy to farmers.
had had initial talks with private banks, which have already expressed interest
Chamber of Thrift Banks, the Metropolitan Bank and Trust Co., Bank of the
Philippine Islands, EastWest Bank and Sterling Bank of Asia. These banks, he
compliant to the Agri-Agra law.
“They said they have about P200 billion, which they could
banks are DA’s solar-powered irrigation system banner program, farm
mechanization and farm-to-market road construction, according to the
they can invest in,” he told the BusinessMirror in an interview in February.
the total loans granted to the agriculture, fishery and forestry (AFF) sector
whole economy, from 1.3 percent in 2017, documents from ACPC showed.
loans granted to the AFF sector came from the private banks, with the remaining
amount being provided by state-run financial institutions.
granted by the private sector. These banks accounted for 34.83 percent of the
loans provided by all financial institutions to the AFF sector.
rose by nearly 24 percent to P215.524 billion from P173.929 billion in 2016,
reached P123.812 billion in 2017, 31.5 percent over the P94.151 billion thrift
“Rural banks (RBs), on the other hand, whose commitment is
to sustain growth in the countryside, barely posed a 10-percent growth in loan
releases to agriculture amounting to P42 billion,” ACPC said.
by 22.58 percent, but their share to the total value shrank to 38.32 percent.
“As the leading government agricultural lending institution,
LandBank continues to beef up its lending to priority sectors (i.e., small
year’s level amounting to P35 billion,” it added.
production loans granted by all types of banks in 2017.
loans expanded by 26 percent to P65.435 billion from P51.896 billion in 2016.
agricultural sector, released nearly P62 billion worth of production loans, a
14-percent increase compared to the previous year,” it said.
billion to P3.3 billion for the year,” it added.
Loans granted directly to farmers by private banks, which
accounted for 81.32 percent of the total value, expanded by nearly 30 percent
to P284.947 billion from P219.308 billion in the previous year.
loan exposure of P8.811 trillion, 1.9 percent over P7.473 trillion recorded
accounted for 4.6 percent with a value of P405.329 billion.
10.5 percent from P366.824 billion recorded in 2016, ACPC data showed.
percent amounting to P143 billion,” the report read.
Total loan exposure to agriculture sector by private banks,
which accounted for 64.73 percent of the total value, expanded by 11 percent to
P262.366 billion from P236.351 billion.
agriculture at 13 percent and 6.5 percent, respectively,” the ACPC report
TO address the issues underlying agriculture financing, the
commitment to implement a whole-of-nation road map for the agriculture sector.
of more credit resources to the sector. What is needed is a real ‘structural
For the agricultural sector, the BSP said it would be good,
especially for the smallholder farmers, if they could gather themselves and
form an organized group such as a small farmers’ organization or cooperative.
purchase farm inputs at lower cost, get access to farm machineries and
approach to get things done.
pushing for a more sustainable lending environment to the agricultural sector.
financial system as a whole. While we seek to encourage financial innovation
and promote innovative financing models in agricultural financing, we also aim
activities. Nevertheless, we recognize that agricultural financing, if better
understood and with risks properly managed, can have a transformative effect
