For the first time, it has provided options for clearing corporations to divide commodities into three broad categories, depending on realised volatility over the previous three years
Last Updated at January 28, 2020 01:17 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi) has prescribed higher margins for futures trade in both agricultural and non-agricultural commodities to address the risk of default in cases of high volatility. For the first time, it has provided options for clearing corporations to divide commodities into three broad categories, depending on realised volatility over the previous three years.
If actual annualised volatility was between nil and 15 per cent, the contract would be in a low volatility category. If between 15 and 20 per cent, medium; if above 20 per cent, a highly volatile ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
