Four days into the hustings, East Coast GRC is feeling the heat.
The People's Action Party (PAP) and Workers' Party (WP) are clashing in East Coast for the fourth time, and - as in past polls - the contest is shaping up to be one to watch.
Shortly after the slates were finalised on Nomination Day on Tuesday, banners and posters began going up around the constituency of 121,772 voters, which stretches from Bedok to Changi Village and includes the island of Pulau Ubin.
On the same day, the five-member teams from both parties began canvassing for votes, even as perambulating lorries broadcast messages exhorting listeners to lend support to their party's cause.
Over the past four days, candidates from both parties have been spotted in the markets, food centres and busy thoroughfares of Bedok and Simei, distributing fliers and party paraphernalia.
"We are here to get to know our residents better and to understand their concerns, as well as how the Budget measures have been helpful to them," Deputy Prime Minister Heng Swee Keat, who leads the PAP team, said during a visit to Block 216 Market and Food Centre in Bedok North Street 1.
He was accompanied by retiring MP Lee Yi Shyan and new face Tan Kiat How, 43, former chief of the Infocomm Media Development Authority, who will take over Mr Lee's Kampong Chai Chee ward if elected.
In a Nomination Day surprise, Mr Heng, 59, filed his papers for the PAP's East Coast GRC team, in a tactical move aimed at ensuring the party strengthens its support there.
Mr Heng is the leader of the PAP's fourth-generation team, poised to be Singapore's next prime minister.
Said Ms Suzanne Er, a human resource professional in her 40s: "Now that Mr Heng has moved here, the PAP's margins will definitely increase. He is a strong anchor for the team."
For some voters, the PAP's decision to dispatch Mr Heng to East Coast is seen as a sign that the party cares about their constituency.
"I was very happy to hear that he is coming here, because it feels like he is closer to us," said 74-year-old Ms Caroline Lim, who took a picture with Mr Heng during his visit to the food centre yesterday morning. "I think he is a sincere man."
But others, such as Mr Tan L.B., 71, remain unconvinced. "The PAP candidates are all the same, like sons from the same father," the retiree said in Mandarin. "It doesn't matter to me which of them stands here."
He is more impressed by WP candidate Nicole Seah, 33, whom he described as speaking with "vigour". "She is someone who has ideas of her own," he said.
Ms Seah, an associate director in a multinational marketing firm, was the star candidate of the National Solidarity Party in the 2011 election, and has made a comeback in blue after sitting out the 2015 General Election.
For the July 10 election, the PAP's East Coast GRC team includes Senior Minister of State for Defence and Foreign Affairs Maliki Osman, 54; three-term backbencher Jessica Tan, 54; one-term Fengshan MP Cheryl Chan, 44, whose single seat has been absorbed into the GRC; as well as Mr Tan Kiat How.
The WP slate led by lawyer Terence Tan, 49, the party's deputy organising secretary, also includes Mr Dylan Ng, 44, who works in finance; former researcher Abdul Shariff Aboo Kassim, 54; Singapore Cancer Society deputy director Kenneth Foo, 43; and Ms Seah.
