Skip the crowded grocery stores and support local farmers.
Read all about the latest gym openings, healthy events, and fitness trends in our twice weekly Wellness newsletter.
Grocery shopping used to be a semi-enjoyable experience. I remember perusing the aisles of Whole Foods on my lunch break looking for a snack I hadn’t tried before. Even cramming my cart down the aisles of Market Basket on a Saturday is something of a nostalgic experience now. It’s the little things in life sometimes.
Now, we’re coming up with more innovative ways to skip the grocery store and shop local. Restaurants and bakeries are not only offering their own fare to go, but they’re sourcing fresh produce (and sometimes things like paper towels and toilet paper) as a way to keep their heads above water and their employees paid. Even if you are still making your way to the grocery, hopefully only once a week, you’re probably stocking up on a bunch of produce that takes a little longer to go bad. After all, that would be the sensible thing to do. I think we’re over the Spaghetti-O hoarding days, and those carrots and squash are going to make you feel a whole heck of a lot better than something from a can—leave those as the absolute last resort .
If you’re still looking for more options to opt out of the busy stores, sign up for one of these CSAs, or Community Supported Agriculture programs, close to Boston. Not only will you receive locally-sourced fresh produce, but you’ll be supporting farmers in the area without ever having to leave your house.
The first distribution date for this summer CSA from Stillman’s Farm in New Braintree is June 22, but you can reap some of its early harvest now with pick-ups of variety produce bags at Jamaica Plain, Quincy, and Framingham. Bags range from $20-$40 and include what is available at the farm like spinach, eggs, and flour. The summer CSA has similar pick up locations priced around $450 for 16 weeks of fresh produce.
You’ve probably noticed this farmstand if you’ve frequented the Boston Public Market. Based in Sudbury, Siena Farms is “enthusiastically and gratefully” accepting new CSA memberships for the 2020 season, according to their website. You can choose between a full share (weekly) or flex share (every other week) starting at $375 for summer crops like baby spinach, potatoes, tomatoes, and more. Pick up locations are all over Boston, Somerville, and Cambridge, and you can even opt for home delivery for an added $10/week.
Located near the Blue Hills, this community farm offers spring, summer, and fall CSA shares starting at $58. The summer share begins with greens, beets, and peas, and finishes with early fall produce like kale and winter squash. You can also sign up for Pick-Your-Own options to go out into the field and personally harvest your own food, and you can even receive farm fresh eggs and fruit. Unfortunately, this one doesn’t deliver, so you’ll have to make a trip out to the farm to pick up your CSA.
This farm share program sources produce from over 20 different small vegetable farmers across the state to help support their business growth. By signing up for a farm share, not only are you supporting beginning farms, but you’ll also be helping to distribute nutritious food to underserved communities through a food access program. You have the option to sign up for a traditional farm share box, or you can purchase share credits to choose your own produce each week starting at $200. Pick up locations include Tufts Chinatown, Tufts Medford, Pemberton Farms Marketplace, and more.
Along with weekly produce drop-offs from this Montague farm, you can also get fruits, eggs, mushrooms, flowers, and baked goods. Shares start at about $550 and include a whole bunch of produce like summer squash, beets, spinach, and lettuce. With flexible payment options (they also except SNAP) and pick-up locations all across Boston, Cambridge, and Somerville, this is a pretty convenient and flexible CSA option.
You might not be able to peruse the aisles of the always bustling Boston Public Market on Hanover Street these days, but they’re still supporting the community and their vendors by offering a pop-up market outside on the outdoor plaza along Surface Road. Due to limited resources, vendors will change daily and you can check their Instagram page for updates . In addition, the market is offering same-day delivery from select vendors. Note: Delivery is closed on Thursday and Sunday.
