Leading fertiliser companies, analysed by Prabudas Lilladher saw a 22%-67% jump in sales in May. Coromandel International and Chambal Fertilisers were the biggest gainers both seeing 67% and 49% jump in sales on-year basis. Urea, compost, and NKP were the fertiliser segments seeing the largest demand. The brokerage firm has a BUY rating on Bayer Cropscience , Dhanuka Agritech , Godrej Agrovet , Insecticides India , and UPL . The strong outlook for the industry is evident from the 45% jump in profits that Dhanuka Agritech registered in the March quarter. Dhanuka Agritech’s management in a post-result conference call also termed the locust attack as a positive for the company that has  7-8 product offerings to deal with such attacks.
After falling in the market bloodbath of March, fertiliser stocks have seen a massive surge to date. Dhanuka Agritech has seen phenomenal growth with the stock jumping 116% since the last week of March, shares of Coromandel International gained 37%, while those of Insecticides India are up 85% in the same time-frame. Even Sumitomo Chemical India and Rallis India have seen a 74% and 60% increase in share price since March lows. The locust attacks seen in the states of Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, and Gujarat were at a time when Rabi harvest was over, however, the threat to horticulture are at risk in the particular states.
Vegetables constitute 59% of the horticulture production in India while 31% comes from fruits, said Motilal Oswal in a research report. “Pesticides mainly used to control locusts are Chlorphyrifos (Sumitomo Chemicals, Gharda, UPL, Coromandel, Insecticides India, and Bharat Rasayan ), Melathion (Rallis, Coromandel, and Sumitomo), and Deltamethrin (Bayer Crop, Insecticides India, and Meghmani),” the report said. Over the years pesticide consumption has jumped when such pest attacks have targeted Indian farmers.
The agriculture sector has a positive outlook with even the Reserve bank of India Governor, Shaktikanta Das calling it the beacon of hope in the middle of the coronavirus crisis. The sector also has fared well despite the coronavirus pandemic. “In fact, COVID has pushed the theme to stable sectors where agriculture is very positive,” Vinod Nair said.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
