States should dismantle APMCs, adopt e-NAM for better price discovery: FM
States should dismantle APMCs, adopt e-NAM for better price discovery: FM
Sitharaman added that she had in the Budget announced formation of 10,000 Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) so that farmers have easy access to institutional finance.  (File photo)
A digital agriculture market at national level will ensure that farmers get better price for their produce, she said at 6th World Congress on Rural and Agriculture Finance jointly organised by National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) and Asia-Pacific Rural Agricultural and Credit Association (APRACA).
“The e-NAM has been pushed very much by the Union government and many states have agreed also to take it up at their level. Together with this, we’re also making sure that the states are cajoled to reject the Agricultural Produce Market Committees (APMCs). It has served its purpose at one time there’s no doubt. But today there are many difficulties associated with the agricultural produce market committee, which at every state level has become not so efficient in helping the farmers find better price points for their produce…We are talking with many states to sort of dismantle that (APMC) and move towards e-NAM for farmers,” she said.
e-NAM is a pan-India electronic trading portal which networks the existing APMC mandis to create a unified national market for agricultural commodities. So far, 21 e-NAM mandis of eight states namely Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh have joined hands to start inter-state trade on e-NAM. Initially started with 25 commodities, e-trade facilities have been provided on 124 commodities with tradable parameters on e-NAM portal. Through inter-state trade, farmers get better market access, more buyers/ traders and realise better prices for their produce.
Sitharaman added that she had in the Budget announced formation of 10,000 Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) so that farmers have easy access to institutional finance. FPOs are largely those cluster or groups of farmers who are being brought together so that credit and other assistance can be extended to them and their marketing issues are also addressed with a clear objective of making the produce earn the money that it should be, she added.
“India provides $200 billion agriculture credit every year to small and marginal farmers. This will be enhanced once the formation 10,000 FPOs, as announced in this year’s Budget, will be functional. There will be a huge traction when the farmers will anchor the value chain, which in turn, will augment the value chain funding. These inclusive measures aided by technology interventions would bolster financial inclusion and rural financing efforts,” NABARD Chairman Harsh Kumar Bhanwala said at the conference. He said NABARD’s largest (Self Help Group) SHG-bank linkage programme benefiting millions of rural women will soon move to a digital platform.
The finance minister asked NABARD to take up immediate and necessary steps to extend support to the farmers in the Union territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh. This will ensure that the next crop of saffron, peaches, walnuts and other agriculture produce in the UTs is procured at the right time, she said, while highlighting the need to promote solar energy in the Ladakh region.
She emphasised that there is a need for the farmers contributing in solar energy generation, participation in wind energy, installing solar panels in his farms, etc and also to become an Urjadaata from Annadata.
📣 The Indian Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel (@indianexpress) and stay updated with the latest headlines
For all the latest Business News , download Indian Express App.
