ease the work of farmers is commendable. Hence, many states in India offer subsidiaries
achieve increased production. Accordingly, few of them are mentioned here-on:
a tractor. Further, being under Farm Mechanization Scheme, it aids the
purchasing of other farm apparatuses. Additionally, provide a 100% subsidiary
eligible bachelor with insurance and collateral security. Also, the
agricultural loan can be short term or long term with 12% interest per annum.
Nevertheless, this subsidy holds good for purchasing rotators, Mini Tractors,
Karnataka state government has three visions regarding the farming sector. That is, one to maintain the timeliness, second to increase productivity, and finally to reduce human labor. Thus, the farmer can easily achieve the goal by inculcating the mechanization of farming. Addressing the vision as well as the solution, it is speculated that, the government plans on providing all the necessary machines on a rental basis. Also, this would be under the scheme, “Uber for Agricultural Services” with an initial investment of Rs 87.5 crore to set up the idea. Further, the center in association with automobile makers (VST Tillers, John Deere, Mahindra) helps the farmers on a rental basis. Besides, loans are also available at the same interest rate as Agricultural term loan s with up to 9 years repayment time
under the Agricultural Mechanization Program. Accordingly, aids in purchasing a
variety of machines namely Power tiller, Paddy Trans-planter, Rotavator, seed
Nonetheless, it provides 40% and 50% subsidy to general and SC/ST farmers respectively. Additionally, the farmer is given the option to select the machinery of their choice. Accordingly, the government allots Rs 30.75 lakhs for supporting the initiative.
to ensure transparency in distribution. Further, for tractors, they provide a
25% subsidy. However, in other cases like for tiller, rotavator, and other few
machines only loans are available. Also, the repayment is within 5-10 years
The distribution of tractors was under the scheme,
one acre of land, should not own a tractor, and must have all supporting
Under the Farm Mechanization Scheme, the center
encourages to inculcate the use of modern machinery and techniques.
Accordingly, in the case of small, marginal, and SC/St farmer, it provides a
35% subsidy for tractor and 50% for other machines. Contrarily, general
categories get only 25% for tractor and 40% for other machines. Further, it
assists in the purchase of a tractor, power tiller, harvesters, Threshers,
are offered with repayment of 5-9 years. Also, no margin for loans under Rs 1
through the Macro- Management Scheme. Subsequently, this scheme is in
association with the state and the union government. Accordingly, all farmers
are eligible to benefit from the scheme. Also, this scheme is successful as the
availability of tractor is low in Madhya Pradesh. Moreover, loans are also
available to further help the cultivators.
The scheme for buying tractor in UP is the Krishi Yantra.
Consequently, it provides 25% of cost aid or Rs 45,000, whichever is less.
Both states work under the Farm Mechanization scheme. Also, provide loans via Sarva Haryana Bank (Haryana) and AU bank (Rajasthan). Despite, encourage the use of modern techniques to increase production. Subsequently, the terms in this scheme follow the rest discussed above. For further information on applying for subsidy click here
responsible for tractor subsidy in Assam. Thus, CMSGUY offers a 70% subsidy up
to Rs 5.5 lakhs. However, it necessary for the cultivator to be eligible.
Accordingly, the eligible farmer must own 2 acres of land. Nevertheless, a
group (8-10) of farmers could also avail the benefits of the scheme. Following
approval, 70% is offered as a subsidy, 20% in the form of a loan, and 10% would
tillers and 40% for tractors. Besides, Odisha Gramya bank offers a hassle-free
loan to buy any agro- vehicle that aids cultivators. Consequently, offers 85%
of the cost and other machines with a margin of just 15% of the total cost.
Similarly, government tractor Subsidy is available in Gujarat, with over 25% subsidy for the general category and 35% for special categories. Besides, training and workshops are conducted to spread awareness about the importance of machines in agriculture. Also, loans from Dena Gujrat Gramin Bank is easily attainable.
In addition to the above, Punjab uses the Kisan Dost
Finance scheme along with loans from Punjab National Bank. Similarly, West
Bengal offers an HDFC loan and tractor plus protection scheme. Also, in
mechanization scheme and SMAM scheme. Likewise, Arunachal-Pradesh provides
