Lallemand is a privately held Canadian company, founded at the end of the 19th century, specializing in the development, production and marketing of yeasts and bacteria. The company is comprised of 11 major business units, each focused on specific applications of yeast and bacteria, with activities worldwide. Administrative offices for the parent company are in Montreal, Canada. Today, Lallemand employs more than 3,500 people working across more than 45 countries, on five continents.
This job opportunity is within Lallemand’s Plant Care business unit. Yeast, bacteria, mushrooms: micro-organisms have always lived in harmony with plants, and they are now being recognized for their many agricultural benefits. As an international specialist in micro-organisms, Lallemand Plant Care carefully selects strains for agricultural, horticultural and forestry use, in order to improve plant nutrition, health, and productivity.
Joining the Lallemand Plant Care team means collaborating with people who work passionately to develop sustainable, efficient, and clean solutions for agriculture professionals, green spaces, and the forestry sector. We are regularly looking to recruit new talent across the globe to help support our commercial, logistical, marketing, production, and research and development efforts.
Lallemand Plant Care is looking to recruit a hardworking, proactive, detail oriented and self-motivated individual to help support its rapidly growing business. The supply chain assistant will be an integral part in assisting the planning and procurement processes that support Lallemand Plant Care’s supply chain in North America.
Reporting to the supply chain manager, the supply chain assistant will work closely with the procurement and production planning coordinator to secure the resources required to produce Lallemand Plant Care’s products. This is a full time, permanent position that is located in Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario.
	Contact vendors for quotes, estimates and product availability
