Sustainable Agriculture Stocks Added to Directory; (TSXV: IFX.V) (TSXV: GSP.V) (NYSE: NTR) (TSX: NTR) (NYSE: DIET)
Also new stocks in Sports (Nasdaq: PTON) (OTC: BTHR), Cannabis (CSE: CCHW) and Real Estate (NYSE: MFA)
Point Roberts, WA and Delta, BC - April 3, 2020 (Investorideas.com Newswire) Investorideas.com , a global news source and leading investor resource announces its weekly roundup of stocks added to its global stock directories, including agriculture, sports, cannabis and real estate.
The newest companies added to the agriculture stock list are all involved in sustainable agriculture and include crop protection, environmental potash mining, increased food production and a food and agriculture ETF.
The latest sports companies are involved in esport/sports venues and a sports equipment/fitness class company.
The newest cannabis company operates in the US and EU while the latest real estate company is an REIT.
New Stocks added to Agriculture stocks directory:
Imaflex Inc. ( TSXV: IFX.V ) is focused on the development and manufacturing of innovative solutions for the flexible packaging space. Concurrently, the Corporation develops and manufactures films for the agriculture industry. The Corporation's products consist primarily of polyethylene (plastic) film and bags, including metalized plastic film, for the industrial, agricultural and consumer markets. Headquartered in Montreal, Quebec, Imaflex has manufacturing facilities in Canada and the United States. Today, agricultural films are used in the growing of fresh fruits and vegetables worldwide to cover soil treated with fumigants - volatile and toxic pesticides essential for reducing pests, weeds and fungi in the soil, thus supporting good growth of new crop seedlings. The original EPA approved ADVASEAL速 (ADVASEAL速 HSM), contained only a herbicide for weed control. The new enhanced ADVASEAL速 under development also includes fungicides and a nematicide to control soil borne pathogens, thus becoming a complete non-fumigant alternative for soil disinfestation. With ADVASEAL速, modern non-volatile crop protection products can be applied more effectively and safely than with fumigants. The crop protection products are incorporated into a coating, which is then applied to a mulch film. Once the coated film is applied to the ground the active ingredients are released into the soil under controlled conditions, preventing the over/under-dosing found with current soil disinfestation practices. This new technology dramatically reduces the amount of crop protection products required. The catalyst to trigger the release of the active ingredients is soil moisture. When the film is applied to the soil, they are efficiently and safely discharged into the ground, resulting in heightened productivity, lower costs and notable environmental benefits.
Gensource Potash Corporation ( TSX:GSP.V ) is a fertilizer development company based in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan and is on track to become the next fertilizer production company in that province. With a small scale and environmentally leading approach to potash production, Gensource believes its technical and business model will be the future of the industry. Gensource operates under a business plan that has two key components: (1) vertical integration with the market to ensure that all production capacity built is directed, and pre-sold, to a specific market, eliminating market-side risk; and (2) technical innovation which will allow for a small and economic potash production facility, that demonstrates environmental leadership within the industry, producing no salt tailings, therefore eliminating decommissioning risk, and requiring no surface brine ponds, thereby removing the single largest and negative environmental aspect of potash mining.
Nutrien Ltd. ( NYSE:NTR ; TSX: NTR.TO ) is the world's largest provider of crop inputs and services, playing a critical role in helping growers increase food production in a sustainable manner. We produce and distribute 25 million tonnes of potash, nitrogen and phosphate products world-wide. With this capability and our leading agriculture retail network, we are well positioned to supply the needs of our customers. We operate with a long-term view and are committed to working with our stakeholders as we address our economic, environmental and social priorities. The scale and diversity of our integrated portfolio provides a stable earnings base, multiple avenues for growth and the opportunity to return capital to shareholders.
The Defiance Next Gen Food and Agriculture ETF ( NYSE: DIET ) Defiance ETFs is a low-cost* thematic ETF provider focusing on the Next Generation of investors. The DIET ETF provides exposure to companies that are focused on technologies like alternative plant-based sources of meat, such as Beyond Meat (BYND), seed modification, sustainable farming and irrigation techniques.
Peloton Interactive, Inc . ( NasdaqGS:PTON ) is the largest interactive fitness platform in the world, with a loyal community of more than 2.0 million members. We pioneered connected, technology-enabled fitness and the streaming of immersive, instructor-led boutique classes to our members anytime, anywhere. Peloton makes fitness entertaining, approachable, effective, and convenient, while fostering social connections that encourage our members to be the best versions of themselves. Our world-class instructors teach classes across a variety of fitness and wellness disciplines, including indoor cycling, indoor/outdoor running and walking, bootcamp, yoga, strength training, stretching, and meditation.
Sports Venues of Florida, Inc. ( OTCPink: BTHR ) is a developmental stage company engaged in the business of eSports, and the development of youth sports and family entertainment complexes. The company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, Shadow Gaming, Inc., has aggressively entered the eSports market. The Company has placed on hold its plans to building sports complexes ranging from 80-acres to 300-acres that will include both outdoor and indoor athletic competitions. In addition the company plans on operating a number of subsidiary companies from high tech data management businesses to product and support businesses.
Columbia Care Inc. ( CSE:CCHW ) is one of the largest and most experienced cultivators, manufacturers and providers of medical and adult use cannabis products and related services with licenses in 19 jurisdictions in the US and the EU. Columbia Care has completed more than 1.6 million sales transactions since inception and working in collaboration with renowned and innovative teaching hospitals and medical centers globally, continues to be a patient-centered health and wellness company setting the standard for compassion, professionalism, quality, care and innovation in the rapidly expanding cannabis industry.
MFA Financial, Inc . ( NYSE: MFA ) is a real estate investment trust primarily engaged in the business of investing, on a leveraged basis, in residential mortgage assets, including residential mortgage-backed securities and residential whole loans.
The directories are not meant as recommendations but as a research tool to discover opportunities and trading ideas in a particular sector.
About Investorideas.com - News that Inspires Big Investing Ideas Investorideas.com is a recognized news source publishing third party news and press releases, research and our own original financial content. We were one of the first retail investor sites to cover renewable energy and cleantech stocks at investorideas.com and our domain Renewableenergystocks.com. We were also one of the most well- known and cited defense stock sites, featuring our domain Homelanddefensestocks.com at its peak.
We follow the money for investors as sector sentiment shifts and technology disrupts. Our mission is to provide investor ideas with breaking news, resources, industry articles and interviews with leading experts.
Learn about investing in stocks and sector trends with our news alerts, articles, podcasts and videos, looking at cannabis, crypto, AI and IoT, mining, sports biotech, water, renewable energy and more. Investor Idea's original branded content includes the following podcasts and columns: Crypto Corner , Play by Play sports and stock news column, Investor Ideas Potcasts Cannabis News and Stocks on the Move podcast and column, Cleantech and Climate Change , Exploring Mining and the AI Eye .
Public companies within the sectors we cover use our news and content services to tell their story to interested investors. Paid for content is disclosed.
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
Learn more about our news, PR and social media services at Investorideas.com
