What If BlackRock Appointed The Auditor?
Given the importance of agriculture, the next decade or two will be an extraordinary time for ag investment.
Local Supply and Regional distribution. Agriculture has become very efficient and consolidated in terms of food supply, processing and distribution. Yet, with Covid-19, we see the important role local and regional alternatives can play. Look for investment opportunities in ag supply chain, logistics and food distribution management to take off as retailers seek more regionalized and local alternatives that can continue to deliver in a pandemic.
Ecommerce. Likewise, e-commerce and e-grocery are also growth areas. Firms that take proven e-commerce technology and deploy it in agriculture will be smart investments in years to come. In the future everything from a farmer’s agricultural inputs to a consumer’s groceries will be available on e-marketplaces, lowering costs and providing more choices for buyers and sellers alike.
Indoor Farming. Look for supply chains to shorten as retailers and consumers continue to place value on sourcing local. As a result, vertical and indoor farming in urban and suburban areas will continue to attract investment post Covid-19.  Such facilities can also help offset planting shortages and disruptions due to climate change.
Intelligence. Agriculture will become inexorably intertwined with advances in artificial intelligence of over the next two decades. Advanced robotics technology could help address both labor shortages and food safety concerns in packing houses and processing facilities and is already advancing in field machinery operations. Sensing technology will be increasingly available to farmers for moisture, soil samples, nutrient availability and uptake, tissue sampling, etc. The same will be true for sensors used with livestock. Sensing technology will allow farmers to make smarter, more efficient and more environmentally friendly decisions. Satellite imagery and drone technology will continue to provide farmers with reams of real time data.
Data Management. Every increase in intelligence capability and utilization produces enormous amounts of raw data. Ag companies have been collecting planting data for example for many years.  This is just the tip of the iceberg as the real fruit from this data will be in assemblage, analysis and synthesis of distinct data sets into real time decision making for producers.
Biostimulants. The seed genetic revolution hasn’t been without controversy, but it has arguably produced great returns for ag business and increased yields for farmers. The next revolution in terms of inputs for farmers will likely occur in advanced nutrient management. Some of the most exciting products in decades are being developed employing beneficial microorganisms, fungi and bacteria to enhance root and plant growth. Given the rising costs of fertilizer and the environmental concerns of nutrient loads in critical watersheds, companies around the globe are pioneering more efficient and effective nutrient technologies, using natural substances and microorganisms, to produce significant gains in yield.
Animal health. Animal health goes hand-in-hand with human health. Healthier animals which are more resistant to disease and grow more healthily will improve food quality and help hold down food costs. Companies such as those in the Missouri-Kansas Animal Health Corridor are focused on improving animal health in pets and our food supply. Look for those companies to continue to expand and produce a significant rate of return.
I have been CFO and acting-CEO of several global companies. I've completed over $2.5 billion in M&A and $4.5 billion in financing transactions. For last 10 years, I've
I have been CFO and acting-CEO of several global companies. I've completed over $2.5 billion in M&A and $4.5 billion in financing transactions. For last 10 years, I've also been an Adjunct Professor at UC Davis Graduate School of Management, teaching international finance and international business. I served on various boards including a bank with over $1billion in assets, a school, a homeless-shelter, and a publicly-traded industrial company. I'm co-author of a book The 80/20 CFO: A guide to making strategic transformations for your company. I have a unique perspective at the intersection of C-suite, academia, and board of directors. I'm a frequent speaker on leadership, international growth, and strategic change. I'm also the mom of 2 great teenagers, and that reminds me that I don't have all the answers.
