By Charlie Pinkerton and Rachel Emmanuel . Published on Mar 9, 2020 1:50pm
Today’s Sprout is brought to you by Beef Farmers of Ontario , the advocacy group for Ontario’s 19,000 beef farmers. Recent market disruptions have Ontario beef farms at a tipping point. Learn more about their request for support to get through the crisis.
Happy Monday and welcome to the Sprout. We’re celebrating some top-notch appetizer meats today as it’s National Crabmeat Day and National Meatball Day.
The worldwide spread of COVID-19 has prompted a rout of stocks and crude oil across the world on Monday, which Yahoo News is tracking.
Agriculture prices were not exempt, with Chicago corn, soybean and wheat futures all sliding close to 2 per cent on Monday.
As Reuters reports , wheat’s fall of 1.8 per cent to $5.06-3/4 a bushel puts it at its lowest in almost 4 months.
Monday’s losses follow the plummeting of the price of oil by more than 20 per cent, after Saudi Arabia slashed its selling price following Russia’s refusal to agree with OPEC countries to cut oil production amidst the spread of the coronavirus.
MPs are back in the House of Commons this week.
The House agriculture committee meets on Tuesday to discuss business risk management programs.
The House is expected to discuss a motion by Conservative finance critic Pierre Poilievre for the government to disclose any warnings of economic downturns that departments, agencies or Crown corporations have recently prepared for them.
Health Canada is moving ahead with a ban on a deadly pesticide being used to kill prairie gophers. The Health Canada website said the pesticide posed risks to other animals, including species that are at risk.
Gophers are targeted because their underground burrowing can damage crops and cause injury to livestock. CBC News has more.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture said it will prohibit shipments of all pigs for at least three days if the nation ever finds a case of the African swine fever that has reduced China’s herd by over 40 per cent and pushed pork prices to record highs. With no vaccine or cure available for African swine fever, experts recommend that infected pigs and others housed in the same barn be culled. The USDA would stop the transportation of pigs if the United States detects a case in an effort to stop the disease from spreading, the agency said in a statement, according to Reuters .
U.S. lobster prices have plummeted to the lowest in at least four years after the spread of the virus halted charter flights to Asia at a time when sales usually boom for Chinese New Year celebrations. The fallout has left thousands of pounds of unsold lobster flooding North American markets and squeezing U.S. businesses that were already hurting from lost sales due to China’s tariffs from its trade war with Washington. The U.S. used to be the main supplier of live lobster to China, reports Bloomberg .
Speakers at an annual agricultural trade conference in Richmond tomorrow are expected to address the potential impacts of the coronavirus outbreak on global trade. The conference is expected to focus on the current trade environment, challenges and opportunities for agricultural and forestry exports, and recent trade negotiations, as well as the coronavirus. Speakers will include: Stephen Censky, Deputy Secretary of Agriculture at the U.S. Department of Agriculture; Dr. Robert Johannson, USDA Chief Economist; and Virginia Secretary of Agriculture and Forestry Bettina Ring, found The Washington Post .
