The  of Roots Sustainable Agricultural Technologies Ltd (ASX:ROO), James Schwarz, Just Sold 72% Of Their Holding
Simply Wall St October 11, 2019
Anyone interested in Roots Sustainable Agricultural Technologies Ltd ( ASX:ROO ) should probably be aware that a company insider, James Schwarz, recently divested US$397k worth of shares in the company, at an average price of US$0.051 each. In particular, we note that the sale equated to a 72% reduction in their position size, which doesn’t exactly instill confidence.
In fact, the recent sale by James Schwarz was the biggest sale of Roots Sustainable Agricultural Technologies shares made by an insider individual in the last twelve months, according to our records. While insider selling is a negative, to us, it is more negative if the shares are sold at a lower price. It’s of some comfort that this sale was conducted at a price well above the current share price, which is AU$0.047. So it may not tell us anything about how insiders feel about the current share price.
You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. By clicking on the graph below, you can see the precise details of each insider transaction!
If you like to buy stocks that insiders are buying, rather than selling, then you might just love this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. Usually, the higher the insider ownership, the more likely it is that insiders will be incentivised to build the company for the long term. Roots Sustainable Agricultural Technologies insiders own about AU$901k worth of shares. That equates to 30% of the company. This level of insider ownership is good but just short of being particularly stand-out. It certainly does suggest a reasonable degree of alignment.
What Might The Insider Transactions At Roots Sustainable Agricultural Technologies Tell Us?
An insider hasn’t bought Roots Sustainable Agricultural Technologies stock in the last three months, but there was some selling. And there weren’t any purchases to give us comfort, over the last year. Insider ownership isn’t particularly high, so this analysis makes us cautious about the company. We’d think twice before buying! Along with insider transactions, I recommend checking if Roots Sustainable Agricultural Technologies is growing revenue. This free chart of historic revenue and earnings should make that easy .
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
