By Rachel Emmanuel and Anchal Sharma . Published on Jun 29, 2020 2:00pm
Photo by Jessica Lewis from Pexels.
Hello and welcome to the Sprout. Today is National Almond Buttercrunch Day. If you’re not familiar with this delicious toffee nut candy, check out the Spruce Eats for an easy recipe to help get you acquainted with it.
Here is Monday’s agriculture news.
In the most Canadian news you’ll read all week, Tim Hortons has landed itself in some hot coffee.
After media reports raised concerns about how Tim Hortons mobile ordering app may be collecting and using data about people’s movements as they go about their daily activities, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada (OPC), along with three provincial counterparts announced today that they’ve launch an investigation into the app. Quebec, Alberta, and B.C.’s privacy commissioners will join the federal office in the investigation.
A release from the department said the OPC will examine whether Tim Hortons is in compliance with the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA), Canada’s federal private-sector privacy law, to determine whether Tim Hortons is obtaining consent from users on collecting their geolocation data, and whether that collection and use of the data is appropriate in the circumstances.
“The federal Privacy Commissioner’s office considers this to be an issue of great importance to Canadians given the privacy issues it raises,” the release said. “Geolocation data can be very sensitive as it can reveal information about the habits and activities of individuals, for example, medical visits or places that they regularly frequent.”
The office provided no further details as the investigation is ongoing.
There are no House committees meeting today. One Senate committee is meeting in camera to discuss the government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Statistics Canada released a report on poultry and egg statistics as well as principal field crop areas today for June 2020.
Sunday saw an increase in positive COVID-19 cases among migrant workers in Ontario. 98 new cases were reported in the Windsor-Essex region, only two of which were caused by community spread. Local public health officials will be inspecting the farm that has seen the outbreak today, the Globe and Mail reports .
In a letter to agriculture minister Marie-Claude Bibeau, Liberal MP and chair of the House agriculture committee Pat Finnegan has requested improvements to the government’s business risk management programs. In his letter, Finnegan outlines concerns that he’s heard from farm groups and stakeholders in the agricultural sector, stating that most feel that application processes are too complicated and payments are not being made in a reasonable timeline. Finnegan added that one of the major concerns of farmers is the increased debt they are incurring from government loans and urged the government to implement risk management programs that do not revolve around loans. Read more from RealAgriculture .
Some U.S. food exporters are sending shipments to China with commitment statements drafted by the Agriculture Transportation Coalition stating that their products are safe and in line with industry and medical standards. Many exporters are wary of signing China’s official declarations that their shipments do not contain traces of COVID-19, as they do not want to be liable for contamination that occurs after the shipments are sent. There is no scientific evidence to show that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food products. China has not yet confirmed whether they will accept the letters instead of their requested official declarations. The Globe and Mail has the story.
U.S. livestock markets are taking a hit due to the pandemic, with cattle and lean hog futures dropping. Read more from Reuters.
