Agri SA and its 90 plus affiliates donate tons of food daily to the needy throughout South Africa.
Agri SA distributes food to communities in crisis, agriculturists join virtual agri-tech roadshow and lockdown on aerial work lifted
They say there’s never a dull day in farming. We know this much is true. These are the top three things happening in Mzansi’s dynamic agricultural space today – ranging from the sector’s continued support to help alleviate poverty, especially during the covid-19 pandemic, and a really cool virtual agri-tech roadshow by PMA.
Agri SA is once more calling on the sector to support its Surplus Food Aid Campaign which will distribute food to communities in crisis today.
The initiative done in collaboration with the RSA Group, Mike Loutfie Foundation, Agri Gauteng, Obaro and Kamcare, kicked off early this morning at the market at the Samrand Business Park in Centurion.
The food aid campaign will move to Kameeldrift later, where the beneficiaries will collect parcels at Plot 310 Sinagoge Road in Kameeldrift East.
In March, the agricultural organisation called on the sector and government to donate surplus food to poor communities. They also called on government to launch a national covid-19 non-perishable food aid scheme in collaboration with agricultural businesses and retailers.
Agri SA believes this can help address barriers to food security and support the agricultural economy.
Speaking at a media briefing on Monday (29 June), transport minister Fikile Mbalula announced that the agricultural sector will be allowed to conduct aerial work from 1 July. This was announced as part of the country’s move to “advanced” level three of the nationwide coronavirus lockdown.
The industry will now be allowed to perform agricultural spraying, seeding, culling and dying. Fire control will also now be permitted.
Commenting on domestic essential travel, Mbalula also announced the opening of a number of air routes. The agricultural industry along with other sectors can also look forward to domestic business travel.
The Produce Marketing Association (PMA) in collaboration with the Israel trade office, is extending an invitation to Mzansi’s agriculturalists to join in and participate in a virtual agricultural technology roadshow taking place today.
The virtual event takes place today (30 June) at 14:00 (SAST) and features Israeli agri-tech that has been placed at the forefront of the covid-19 battle. Participants can expect to engage with six cutting edge companies who are ready to ensure a more resilient food and agricultural industry.
