Thumb Electric Cooperative in Ubly will be receiving a loan of $26.5 million through the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Electric Loan Program. (Metro Creative Graphics/File Photo)
Thumb Electric Cooperative in Ubly will be receiving a loan of $26.5 million through the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Electric Loan Program. (Metro Creative Graphics/File Photo)
Thumb Electric Cooperative in Ubly will be receiving a loan of $26.5 million through the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Electric Loan Program. (Metro Creative Graphics/File Photo)
Thumb Electric Cooperative in Ubly will be receiving a loan of $26.5 million through the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Electric Loan Program. (Metro Creative Graphics/File Photo)
UPPER THUMB — Thumb Electric Cooperative in Ubly will be receiving a loan of $26.5 million through the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Electric Loan Program.
TEC General Manager Dallas Braun said the loan is basically a pre-approved line of credit intended to finance capital improvements on electric infrastructure in the area over the next five years.
The loan is intended to connect 252 rural member-consumers and build or improve 97 miles of line through infrastructure improvements. Of the $26.5 million, $3 million will go toward smart-grid technology.
“Thumb Electric has used USDA funding for capital improvement projects for decades,” Braun said. “The last one being in 2015 for $25 million.”
“Some improvements that will take place over the next five years will include rebuilding underperforming distribution and transmission circuits to increase capacity and improve reliability, upgrade or replace substation transformers to increase capacity, and replace deteriorating transmission and distribution poles,” Braun added.
Funds will also be used for the installation of an Advanced Metering Infrastructure system which will allow for two-way communications with meters. According to Braun, this smart-grid tech will bring cost savings, efficiencies, and future opportunities to TEC’s member-consumers.
The Trump administration announced on June 22 that the USDA is investing $1.6 billion to “build or improve rural electric infrastructure” in 21 states.
USDA Rural Development expands economic opportunities and creates jobs in rural areas through loans and grants that support infrastructure improvements, business development, and high-speed internet access.
“Reliable and modern 21st century infrastructure, including electric infrastructure and smart grid technologies, is a cornerstone for prosperity in rural America,” United States Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue said in a press release. “Under the leadership of President Trump, USDA is committed to being a strong partner to rural companies in building their future.”
The USDA’s Electric Loan Program will provide $1.6 billion in loans and loan guarantees to rural electric cooperatives and utilities. These funds will go toward building or improving 9,138 miles of electric transmission and distribution lines across 21 states, benefitting one million rural residents and businesses. Of the $1.6 billion, $386 million is intended for investments in smart grid technology, which uses digital communications to detect and react to local changes in electricity usage.
“This administration is arguably making the most sustained, intensive investment in rural infrastructure since the Great Depression,” USDA Rural Development State Director for Michigan Jason Allen said. “We are connecting Michigan’s rural communities as never before.”
Thumb Electric Cooperative was formed in 1937 and is a not-for-profit corporation that returns any profits back to its member-consumers. TEC now serves over 12,000 member-consumers over 2,141 miles of line throughout Huron, Sanilac and Tuscola counties.
