Easing crude oil prices and a weakening dollar helped the rupee stage a bounceback.
PTI reports: "The rupee settled 7 paise higher at 75.58 (provisional) against the US dollar on Monday supported by weak American currency and easing crude prices even as the equity market was trading in the negative territory.
Forex traders said weak domestic equities, foreign fund outflows and rising COVID-19 cases weighed on investor sentiments. However, weak American dollar supported the local unit and restricted the decline.
The rupee opened on a flat note at the interbank forex market at 75.64 against the US dollar, then gained ground and finally settled for the day at 75.58 against the US dollar, up 7 paise over its last close.
It had settled at 75.65 against the US dollar on Friday.
During the four-hour trading session the domestic unit touched an intra-day high of 75.52 and a low of 75.64 against the US dollar.
Meanwhile, the number of cases around the world linked to the disease has crossed 1.01 crore and the death toll has topped 5.01 lakh.
In India, the death toll due to COVID-19 rose to 16,475 and the number of infections rose to 5,48,318, according to the health ministry.
On the equities front, the 30-share BSE benchmark Sensex was quoting 345.82 points lower at 34,825.45 and the broader Nifty fell 109.90 points to 10,273.10.
Foreign institutional investors were net sellers in the capital market, as they sold equity shares worth Rs 753.18 crore on Friday, according to provisional exchange data.
Brent crude futures, the global oil benchmark, fell 2.15 per cent to USD 40.14 per barrel.
The dollar index, which gauges the greenback’s strength against a basket of six currencies, fell by 0.09 per cent to 97.34."
More calls emerge asking for another stimulus package to boost the economy as it reels under crisis.
PTI reports: "The surge in equity markets is not linked to economic recovery and may be a sign of irrational exuberance, economists at SBI said on Monday, pitching for a second round of fiscal support to help the impacted sectors.
They also warned that banks will start reporting higher non-performing assets (NPAs) after September, once the six-month moratorium on loan repayment ends.
The markets shed over a fifth of their value in the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic and have recouped some of the losses in the last few weeks. Interestingly, the gains happened even as the chorus of a contraction in GDP started among the analysts, wherein some expect a negative growth of up to 5 per cent in 2020-21.
There is a weak linkage between buoyant markets and economic recovery and the phenomenon largely reflects irrational exuberance , the economists wrote in a note, attributing the same to easy liquidity made available by RBI.
Beautiful markets do not signify a beautiful economy, they said.
They also seemed to suggest that India cannot rely a lot on agriculture to boost the overall GDP growth, pointing out that even if the farm sector’s historically best performance of 15.6 per cent growth in 1951-52 were to be considered, a similar performance can only help the GDP growth by 2 percentage points.
We must think of a second round of fiscal support at least for the beleaguered sectors, the note said.
It can be noted that the government has already announced a Rs 20 lakh crore package, but the actual fiscal expenditure will be just a tenth of the package.
The note said deposits in bank accounts are fast outpacing borrowings at present, and added that a large part of Indian population depends on interest from deposits because of the lack of a social security base in the country."
— The Economist (@TheEconomist) June 29, 2020
Airbus plane output will be 40% lower for two years compared to pre-crisis plans, its chief executive said in remarks published on Monday, underscoring the threat to jobs as it draws up rapid restructuring plans due to a travel slump.
Reuters reported on June 3 that Airbus was looking to hold underlying jet output at 40% below pre- coronavirus pandemic plans for two years as the basis for the restructuring.
“For the next two years - 2020/21 - we assume that production and deliveries will be 40% lower than originally planned,” CEO Guillaume Faury told Die Welt newspaper, saying output would return to normal by 2025.
Airbus has till now said it was cutting output by a third on average.
The global crude oil rally is facing resistance as demand could be hit by the second wave of the coronavirus.
Reuters reports: "Oil prices slid for a second straight session on Monday as coronavirus cases rose in the United States and other places, leading some countries to resume partial lockdowns that could hurt fuel demand.
Brent crude dropped 81 cents, or 2%, to $40.21 a barrel by 0653 GMT, while U.S. crude was at $37.74, down 75 cents, or 2%.
Brent crude is set to end June with a third consecutive monthly gain after major global producers extended an unprecedented 9.7 million barrels per day supply cut agreement into July, while oil demand improved after countries across the globe eased lockdown measures.
However, global coronavirus cases exceeded 10 million on Sunday as India and Brazil battled outbreaks of over 10,000 cases daily. New outbreaks are reported in countries including China, New Zealand and Australia, prompting governments to impose restrictions again.
“The second wave contagion is alive and well,” Howie Lee, an economist at Singapore's OCBC bank, said. “That is capping the bullish sentiment that we've seen in the last six to eight weeks.”
Other factors restricting oil prices' advance at this stage include poor refining margins, high oil inventories and the resumption of U.S. production, Lee said.
Despite efforts by OPEC+ - the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and allies including Russia - to reduce supplies, crude inventories in the United States, the world's largest oil producer and consumer, have hit all-time highs.
“There is also a risk that gains in prices recently could see some U.S. shale producers restart wells,” ANZ analysts said.
Even as the number of operating oil and natural gas rigs dropped to a record low last week, higher oil prices are prompting some producers to resume drilling."
Global mkts start the week on the back foot following heavy losses on Wall St on Fri as virus threatens econ reopening. Virus fatalities exceed half a million people worldwide. Bonds slightly lower w/US 10y at 0.65%. Oil prices down -2% w/Brent $40.19. Gold $1771. Bitcoin $9.1k. pic.twitter.com/iSehwFBKD9
— Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) June 29, 2020
JLL, leading real estate consulting firm has announced a tie up with RoofandFloor, a technology driven online marketplace for homebuyers to smoothen homebuying experience starting from project discovery, shortlisting, site visits, negotiations and bookings.
“The partnership brings together JLL’s long established relationships with several top developers in the country and RoofandFloor’s tech-savvy online marketplace delivering a superior experience to high intent homebuyers,” JLL said in a statement.
The platform showcases properties across 24 cities in India and supports buying, selling and resale.
Properties can be shortlisted on RoofandFloor’s portal and JLL would help in the homebuying journey.
Could Yes Bank be the canary in the coal mine as Indian banks come under increased stress?
PTI reports: "Shares of Axis Bank on Monday declined over 5 per cent after S&P Global Ratings lowered its ratings of the lender due to increased economic risks for banks operating in India.
The stock plunged 5.21 per cent to Rs 402.90 on BSE. On NSE, it tanked 5.29 per cent to Rs 402.35.
“We lowered our ratings on Axis to reflect our expectation that heightened economic risks facing India’s banking system will affect the bank’s asset quality and financial performance, S&P said on Friday.
While Axis Bank’s asset quality is superior to the Indian banking sector average, its level of non-performing assets will likely remain high compared to international peers, it noted.
— Reuters India (@ReutersIndia) June 29, 2020
The future of #inflation is the biggest question in finance: The key debate on Wall Street is whether inflation is coming back with a vengeance. Inflation can wreck even the safest portfolio by eroding the value of investments for decades. https://t.co/axR9o1KyS6 pic.twitter.com/OaLBCnnhSJ
— Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) June 28, 2020
Starbucks is the latest company to say it will pause social media ads after a campaign led by civil rights organisations called for an ad boycott of Facebook, saying it doesn’t do enough to stop racist and violent content.
Starbucks said on Sunday that its actions were not part of the “#StopHateforProfit” campaign, but that it is pausing its social ads while talking with civil rights organisations and its media partners about how to stop hate speech online.
The coffee chain’s announcement follows statements from Unilever, the European consumer-goods giant behind Ben & Jerry’s ice cream and Dove soap; Coca-Cola; cellphone company Verizon and outdoors companies like Patagonia, Eddie Bauer and REI; film company Magnolia Pictures; jeans maker Levi’s and dozens of smaller companies.
