Updates from the world of economy, markets, and finance
The benchmark stock indices have rallied this morning on the back of positive global cues.
Earnings announcements from India Inc. continue to pour in with auto majors showing some signs of improvement.
Join us as we follow the top business news through the day.
NEW ODD LOTS @tracyalloway and I talked to @HyunSongShin about the crisis, what central banks have learned, the power of fiscal policy, and what more needs to be done. https://t.co/cqTzmInU3E
— Joe Weisenthal (@TheStalwart) July 2, 2020
It was a good for the benchmark stock indices which rallied well over 1% by the end of the day.
PTI reports: "Equity benchmark BSE Sensex rallied 429 points on Thursday on widespread buying amid a broad upmove in global markets following encouraging COVID-19 vaccine trials.
After soaring 600 points during the session, the 30-share index settled 429.25 points, or 1.21 per cent, higher at 35,843.70.
The NSE Nifty surged 121.65 points, or 1.17 per cent, to close at 10,551.70.
M&M was the top gainer in the Sensex pack, jumping around 6 per cent, followed by Titan, HCL Tech, Tata Steel, Infosys and TCS.
On the other hand, Axis Bank, HUL, Kotak Bank and Bharti Airtel were among the laggards.
According to Narendra Solanki, Head- Equity Research (Fundamental), Anand Rathi, market rallied tracking positive Asian peers on news that Germany’s BioNTech and US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer reported positive preliminary results from a joint project for a potential coronavirus vaccine.
Further, positive factory output data across economies too boosted global investors’ risk appetite, traders said.
Bourses in Shanghai, Hong Kong, Tokyo and Seoul ended with significant gains.
Stock exchanges in Europe were also trading around 1 per cent higher in early deals.
International oil benchmark Brent crude futures rose 0.86 per cent to USD 42.39 per barrel.
India’s GDP may contract by 6.4% in FY21: Care Ratings
The forecasts about India's growth this year only seem to be getting worse.
PTI reports: "Care Ratings on Thursday revised India’s GDP growth forecast for the current financial year to (-) 6.4 per cent as economic activity continues to be under restriction due to the lockdown on account of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The rating agency, in May, had projected a decline in GDP growth of 1.5-1.6 per cent in FY21.
It said given that the nation is into a lockdown for July too with several restrictions on resumption of services in particular as well as movement of people, the cutoff date for normalcy will spread into the latter part of the third quarter and more likely to the fourth quarter.
“Under these assumptions our forecast for GDP growth is now (-) 6.4 per cent for FY21 with GVA (de)growth estimated to be around (-) 6.1 per cent, Care Ratings said in a report.
The sharper fall in real GDP also means that the nominal GDP for the year will also decline assuming inflation of 5 per cent which in turn will affect the projected fiscal deficit number of the central government which will be in the region of 8 per cent for FY21, it said.
In FY20, the country’s economy grew at an estimated 4.2 per cent, almost a decade low.
It, however, said the positive growth will come from only agriculture and the government sector.
The agency’s May estimate for a decline in GDP growth of 1.5-1.6 per cent was based on the assumption that the lockdown would be ending by the month-end and that the recovery process will be gradual and be calibrated across sectors with the second half being closer to normal.
GDP forecasts for FY21 are unique as they would be varying depending on the evolving situation and the assumptions being made on the recovery process in the country, the report said.
As the industry tries to recover, auto majors are trying out various ways to enthuse customers.
PTI reports: "The country’s largest carmaker Maruti Suzuki India on Thursday launched its vehicle lease subscription service for individual customers under ‘Maruti Suzuki Subscribe’ brand.
The company said it has tied up with ORIX Auto Infrastructure Services Ltd, a subsidiary of ORIX Corporation, Japan, to launch the subscription service in India.
The subscription service will begin as a pilot project in Gurugram and Bengaluru and will be initially available on Swift, Dzire, Vitara Brezza and Ertiga from Maruti Suzuki ARENA Channel and Baleno, Ciaz and XL6 from NEXA Channel, the company said in a regulatory filing.
Maruti Suzuki India joins rival Hyundai Motor India, which had last year launched its subscription model initially in six cities across India as part of its partnership with self-drive car-sharing firm Revv.
Similarly, MG Motor India also offers its subscription services through a strategic tie-up with Myles, the car sharing and car subscription company from Carzonrent.
In May this year, German car maker Volkswagen had also launched its car-leasing schemes allowing customers to lease all BS-VI compliant cars in its portfolio with a minimum lock-in period ranging from 2-4 years.
The rupee appreciated 56 paise to settle at 75.04 (provisional) against the US dollar on Thursday tracking weakness in the greenback and gains in the domestic equity market.
Forex traders said positive domestic equities and weak US currency supported the local unit. Moreover, investor sentiment strengthened after Pfizer reported encouraging vaccine test results.
The rupee opened at 75.51 against the US dollar, gained further ground and finally closed for the day at 75.04 against the US dollar, up 56 paise over its previous close.
It had settled at 75.60 against the greenback on Wednesday.
Apple supplier Foxconn, others hit as India holds up imports from China, say sources
Businesses are beginning to feel the pain of the Centre's ban against Chinese products.
Reuters reports: "India's additional scrutiny of imports from China has disrupted operations at plants owned by Apple supplier Foxconn in southern India, three sources told Reuters, and other foreign firms are also facing delays as tensions between the two countries build.
Customs officers at Indian ports have held back shipments from China and sought additional clearances after deadly clashes at the disputed Himalayan border last month. The checks have been imposed without any formal order.
While several companies such as Apple and Dell have been battling to free stuck shipments, hundreds of employees at Taiwanese contract manufacturer Foxconn's two plants in the south had no major work to do this week as shipments were delayed, sources said.
More than 150 Foxconn shipments - containing smartphone and electronic parts - were stuck at the port of Chennai, though some are being cleared slowly now, the first source said. The total number of parts in the shipments was not clear.
Foxconn's two plants in Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh state mainly assemble Apple and Xiaomi smartphones in the country and employ thousands of workers, many of whom stay in company-provided accommodation.
“Foxconn was in a very bad state ... lots of workers stayed at the dormitory because there was no work,” said the first source.
Foxconn, Apple and Xiaomi did not respond to Reuters queries.
The finance ministry also did not respond. Two officials at the ministry, which oversees the customs department, said the inspection measures were temporary and will ease soon.
“We cannot keep checking 100% of shipments forever ... Shipments of non-Chinese companies being impacted will be cleared on priority,” said one official.
While the exact impact of the disruptions is not immediately clear, the delays come when companies in India had already been battling disrupted supply chains due to coronavirus shutdowns in recent months. Business activity has only just begun to pick up.
Global logistics majors DHL & FedEx suspend shipments between China & India as customs officials refuse to clear consignments.
Industry says supplies of medicines laptops, phones etc hit & shortages are imminent. #BoycottChina getting real!
— Nikhil Inamdar (@Nik_Inamdar) July 2, 2020
China continues to press against India's ban on Chinese apps.
Reuters reports: "China's commerce ministry said on Thursday that it hopes India would correct its discriminatory actions against Chinese companies immediately, after India banned Chinese mobile apps amid a border crisis between the two countries.
China has not adopted any restrictive or discriminatory measures against Indian products and services, Ministry of Commerce spokesman Gao Feng told reporters in an online briefing, adding that India's actions are in violation of WTO rules."
Improvement in global trade shows a still weak but promising bounce. pic.twitter.com/m5nxDpf2rC
— Daniel Lacalle (@dlacalle_IA) July 2, 2020
Coal India trade unions begin 3-day strike; around 4 MT of coal output likely to be hit
The Centre's decision to allow more mining by private players hasn't gone down well with the trade unions.
PTI reports: "Protesting against the government’s decision to allow commercial coal mining, Coal India trade unions started their three-day strike beginning Thursday, a move that may hit around four million tonnes of production.
The unions on Thursday went on the strike from the first shift which begins at 0600 HRS, Nathulal Pandey, president of HMS-affiliated Hind Khadan Mazdoor Federation said.
On an average Coal India produces 1.3 million tonnes (MT) of coal every day, so it is estimated that the production loss due to the three-days strike would be around 4 MT, Pandey said.
The move comes at a time when the government has set an ambitious one billion tonnes of coal output for Coal India (CIL) which accounts for over 80 per cent of domestic coal output.
Pandey said, in the Jhanjra area of Eastern Coalfields, five persons -- one CITU member, one INTUC and three HMS -- who were on strike have been arrested.
Further, workers employed in the BCCL, a Coal India arm, have not gone to work and as a result emergency services such has hospitals in the mines have been paralysed, Pandey said.
Besides, the general manager of the Sohagpur area of SECL, a Coal India arm, has called outsiders to work in the mine which is an “extraordinary situation” and this has never happened to Coal India.
On Wednesday, talks between Coal India trade unions and the government over the issue of commercial coal mining failed. A virtual meeting was held between Coal Minister Pralhad Joshi and representatives of trade unions on Wednesday."
Amid the coronavirus restrictions, SpiceJet said on Thursday it has operated a total of 200 charter flights to repatriate close to 30,000 Indians till now.
In a press release, the airline said it has operated 111 charter flights from the UAE bringing back 20,000 Indians.
It added it has operated around 50 charter flights from Saudi Arabia, Oman, Qatar, Lebanon and Sri Lanka “to bring thousands back home”.
Scheduled international passenger flights continue to remain suspended in India. Domestic passenger flights resumed in India on May 25 after a gap of two months due to the coronavirus-triggered lockdown.
Amendments to bank resolution framework to help preserve depositor confidence: Moody’s
The global ratings agency believes the new amendments can help troubled banks' health by preventing capital flight.
Reuters reports: "Moody’s Investors Service on Thursday said the amendments to India’s bank resolution framework are credit positive as they will help preserve depositor confidence.
On June 26 the government amended the Banking Regulation Act, 1948, allowing the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to initiate the resolution of a weak bank by reconstructing its capital or merging it with another bank without the prior requirement of imposing a moratorium on its depositors or creditors.
The amended resolution process is credit positive because it will help preserve depositor confidence and avoid deposit flight from a weak bank as the risk of a moratorium is reduced, Moody’s said in a statement.
The amendments are also credit positive for the bank’s depositors and creditors because their ability to obtain full and timely repayments during the resolution process are unaffected, it afford.
Moody’s said before the amendments, the RBI could only initiate the resolution process of a weak bank after seeking approval from the government to impose a moratorium on the bank’s assets and liabilities for up to six months.
In March, RBI had imposed a moratorium on Yes Bank because of its weakening solvency and liquidity. Although the moratorium was lifted after 14 days, the bank saw a significant outflow of deposits in the run up to the moratorium and after it was lifted, the rating agency said.
Between December 2019 and March 2020, the bank’s deposits fell 36 per cent leading to sharp deterioration in its liquidity."
A long way ahead for normalcy to return in the oil market.
Reuters reports: "Goldman Sachs said on Thursday a pick-up in commuting, a shift to private transportation and government efforts to improve economies with higher infrastructure spending should help global oil demand return to pre-coronavirus levels by 2022.
Demand is expected to fall by 8% this year, before rebounding 6% in 2021 and fully recovering to pre-pandemic levels by 2022, the U.S. bank said in a note.
“Oil demand has already started to recover with the initial pace of recovery surprising to the upside in economies like China and India. Demand is still below normalised level with June demand estimated to be 12% below last year levels,” Goldman said.
The bank expects gasoline to stage the fastest demand recovery among oil products, while jet fuel consumption, which has been hit the most by the pandemic, could suffer more as consumer confidence in air travel is likely to stay low in the absence of a vaccine.
While fuel demand is gradually recovering as lockdown measures ease, a second coronavirus wave could quickly undermine the trend, industry data showed last week.
A Reuters poll on Tuesday estimated oil prices will consolidate at around $40 a barrel this year, with a recovery gaining steam in the fourth quarter and into 2021 on OPEC-led production cuts and as economies limp back from coronavirus lockdowns."
India's June gold imports plunge 86% y/y to 11 T, says govt source
The plunge in imports due to the lockdown couldn't stop the rally in the yellow metal though.
PTI reports: "India's gold imports plunged 86% year-on-year in June due to record high prices and as international air travel was banned and many jewellery shops were closed amid a nationwide lockdown to curb the spread of coronavirus, a government source said.
The world's second-biggest consumer of the precious metal imported around 11 tonnes of gold in June, down from 77.73 tonnes a year ago, the source said on Thursday. The source asked to remain anonymous since he is not authorised to speak to the media.
In value terms, June imports dropped to $608.76 million from to $2.7 billion a year ago, he added."
The auto major has shown some improvement in its sales numbers when compared to May.
PTI reports: "Bajaj Auto on Thursday reported a 31 per cent decline in its total sales at 2,78,097 units in June as against 4,04,624 units in the same month last year.
Domestic sales declined by 34 per cent at 1,51,189 units last month as compared to 2,29,225 units in June 2019, Bajaj Auto said in a regulatory filing.
The company further said its total two-wheeler sales were down 27 per cent at 2,55,122 units as compared to 3,51,291 units in the year-ago month.
Domestic two-wheeler sales were at 1,46,695 units last month against 1,99,340 units in June 2019, a decline of 26 per cent, it added.
Overall commercial vehicles sales also dropped by 57 per cent at 22,975 units last month compared to 53,333 units in the year-ago period with domestic sales falling 85 per cent to 4,494 units against 29,885 units in June 2019.
Bajaj Auto said its total exports last month were down 28 per cent at 1,26,908 units as compared to 1,75,399 units in June 2019.
For the first quarter ended June 30, the company saw its total sales drop by 64 per cent to 4,43,103 units as compared with 12,47,174 units in April-June period of 2019-20."
Rupee rises 10 paise to 75.50 against U.S. dollar in early trade
The rupee appreciated 10 paise to 75.50 against the U.S. dollar in early trade on Thursday tracking weakness in the greenback and gains in the domestic equity market.
Forex traders said positive domestic equities and weak U.S. currency supported the local unit. Moreover, investor sentiment strengthened after Pfizer reported encouraging vaccine test results.
The rupee opened at 75.51 against the U.S. dollar, gained further ground and touched 75.50 against the U.S. dollar, up 10 paise over its previous close.
It had settled at 75.60 against the greenback on Wednesday.
