Hopes of pro-growth reforms from Modi govt have already fuelled a rally in most of the agriculture-related stocks so far in the year 2014.
Hopes of pro-growth reforms from Modi govt have already fuelled a rally in most of the agriculture-related stocks so far in the year 2014.
NEW DELHI: Agriculture happens to be the engine of India’s economic growth and in the next 10 years the total food production in India is likely to double, say experts.
Hopes of pro-growth reforms from the newly-elected Modi government have already fuelled a rally in most of the agriculture-related stocks so far in the year 2014. But fears of below-normal monsoon have capped gains at least in the short term.
Experts, however, see this as a short-term trend setback for most of the agricultural-based stocks and once the fear subsides, they are good long-term bets. Atul Ltd has rallied nearly 90 per cent, BASF India surged as much as 35 per cent, UPL rose over 60 per cent, P I Industries surged a little over 30 per cent so far in the year 2014 on hopes of likely reforms to kick start growth in Asia’s third largest economy.
“The agri names at least in the shorter term would be subdued as we have already seen a huge run-up, whether it is a stock like PI Industries or a stock like Kaveri and so on so forth are backed by good numbers,” said Nitin Raheja, CIO, AQF Advisors.
“But, in the short term, impact of this monsoon will act as a bearing and there will be some sort of a time correction, that is possible in these names,” he added.
India’s June rain deficit widened to 42 per cent with the monsoon stuck in its tracks now for 12 days in a row, but global forecasters offered a ray of hope for the Narendra Modi government as the disruptive El Nino phenomenon may not be as intense as previously feared, ET reported.
The agriculture sector is representing a share of around 14 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) & 11 per cent of India’s total export, which reached US$ 45 billion during 2013-14 compared US$25 billion in 2012-13.
A hit to agriculture this year will have a direct impact on India's $2-trillion economy and companies that depend directly or indirectly on the farm sector and rural consumption, added the report.
“We have the same monsoon concerns affecting us in the near term. But in the long term we are not worried about it at all,” said S Naren, CIO, ICICI Prudential AMC.
10 years the total food production in India is likely to double. India holds 179.90 million hectares, which is also the second largest in the world.
The government has allowed 100 per cent FDI under the automatic route in storage and warehousing, including cold storages, Microsec Capital said in a report. 100 per cent FDI is also permitted for development of seeds under the automatic route. India’s new stable government may give the highest priority to agriculture.
Microsec Capital has identified some of the companies which, they believe, will outperform in the medium-to-long term:
Bayer Cropscience is a zero debt company for the last three years with huge cash in hand and in the current high interest rate system this conservative capital structure is advantage for the company, thus, helping in improving the bottom line.
The new stable government may implement to introduce the latest technology for farming & may take steps to enhance the profitability in agriculture. Bayer Cropscience Ltd has 17 branded products in crop protection.
The company offers an integrated portfolio of high quality seeds of rice, cotton, pearl millet, corn, grain sorghum, mustard etc. On FY16E expected EPS of Rs 107.05, Microsec has assigned a P/E multiple of 20.90x to arrive at a target price of Rs 2240.00, which shows an upside potential of 21.70 per cent, hence making the scrip an attractive buy.
The brokerage firm rates BASF Ltd a ‘BUY’ based on factors like the company’s strong experienced management, high quality & innovative product range. BASF has 11 solutions to solve its customer-specific needs in this segment of business.
The company may participate in this growth by increasing its manufacturing and working capital efficiency, adding capacity & introducing new innovative product & formulations. Above 25% of total revenue comes from this segment of business.
The company has established the partnership companies all over the world, named Gazprom, Statoil, Monsanto, Petronas, Shell, Sinopec Total.
The brokerage firm rates Atul Ltd a ‘BUY’ based on factors like the company’s strong management, healthy business model which is adequate diversified and a vast product range. Atul Ltd has 14 products and 44 formulations in this segment of business & above 35% of total revenue comes from this segment of business.
The company may participate in this growth by increasing its manufacturing and working capital efficiency, adding capacity & introducing new product & formulations. The stock is currently trading at INR895. On FY16E expected EPS of INR103.85, we assigned a P/E multiple of 10.60x to arrive at a target price of INR1098 which shows an upside potential of 22.70 percent, hence making the scrip an attractive buy.
The brokerage firm rates UPL Ltd a ‘STRONG BUY’ based on factors like the company’s strong balance sheet, knowledge based dynamic business model which is prominent for global as well as the Indian market.
The company holds 83 product patents in India and the world over. Along with this, the company has a variety in its seeds portfolio like sorghum, oil seeds, rice, corn, cotton, and vegetables.
The stock is currently trading at INR323.00. On FY16E expected EPS of INR31.45. The brokerage firm has assigned a P/E multiple of 13.40x to arrive at a target price of Rs 421.00 which shows an upside potential of 30.30 percent, hence making the scrip an attractive buy.
The brokerage firm rates PI Industries Ltd a ‘STRONG BUY’. The company is one of the leaders of manufacturing & marketing of agrochemicals, plant nutrients, specialty fertilizers & hybrid seeds.
P I Industries has 32 branded products in this segment of business. The company’s high growth potential of the existing and pipeline products of custom synthesis exports gives a clear visibility of the company’s performance.
The stock is currently trading at INR335.00. On FY16E expected EPS of INR21.90. The brokerage firm has assigned a P/E multiple of 20.90x to arrive at a target price of INR459 which shows an upside potential of 37 per cent, hence making the scrip an attractive buy.
The brokerage firm rates Monsanto India Ltd a ‘BUY’ based on factors like the company’s research based biotechnology, strong parent & healthy business model with selective products.
MIL is a zero debt company for the last eight years and in the current high interest rate system, its conservative capital structure is advantage for the company and is also expected to improve the bottom line. MIL is also a regular dividend paying company.
The stock is currently trading at INR2222.00. On FY16E expected EPS of INR125.10. The brokerage firm assigned a P/E multiple of 21.35x to arrive at a target price of Rs 2672 which shows an upside potential of 20.30 per cent, hence making the scrip an attractive buy.
The brokerage firm rates Rallis India Ltd a ‘BUY’ based on factors like the company’s parent management, huge customer based & compact agriculture business. The company has been proactively working towards improving the quality of farm inputs.
It has introduced a range of specialty nutrient products addressing the deficiencies of secondary and micronutrients in the soil with emphasis on sustainable agriculture and greener and cleaner products such as GEOGREEN, TATA BAHAAR, UPHAAR-RDS, GLUCO BATA, which are the top selling brands.
The stock is currently trading at INR225.00. On FY16E expected EPS of INR11.70. The brokerage firm assigns a P/E multiple of 23.45x to arrive at a target price of INR274.00 which shows an upside potential of 22 per cent, hence making the scrip an attractive buy.
The brokerage firm rates Coromandel International Ltd a ‘BUY’. With the up-coming government policies on the agriculture sector likely to be implemented/ to be considered, they believe the company to be benefitted.
The company has strong performing subsidiaries and joint ventures for its various business initiatives. It has over 600 retail outlets in the rural retail business in the states of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka through a chain set up in various parts of these states.
The stock is currently trading at INR259.00 On FY16E expected EPS of INR24.20. The brokerage firm assigns a P/E multiple of 12.95x to arrive at a target price of INR313.00 which shows an upside potential of 21 percent, hence making the scrip an attractive buy.
The brokerage firm rates Bajaj Hindusthan Ltd a ‘STRONG BUY’ based on triggers like up-coming government policies on sugar sector, healthy growth in power export business.
The new government might increase cap of the quantum of ethanol blending in petrol. This move, if this happens, is expected to be constructive for the company as well as the sugar industry.
The stock is currently trading at Rs 30.65 on FY16E expected EPS of INR2.35. The brokerage firm assigns a P/E multiple of 22.55x to arrive at a target price of INR53.00 which shows an upside potential of 73.00 per cent, hence making the scrip an attractive buy.
The brokerage firm rates Balrampur Chini Mills Ltd a ‘STRONG BUY’ based on triggers like the up-coming government policy on sugar sector, healthy growth in power generation and selling.
The new stable government may implement to an estimated increase in cash flow, following the export incentive scheme for raw sugar in coming years. It will be very positive moves for the sugar companies as well as sugarcane farmers.
Apart from that, the company’s total debt is reducing year on year. Compared with its competitors, it has lowest debt/equity ratio, which presently stands at 0.55. This is expected to post better bottom-line in coming years.
INR3.75. The brokerage firm assigns a P/E multiple of 32.65x to arrive at a target price of INR123 which shows an upside potential of 50.00 percent hence making the scrip an attractive buy.
(Views and recommendations expressed in this section are the analysts’ own and do not represent those of EconomicTimes.com. Please consult your financial advisor before taking any position in the stocks mentioned.)
