Agriculture dividend stocks are equities of companies engaged in some aspect of agribusiness and which pay out regular dividends. Agribusiness includes farmers that raise animals and harvest fruits and vegetables, farm equipment manufacturers, processing plants that clean and package livestock for shipping, and chemical producers that develop crop fertilizers.
Companies with a history of paying stable dividends at regular intervals tend to be more established and at a more mature stage of their growth cycle, allowing them to return more of their earnings to shareholders. For investors, these companies can provide a stable source of dividend income even if their stock prices decline sharply with the overall market, which has happened in recent months. However, dividends are not necessarily guaranteed, especially in difficult economic times, such as a bear market or recession. Established companies may cut dividend payments if cash is running low.
Here are the top 7 agriculture stocks with the highest dividend yields , which is the ratio of the company's annual dividend to the company's share price. That ratio is expressed as a percent. The numbers below are as of April 2020.
Dividend investors seek stable, profit-earning companies that pay out monthly or quarterly dividends to investors, whether or not the broader stock market is rallying.
The agribusiness, by definition, refers to the group of industries that produce agriculture and provide services that are needed in farming and production.
Within the agriculture sector, there are a number of stocks that provide steady dividend payments.
These stocks include seafood producer Mowi ASA, food company Bunge Ltd., oil and sugar-focused food processor Wilmar International Ltd., and multi-faceted agriculture firm Archer Daniels Midland.
Other top dividend-yielding stocks in the industry include mineral and chemical producer Israel Chemicals, nitrogen product producer and distributor CF Industries Holdings, and crop nutrient producer Nutrien.
