Unlike in previous years – and in contrast to what their farming neighbours report to them – the Beaumonts haven’t needed to give their cows any anti-worm or anti-fluke medication for more than a year. It’s a benefit of regenerative grazing reported by many farmers, probably explained by the fact that the herd is constantly moving on and therefore not recycling parasite eggs.
One of their neighbours is James Rebanks, author of The Shepherd’s Life , which describes the traditional way of life of Cumbrian shepherds. Rebanks, who is himself experimenting with some regenerative agriculture techniques, is supportive of the Beaumonts’ plans. But last time he spoke to him, Sam reports that Rebanks told them, with a wry smile, that he would come to see the Beaumonts in February, to check whether their cattle were really getting through the winter without any hay or extra feed. This chimes with the view of another local farmer, who commented that “there’s a reason we grow hay and manage things the way we do,” pointing out that success or failure will be determined by how long and cold the fast-approaching winter proves.
The problem with turning a whole system on its head is that it is hard to be entirely certain that you will find a new point of balance. Nevertheless, the Beaumonts are clear that the old system was neither balanced nor sustainable. Sam calculates that, subsidies aside, his flock of 300 ewes made £600 profit from sales of sheep and meat last year. Even in a good year he could not hope to make more than a few thousand. “Not a great hourly rate,” observes Claire dryly.
Central to their new financial model is a drastic reduction in expensive and energy-intensive inputs. As well as cutting out extra feed, they have eliminated artificial fertilisers and plan to keep the use of animal drugs and heavy machinery to an absolute minimum. Their future profitability will depend to a large degree on their ability to sell most of the meat from their new herd of cattle direct to consumers and to the hospitality industry. Alongside that, they hope that if new public subsidies are implemented to replace the EU common agricultural policy, they will financially reward farms that can prove that they balance food production with the urgent action needed to support wildlife and provide a sink for greenhouse gas emissions.
