Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, Prime Minister Oleksiy Honcharuk, and Parliamentary Speaker Dmytro Razumkov attend a meeting in Kyiv. September 2, 2019.  REUTERS/Valentyn Ogirenko
Last year was a crucial one for Ukraine. The country
navigated two national election campaigns in less than six months, experienced
mounting pressure from an unpredictable Russia, repaid around USD 12 billion in
By the end of 2019, it looked as though Ukraine had emerged
blocked Russia’s Nord Stream 2 pipeline project, Gazprom finally agreed to pay
ruling, and signed a new five-year gas transit contract with Ukraine.
issues remain unresolved as Ukraine moves into 2020.
dominating the national agenda and economic themes significantly less visible.
This reflected looming presidential and parliamentary elections. It was also
in 2016-18 as the country’s post-crisis recovery took shape. During 2014-15,
bilateral trade experience an almost fourfold decline between 2013 and 2016. By
around half of these 2014-15 losses in dollar terms. The major issue facing the
defense spending and a shrinking tax base. This raised the prospect of a possible
UkraineAlert is a comprehensive online publication that provides regular news and analysis on developments in Ukraine’s politics, economy, civil society, and culture.
Developments in 2019 caught many observers by surprise, with Zelenskyy’s election triumph serving to change the economic dynamic in the country. As it became increasingly clear in March 2019 that President Poroshenko would lose the upcoming presidential poll, Ukraine’s national currency began to gain against the dollar, providing the first indication that capital inflows might increase. Following his victory, President Zelenskyy then reappointed Finance Minister Oksana Markarova, making her one of only two members from the previous cabinet to remain in her post and allowing her to continue a profound revolution in Ukraine’s financial policy.
Hryvnia-denominated government bonds gained new ground in 2019 and generated record international interest, helping pave the way for a series of National Bank interest rate cuts throughout the year. As a result, the government was able to meet its obligations without support from international financial organizations, while pushing state debt below 50% of GDP for the first time since 2013. This has created a strong macroeconomic negotiating platform for the Ukrainian government ahead of fresh talks with an IMF mission that is expected in Kyiv in the coming weeks. However, it does not mean Ukraine’s economic outlook for 2020 is exclusively rosy.
a significant degree of financial stabilization, the steep rise of Ukraine’s
national currency had itself become a problem by the end of 2019. In recent
to the EU. Ukraine’s agriculture sector is also highly dependent on exports.
of the Ukrainian economy. Agricultural production remained flat in 2019, while
industrial production contracted seven percent in the fourth quarter.
The new government, which began work in late August 2019,
has also been the source of additional economic headaches. Plans for new taxes
moratorium on sales still not delivered.
