During the next few weeks, the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) will conduct the June Agricultural survey. The agency will contact nearly 6,000 producers across the Mountain Region states of Arizona, Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming to determine crop acreage and stock levels as of June 1, 2020.
"Due to the widespread impact of its results, the June Agricultural Survey, also known as the Crops/Stocks Survey, is one of the most significant surveys NASS conducts," explained William Meyer, Director, Mountain Regional Field Office. "Information growers provide serves as the first clear sign of the prospective production and supply of major commodities in the United States for the 2020 crop year. Results from this survey are used by farmers and ranchers, USDA, businesses, exporters, researchers, economists, policymakers, and others who use the survey information in making a wide range of decisions that benefit the producer."
Also of note, other USDA agencies rely on this data to assist in determining crop insurance and disaster aid payments as well as other program benefits.
Growers can respond to the June Agricultural Survey online, by phone, or mail. They will be asked to provide information on planted and harvested acreage, including acreage for biotech crops, and grain stocks.
"NASS safeguards the privacy of all respondents by keeping all individual information confidential, and publishing the data in aggregate form only to ensure that no operation or producer can be identified," said Meyer. "We recognize that this is a hectic time for farmers, but the information they provide helps U.S. agriculture remain viable and capable. I urge them to respond to the June Agricultural survey and I thank them for their cooperation."
NASS will analyze the survey information and publish the results in a series of USDA reports, including the annual Acreage and quarterly Grain Stocks reports, to be released June 30, 2020. The survey data also contribute to NASS' monthly and annual Crop Production reports, the annual Small Grains Summary, and USDA's monthly World Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates.
