Wall Street Looks at Coronavirus’s Impact on Machinery. Caterpillar and Deere Are in Focus.
Bank of America says capital spending in mining isn’t likely to quickly rebound after the crisis. That would hurt demand for Caterpillar equipment.
The impact of the Covid-19 is far reaching, requiring Wall Street analysts to rethink the outlook for near-term earnings as well as demand far in the future, after the pandemic passes.
Every sector of the market is affected, including heavy machinery . On Friday, Caterpillar (ticker: CAT) was downgraded at Bank of America while Deere (DE) was upgraded at J.P. Morgan.
“Energy outlook is grim ,” Bank of America analyst Ross Gilardi wrote in his research report. “We don’t see why energy and mining [capital spending] come storming back once Covid-19 fear eventually fades.”
About 50% of Caterpillar’s sales are in the “energy & transportation” and “resource industry” segments. That is a concern for Gilardi despite the company’s 4% dividend yield and history of consistent cash generation. Caterpillar generated positive free cash flow in both 2008 and 2009, during the last steep economic downturn.
He cut his price target from $123 to $115 while taking his rating from the equivalent of Buy to Hold. His 2020 earnings estimates fell from $7.70 a share to $5.50, down about 29%.
J.P. Morgan analyst Ann Duignan upgraded shares of Cat peer Deere from the equivalent of Sell to Hold. But she lowered her price target to $140 a share from $145.
Even as a famed maker of farm equipment, Deere is affected by Covid-19, particularly in Europe, where Germany, France, Italy, and Spain have more than 40,000 confirmed cases. Farming isn’t totally immune to the virus.
What is more, Deere also sells construction equipment, although Duignan does expect demand to bounce back on the continent in 2021.
There are also problems for Deere in the U.S. “We remain cautious on the structural challenges facing U.S. agriculture,” wrote Duignan. Even though food demand is stable , relative to the rest of the economy, U.S. farmers have to deal with a strong U.S. dollar and low ethanol prices.
U.S. is a big exporter of agricultural products. A strong U.S. dollar makes U.S. goods more expensive relative to, say, Brazilian soybeans. And ethanol —a gasoline additive—trades relative to the price of oil.
For this fiscal year, Duignan cut her earnings estimates from about $9 a share to $6.30, down by about one-third. Even though she is cautious, Duignan points out Deere has more than $8 billion in “excess liquidity” to weather the Covid-19 storm.
The balance sheet is less of a concern. That’s good news for investors.
Deere and Caterpillar stock aren’t moving much in response to either ratings action. Both shares are down more than 4%—a hefty move in normal times, but the Dow Jones Industrial Average is down more than 3% and the S&P 500 is off 2.9% in midday trading Friday.
Industrial stocks, which are more economically sensitive than other sectors—tend to be more volatile than the broader indexes. They drop more on down days and outperform when markets are rising.
Wall Street Looks at Coronavirus’s Impact on Machinery. Caterpillar and Deere Are in Focus.
The impact of the Covid-19 is far reaching, requiring Wall Street analysts to rethink the outlook for near-term earnings as well as demand far in the future, after the pandemic passes.
