Basso says Digital Agriculture has been around for about 20 years in a form where the technology works, but it was only available in initial steps since the early nineties when GPS was first mounted on tractors.
“What’s new about all this now is that as results of new analysis and breakthrough in agronomic sciences, we now have a better knowledge of the factors affecting crop health and yield, and why the crop yields vary within a field and from year to year,” said Basso. “These variation can now be better managed, and finally lead to more sustainable agricultural systems because the required inputs can be distributed more precisely where needed and not where they are not needed.”
“The agricultural sector remains the Cinderella compared to other primary sectors when it comes to digitalization,” said Basso. “Digital Agriculture is a combination of technologies which span from devices sensing the environment from a close distance or thousands of miles in the skies to chips monitoring food systems.”
Basso adds that along with sensors, new ways of analyzing big-data and predicting outcomes through validated simulation models and AI systems are beginning to have positive impacts for farmers and the environment.
“To increase the adoption of these technologies, farmers, environmentalists, scientists, policymakers need to sit down and listen to each other to put aside competing for interests for the well being of the land that we are certainly not looking after,” said Basso.
Basso says that if the objective is to increase biodiversity, to reduce nitrogen fertilizer use, or to grow less resource-intensive bioenergy perennials, incentivization is critical.
According to a press release for the paper, the researchers’ analysis showed that if nitrogen fertilizer applications were based on demand and yield stability instead of uniform application, usage in the Midwest could be reduced by 36% with significant reductions in groundwater contamination and carbon dioxide emissions.
Basso wants these decisions to be made as a society and have society bear those costs.
“What farmers do on their land today will affect their neighbor’s grandchildren in 30 years,” said Basso.
I'm a writer who looks at innovation and how technology and science intersect with industry, environment, arts, agriculture, mobility, health. I've been called the tech
I'm a writer who looks at innovation and how technology and science intersect with industry, environment, arts, agriculture, mobility, health. I've been called the tech Hemingway of Paris, named one of the top 100 women in technology in Europe in 2012, short-listed for best tech journalist by the TechCrunch Europas. I like to find the story that opens people's minds. Follow me on Twitter @jennalee.
