In the latest boost for ASX-listed farming stocks, the Bureau of Meteorology is forecasting the most favourable winter rainfall since 2016 when Australia produced a record grain crop.
The positive rainfall forecast came as new data showed farmers have tapped tax-effective nest eggs for $1 billion as they look to recover from drought through big crop plantings and rebuilding sheep and cattle numbers.
GrainCorp is gearing up its storage and handling network for a much bigger winter crop.
The BOM said the winter outlook was similar to 2016 when Australia produced almost 57 million tonnes of grain, including 15.51 million tonnes in NSW where the past two drought-hit harvests combined reaped just 6.22 million tonnes.
The bumper east coast harvest of 2016 saw GrainCorp’s core storage, handling and marketing divisions record underlying EBITDA of $205 million and pushed the company to net profit after tax of $125.2 million.
The GrainCorp share price was up more than 2 per cent to $4.33 in early trading on Thursday and has jumped almost 32 per cent since May 13.
Elders boss Mark Allison has said farmers have planted “fence line to fence line” this year and were busy restocking as tended to happen after a drought.
His assessment is borne out in new data from the National Australia Bank and the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources showing the national balance held by farmers in Farm Management Deposits (FMDs) was drawn down to $5.6 billion in March.
Deposits in the federal government's FMD scheme, which offers concessional tax treatment on deposits of up to $800,000, reached a record $6.6 billion in June last year.
NAB said there had been big variations across states in its FMD withdrawals and deposits. NSW, only just emerging from drought, recorded a net drawdown of $83 million, while deposits in Western Australia increased by $146 million.
NAB agribusiness customer executive Khan Horne said the significant variation in FMD activity between states represented fluctuating seasonal conditions across the country.
“FMDs are designed to allow producers to set aside pre-tax income in the good years, which is then available as a cash flow management tool for lower production years,” Mr Horne said.
“The continued drawdown and generally flat deposits in NSW reflect the prolonged periods of drought there, while a marginal winter cropping season in WA allowed continued deposits by producers.
“This is the first time since 2014 that we’ve seen states break away from the national trend, with NSW trending to lower net deposits from December 2019 to March 2020, while WA and Victoria trended towards increased net deposits over the same period.”
Mr Horne said it was a positive to see the overall balance remained at $5.6 billion, even after a severe drought, because it showed farmers were adept at managing cash flow and using the FMD scheme to their advantage.
“We expect to see a continuation in FMD drawdowns in the near term as primary producers look to restock and buy seed, fertiliser and chemicals for planting following recent rainfall in drought-impacted areas across the eastern states,” he said.
Andrew Watkins, BOM manager of long-range forecasting, said analysis showed most of mainland Australia had a better than 70 per cent chance of having a wetter than average winter.
Dr Watkins said the outlook was being driven by warmer than average ocean temperatures off north-west WA and warm ocean temperatures in the western Pacific.
"We last saw this happen in 2016, when a strong negative Indian Ocean Dipole formed to the west of Australia. This was the last time we saw tropical moisture from the northern Indian Ocean deliver good winter rainfall to large parts of Australia.
"We aren't guaranteed the same results as 2016, but the warmer ocean temperatures surrounding the continent will push us in the direction of better than average rainfall.”
Brad Thompson writes across business and politics from Western Australia for The Australian Financial Review. Brad is based in our Perth bureau. Connect with Brad on Twitter . Email Brad at bradthompson@afr.com
