Farm work is “not unskilled labour,” Fraser said. It can take weeks, or months, to bring a trainee up to speed, so flooding farms with inexperienced workers could slow down harvests, increase labour costs, and lower the quality and market value of crops.
“If a picker bruises a strawberry, the market value goes down,” he said. “It doesn’t take very long before you tip from being a profitable operation to an unprofitable one.”
The Canadian agriculture sector has long depended on workers from Mexico and the Caribbean to fill the majority of jobs on farms and in food-processing plants. But the sector still had more than 16,500 job vacancies in 2018, according to Canadian Agricultural Human Resource Council data, even after employing 60,000 temporary workers.
A migrant worker picks strawberries in Germany. Alex Kraus/Bloomberg
The Canadian Federation of Agriculture (CFA) fears the vacancy rate will be far worse this year given that the coronavirus crisis complicates travel for many temporary workers. Some farmers are weighing whether it’s even worth planting crops this spring at all.
Policy-makers have been trying to find ways to use domestic labour to fill that void. The Quebec provincial government on Friday announced $45 million in funding aimed at getting 8,500 workers into agriculture jobs, offering a $100 weekly bonus on top of farm wages. Adding that to the existing $100 bonus for essential service workers means every farm worker in that province would make $200 extra per week, the Canadian Press reported.
Prince Edward Island Senator Diane Griffin has been pushing the federal government to let out-of-work Canadians take jobs on farms as well as keep their Employment Insurance or Canadian Emergency Relief Benefit payments.
In response, the office of Carla Qualtrough, Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion, said the federal government was “considering all options to respond to labour shortages in the agricultural sector.”
Keith Currie, first vice-president at the CFA, said the sector is in talks with government to find a way to more precisely place job applicants in vacant positions, using an online job portal that would screen applicants and match them with positions that fit their experience.
But early crops, such as asparagus, are already suffering. In Ontario, farmers are warning consumers to expect less asparagus and higher prices this growing season, from May to June, since a shortage of temporary workers has forced some farmers to harvest only half their fields — if they harvest at all.
“We have some growers that have said it’s just not worth the stress and the risk this year,” said Bernie Solymar, executive director of the Asparagus Farmers of Ontario.
The problem, for asparagus farmers, is that success during the growing season often depends on how good their asparagus cutters are, and it would be tough to train an entirely new crew in one season.
Asparagus grows so fast that on hot days you can watch the spears creep up from the ground, Solymar said. Usually, workers spend half a day cutting a field, then turn around and do it again. If they fall behind, the asparagus spears grow into inedible, unsellable ferns.
Rebecca Compton, who runs Dalton White Farms, in the southwestern Ontario township of Delhi, said the cutting process is a lot like bailing water out of a canoe with a hole in it: “If you don’t keep going, you’re going down,” she said.
A box of freshly picked asparagus at a farm in Spain. Juan Medina/Reuters
To keep pace, cutters drive up and down fields in an asparagus rider — which looks like a go-kart with long benches attached to either side, like wings. The cutters sit spread out along the wings, hovering above the field as the rows of asparagus pass under their feet, making split-second decisions on whether or not to cut based on a spear’s tip, thickness and length.
“You need to have good cutters,” said Compton, whose employees from abroad have an average of 10 years’ experience. “You have essentially a steak knife and you just cut the spears one at a time. People always question why asparagus is so expensive. And that’s why, because it is an incredibly labour-intensive crop.”
A good cutter makes it easier for the graders and packers, who separate the spears into first-grade, second-grade, jumbos, slims, shorts and garbage spears with damaged tips or improperly trimmed butts. Sending in spears that are too short or too damaged slows the process down.
We have six weeks to make our living. To base that on people who have never done it before is very frightening
“To train one or two men in every year, that’s not a big deal,” Compton said. “But to train an entire crew, that’s a completely different task.”
Compton has only been able to bring 15 of her 45 usual labourers into Canada this year for the harvest, since local public health rules only allow her to quarantine three workers in the same bunkhouse, and she only has six bunkhouses.
With less than half the usual workforce, she said she is only planning to harvest half of her 80 acres of asparagus, at the most. The alternative would be to bring in more than 20 new employees, which she said would be the equivalent of teaching 20 new people how to drive all at once, in a matter of days, and basing your entire year’s earnings on how they perform.
“We have six weeks to make our living,” Compton said. “To base that on people who have never done it before is very frightening.”
