The unexpected withdrawal of subsidised agriculture gold loan by public sector banks has come as a bolt from the blue for hundreds of farmers who are going through acute financial crisis with the COVID-19 outbreak and the subsequent lockdown across the State.
Those who renewed their gold loans after October 1, 2019, are now in a situation to pay off more than 7% interest to renew it without subsidy benefits.
Rural farmers who could not renew the loans by paying 4% interest due to COVID-19 regulations have been asked to remit the full interest rate without any special consideration. One complainant said that banks were not concerned about the situation and claimed that the changes were the result of a policy decision of the government.
Complainants said the banks had not given any information regarding the withdrawal of the scheme. At the time of deposits after October 1, 2019, bank authorities could have at least given a hint on the possibility of cancelling the scheme, they pointed out.
Following public protests, some of the banks had given a verbal assurance over the possibility of crediting back the eligible subsidy amount to the beneficiary’s account with government intervention. However, the complainants said there was no such assurance on the part of the government and that they may lose their money already credited as interest.
Farm organisation leaders said the increased interest rate had forced many low income groups to consider the total withdrawal of the deposited gold and sell it outside for addressing the financial crisis. According to them, there are even poorly paid expatriates who obtained loan for agriculture purpose in their home land and struggled with the unexpected development in the banking sector.
Jijo Thomas, a leader of ‘We Farm’ hillside farmers’ collective, said many farmers in the rural areas of Kozhikode were not even thinking of renewing their gold loans now with the looming financial crisis. “Though the government has assured the benefit of the subsidised scheme to Kisan card holders, no one has so far benefited from it,” he said.
You have reached your limit for free articles this month.
Start your 14 days trial now. Sign Up
Find mobile-friendly version of articles from the day's newspaper in one easy-to-read list.
Move smoothly between articles as our pages load instantly.
Enjoy reading as many articles as you wish without any limitations.
A one-stop-shop for seeing the latest updates, and managing your preferences.
A select list of articles that match your interests and tastes.
We brief you on the latest and most important developments, three times a day.
*Our Digital Subscription plans do not currently include the e-paper ,crossword, iPhone, iPad mobile applications and print. Our plans enhance your reading experience.
We have been keeping you up-to-date with information on the developments in India and the world that have a bearing on our health and wellbeing, our lives and livelihoods, during these difficult times. To enable wide dissemination of news that is in public interest, we have increased the number of articles that can be read free, and extended free trial periods. However, we have a request for those who can afford to subscribe: please do. As we fight disinformation and misinformation, and keep apace with the happenings, we need to commit greater resources to news gathering operations. We promise to deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Your support for our journalism is invaluable. It’s a support for truth and fairness in journalism. It has helped us keep apace with events and happenings.
The Hindu has always stood for journalism that is in the public interest. At this difficult time, it becomes even more important that we have access to information that has a bearing on our health and well-being, our lives, and livelihoods. As a subscriber, you are not only a beneficiary of our work but also its enabler.
We also reiterate here the promise that our team of reporters, copy editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers will deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Please enter a valid email address.
var data = {"email" : email, "category" : "mb"};
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 768px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
box-shadow: 0 0 4px 0 rgba(0, 0, 0, .328);
@media ( max-width : 320px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
