Analysts and experts feel that the 16-point agenda to boost farmers’ income will revive the rural economy but say that zero-budget farming may significantly cut down on agri-input consumption and therefore is negative for fertiliser companies.
Mr. Manoj Jain, director & head of Commodities , IndiaNivesh said "The government provides a blueprint for revitalizing growth of real India through various incentivization schemes related to agriculture, healthcare, and education. The government has remained firm on its commitment to doubling farmers’ income by 2022 and has formulated concrete plans under its 16-point agenda to boost farmers’ income.
Thrust on development on setting warehouses, working on sustainable crop pattern, ensuring efficient use of fertilizer to reduce excessive use of pesticide and fertilizer, encouraging use of bio-fertilizer are measures to ensure healthy crop production.
“Addressing the growing water problem was the need of the hour, which the government also addresses through its comprehensive plans for 100 water deficit districts.I also congratulate the FM for pioneering ideas for promoting agriculture exports with initiatives such as the Kisan Rail and Kisan Udan scheme. Integrating warehouse receipts will with e-NAM widen financing avenues for farmers’ produce,” Jain said.
The proposal to provide Rs 15 lac crore as Kisan credit will also provide relief to farmers.
The target of doubling milk production by 2025 will encourage dairy farming and cattle rearing practices on an industrial level.
Focus on rural infrastructure development and doubling of hospitals will enable rural Indians access to quality healthcare. The news is a big positive for cement manufacturers and companies like NBCC NSE -1.41 % ."
Mr. Aksh Vashisth, analyst- chemicals, IndiaNivesh said that focus on promoting traditional organic and other innovative fertilizer with a view to change incentive regime which promotes the use of chemical fertilizers. “This comes in after the government stressed on zero budget farming in the previous budget. Negative for fertilizer companies as zero-budget farming significantly cuts down on agri-input consumption. However, the concept is still in the nascent stage as the lack of use of chemical inputs results in lower yield and production. The concept is being pioneered in AP and has received mixed reviews from farmers, " he said.
