The driver was scheduled on a backup bus that did not end up being needed on routes, according to DASH.
A DASH Bus driver in Alexandria tested positive for the new coronavirus on April 13. (Emily Leayman/Patch)
ALEXANDRIA, VA — A DASH Bus driver in Alexandria tested positive for the new coronavirus, which causes COVID-19 illness, the transit company announced.
DASH said in a statement the worker tested positive on April 13. The driver not work on the day he or she began experiencing symptoms or the two previous days; those were three scheduled days off.
Per DASH spokesperson Whitney Code, the bus operator was previously scheduled to run a backup bus in case a regular route was full. "The staged bus did not assist any of the buses on routes," said Code in an email to Patch. "The bus has since been thoroughly cleaned."
The driver is showing mild symptoms and is recovering at home. The company is not releasing additional information for privacy reasons.
"At this time, there is no reason to suspect the operator had contact with any other DASH employees or passengers," DASH stated.
DASH joined other regional transit authorities including Metro and Fairfax Connector in recommending riders wear a cloth face covering or mask. The Alexandria bus system has taken other measures, including suspension of bus fares until further notice, switching to boarding from the rear door, creating barriers between passenger seating and drivers, blocking seats too close together to maintain physical distance, and providing drivers with personal protective equipment. Riders with disabilities or strollers can board through the front doors if a ramp is needed.
DASH is encouraging essential trips only on public transit with adherence to physical distancing practices. Check for bus service updates at www.dashbus.com .
As of April 14, the Alexandria Health Department reported 248 COVID-19 cases and four deaths in the city. Public health information and city updates are provided at www.alexandriava.gov/Coronavirus .
Get the latest updates on the new coronavirus in Alexandria as they happen. Sign up for free news alerts and a newsletter in your Patch town.
