Under the new Project Restart protocols, clubs are being encouraged to get flights where possible as it is easier to socially distance than use three or four coaches
When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
And that will be the “new normal” for every club facing a lengthy journey which can quickly turn into a nightmare for away games.
Arsenal players had to drive themselves to Stansted airport, the club chef prepared a pre-match meal which they ate as part of a buffet at the airport and then flew to Manchester at 5pm.
It meant they touched down, then took coaches to the Etihad to arrive 90 minutes before kick-off and had to be ferried back to Liverpool to get a flight home.
The Arsenal players arrive at the Etihad ahead of the game vs Manchester City (Image: DAVE THOMPSON/NMC/AP POOL/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock)
But under the new Project Restart protocols, clubs are being encouraged to get flights where possible as it is easier to socially distance than use three or four coaches.
They are actively discouraged from using trains and Arsenal were left facing either an eight-hour round trip by coach or get a plane, but either way it was hardly ideal preparation for a crunch game.
All clubs will have to make similar plans because hotels are still few and far between and any lengthy journeys will have to be done on a similar basis and midweek night matches will be a logistical nightmare.
The Arsenal coaches arrive at the Etihad Stadium in Manchester (Image: PA)
Arsenal are also facing difficult dilemmas on contracts and they will have to decide on the financial implications before the “mini transfer window” opens on June 23 which was designed to allow clubs to decide on whether to make short-term extensions.
The most pressing one for Arsenal is David Luiz, 33, who is out of contract this summer and, while the club want to keep him, they are faced with trying to make plans for next season with very little idea over what their budget will be.
Champions League is vital to turn Arsenal’s finances around and that will completely change their outlook and allow them to press ahead with contracts and also potentially some modest transfer plans.
But if they miss out on European football it could have disastrous consequences for the club as Arsenal, like many other Premier League teams, are struggling amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Mikel Arteta suffered a disappointing return to the Etihad on Wednesday night (Image: REUTERS)
Luiz is caught in the middle and has been left waiting on his contract with Arsenal also trying to sign up Pablo Mari on a permanent basis, they want to secure Bukayo Saka and also have to make a decision on Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang who only has one year left on his deal.
Luiz’s agent Kia Joorabchian has gone public on Arsenal’s contract negotiations and has only spelt out the reality as the club have told him they will decide before the new window date.
It is understood that Luiz joined last summer believing he would definitely get a second year but the first 12 months of his contract was “heavily loaded” meaning that he stood to potentially earn more up front and it was an attractive switch.
David Luiz of Arsenal walks along the touchline after being sent off (Image: Getty Images)
