marked the same milestone with a 15% drop. Stocks have seen wild trading this week, with the Dow on Tuesday soaring 11% for its biggest one-day rise since 1933.
See: The Dow is on pace for its worst month since the Great Depression, but here’s why all hope isn’t lost
The Dow and S&P 500, which both traded at all-time highs in February, dropped from records to a bear market — a pullback of 20% from a recent peak — at the fastest pace on record, and have kept falling. With Friday’s close, the Dow is down 35.1% from its Feb. 12 record finish, while the S&P 500 is off 31.9% from its Feb. 19 record.
°And the drop has come alongside unprecedented volatility. The S&P 500 saw a stretch of seven consecutive trading days in which the index moved up or down 4%, the longest on record. The Cboe Volatility Index VIX,
, a measure of expected volatility for the S&P 500 over the next 30 days, closed earlier in the week at an all-time high.
The stock-market volatility is part of a broader market breakdown that saw investors world-wide liquidating assets across the board in a dash for cash that saw even traditional haven assets fall and sent the dollar soaring , creating a feedback loop.
The Federal Reserve and other major central banks responded with a range of stimulus measures and other efforts aimed at shoring up liquidity and ensuring markets could function. Governments weighed a range of fiscal stimulus measures on previously unthinkable scales.
As a result, investors are witnessing historical market events for the first time together, noted Brian Belski, chief investment strategist at BMO Capital Markets.
“For an investment and strategy culture and community that routinely relies on history for precedence and perspective, we believe it is safe to state that what has transpired the past several days does not have a perfect parallel to previous stock market corrections and ‘shocks,’ he said, in a note.
That means there “unfortunately does not exist a magic chart, table or bullet point that will answer all questions, let alone illustrate the bottom or foretell the recovery in stocks that WILL follow this,” Belski said. “Regrettably, a less negative and hopefully POSITIVE stream of headlines on coronavirus (COVID19 virus) is most likely the only acceptable antidote the stock market is yearning for right now.”
