The startup is determined to solve the skill-based challenges food industry services primarily faces. (In pic:  Gunjan Mehrish, Noopur Tiwari and Monica Narura)
We often wish we knew how the food would look and taste like so as to avoid a bad experience.
When it comes to choosing a dish from fancy menus, the awkward feeling was no different for the co-founding trio.
Dash.menu is a product of the trio’s food tech startup, Idea Chakki.
While exploring the concept of fine dining, feeling overwhelmed by a menu displaying exotic dishes, is quite a common thing. Things can get tougher if you come across dishes whose names you can’t pronounce, in a restaurant out of your monetary bounds. It becomes worse when the dish presented appears and tastes utterly unpleasant, leaving you disappointed and taking out the interest of trying something new.
At times like these, we often wish we knew beforehand how the food would look like or what our taste buds should expect so as to avoid a distasteful experience. Dash.menu is the solution to this dilemma. Founded three years ago, Dash replaces the traditional paper menu with an electronic tablet that lets the customer preview a short video of how the food is prepared, how it appears after preparation, the ingredients used and other details allowing them to choose responsibly through a better medium.
It is the brainchild of Noopur Tiwari, Monica Narura and Gunjan Mehrish, who had previously worked with NDTV’s food programming and news department and shared a common love for food. Dash.menu is a product of the trio’s food tech startup, Idea Chakki .
When it comes to choosing a dish from fancy menus, the awkward feeling was no different for the co-founding trio. Despite being well-travelled, the outlandish menus always baffled them and they would end up disliking their guess-ordered food.
“It only made us realize that when we consume anything we always sample it first, like when we choose to watch a film we always watch the trailer first. When we are buying music on iTunes we hear the teaser first, but when we are at a restaurant ordering food, we don’t know what will come in front of us when we say ‘chimichanga’!,” Narula told ET.
This is when the idea of an app which unravels unseen and untasted food in the form of mouth-watering food videos popped up. Adding a pinch of novelty, the team coined the word ‘fideos’ which is a combination of food + videos with a punchline- “Bite sized videos of each dish on the menu just to make you eat with your eyes first.”
At the time when the idea was still on paper, it was presented to industry giant Ratan Tata . Impressed with the one-of-a-kind initiative, he came on board as a seed investor. “His approval made us confident that we were on the right track,” she said. This was followed by Dash’s successful debut at ITC Maurya, Sheraton in 2016.
Once you enter a Dash.menu-associated restaurant, you’ll be handed a tablet in which you’ll get to submit your preferences such as the type of cuisine, vegetarian or non vegetarian, etc. Following this, you can see the fideos along with the list of ingredients used, the back-story of the dish, its pronunciation, and trivia, etc.
Narula explained how many chefs have amusing stories behind their food and cited example of the chef at Azure Hospitality’s Dhaba restaurant who named a dish ‘Chitta Butter Chicken’ after getting inspired by the song Chittiyan Kalaiyan Ve. Interestingly, the recipe was also based on the song.
Further, the digital menu suggests better wine and beverage pairing with the ordered food and the option to recommend the dishes to the customer’s social circle.
Restaurant owners also have the flexibility to update and upgrade the app in real time. “The app delivery time has been reduced from 24 hours to 2 hours since it started,” Narula said.
To prepare the fideos, the startup has a dedicated team that shoots the videos of the food preparation by the chefs and later creates a 15-second teaser. According to Narula, the videos are short and crisp enough to give the customer a good idea of the dishes, retain attention and not disclose the chef’s recipe.
You could savor the experience in any of the 40 brands Dash.menu has tied up with- Marriott, Pullman Hotels, Le Meridien, Mamagoto Dhaba, Priyank Sukhija’s Plum & Dragon Fly, ITC Hotels, Taj Hotels to name a few. According to Narula, the firm witnessed a compound annual growth rate of 118% from FY2017 to FY2019.
Sumit Gulati, owner of Gulati Spice Market in New Delhi, who has been using the Dash.menu for its customers for over a month, is delighted with the customers’ response. “We have witnessed a good customer reading since we started using Dash.menu. We often have many foreign tourists coming to our restaurant and the fideos help them get a better idea about the food. It is also very quick in responding to queries. Further, I feel it is good for social media sharing, especially for food bloggers and Instagrammers,” Gulati said.
What is the cost of ordering the food by previewing the mouth-watering fideos? Dash has an annual subscription based model and the price depends on the number of services restaurants to choose from. Subscription starts from Rs 1.50-3.75 lakh for restaurants.
With more and more people opting to order food from food aggregators such as Zomato and Swiggy these days rather than enjoying in a restaurant, Narula says they are trying to create a better ‘inside the restaurant’ experience.
The startup is determined to solve the skill-based challenges food industry services primarily faces. These include ineffective communication skills of the staff, average understanding of service offerings, time management, controlling costs to reduce wastage, among others.
In addition to these, Dash is also helping businesses and restaurants increase their brand awareness among customers. “There are currently about 10,000 cafes and restaurants in India in the organised sector and we feel Dash identifies an untapped need and the opportunity is endless. 90% of all internet traffic will be video based in 2019. These statistics convince us more every day that the gap needs to be addressed and we have the perfect solution,” she said.
