| TNN | May 15, 2020, 12:43 IST
NEW DELHI: Jatin Ahuja , founder and managing director of preowned premium car retailer, Big Boy Toyz talks about how BS6 norms and Covid-19 have impacted the second-hand luxury car market. Excerpts:
How to do see the impact amid COVID-19 on the luxury car market in India?
Due to the movement restrictions, as a result of the novel coronavirus, entire automobile industry has been hit hard. From manufacturing plants to showrooms to car dealerships, everything has come to a halt.
Even though the luxury car market size was less sensitive to the prices and financial downturn, the current situation has made it challenging. These testing times require a more flexible response from the automobile industry. It all depends on the customers and how they behave once everything is normalised and the lockdown is lifted.
What is your strategy to grow the business post lockdown?
A lot is expected to change post-lockdown. While the restrictions will be lifted, it is highly questionable if people will prefer to come out in crowded spaces. In the longer run, digitisation of businesses is going to save the ship. Whether or not people will continue to practice social distancing, they will be using their smart phones. Especially for the pre-owned luxury car market, digital mode is going to impact the sales favorably.
How BS6 emission norm is hurting pre-owned cars sales in India?
In a situation like this, BS6 norms has had a huge impact on the pre-owned luxury car business. In order to clear out their unsold stock, car dealerships are offering massive discounts on the BS4 vehicles and this is creating problems for our industry. However, with our digital footprints, BBT has been able to set up a loyal customer base. At present, we have a vast reach of about million users on our digital platforms and this is going to help us in the longer run.
What are your expansion plans for the next two years?
Just like we entered the Hyderabad market, we have plans to enter Kolkata in 2020 and Ahmedabad by 2021.
Start Your Daily Mornings with Times of India Newspaper! Order Now
