Queenslander Stephen Dash has emerged as Australia's latest fintech success story after selling his student loans start-up Credible Labs to the Murdoch family's Fox Corp for $585 million. But despite the fairytale outcome for the 35 year old, not everyone is happy.
Billionaire Alex Waislitz, who has amassed a 4 per cent stake in the ASX listed lender through his Thorney investment vehicle, said Fox has scored itself a bargain, with Credible on th brink of becoming a billion dollar company.
"While the deal is a great endorsement of Credible’s business model and its success to date, on the face of it the offer price is on the low side and we intend to buy more shares at current prices," Mr Waislitz said in a statement to the Sydney Morning Herald and The Age.
Mr Dash came up with the idea for his business when he was working for invesment bank JP Morgan in the US and talking to his colleagues about their cripping student debt. Some were paying as much as 7 per cent in interest on their lands, at a time when banks lending to each other at just 0.30 per cent.
"I saw a mismatch between what people should have been paying and what they were paying, that was the nucleus of the idea,” said the 35 year old Dash.
Credible started as a digital platform that let consumers compare rates for student loans from different providers, but it has since expanded into personal loans and mortgages.
"In a nutshell we give people accurate pre-qualified offers of credit effectively in real time, so they don’t have to fill out a full application,” Mr Dash said.
"The acquisition of Credible underscores Fox Corporation's innovative digital strategy that emphasises direct interactions with our consumers to provide services they want and expand their engagement with us across platforms," he said.
Under the deal announced on Monday morning, Credible will merge with a subsidiary of Fox.
All Credible shareholders will sell their shares in the transaction, except for Mr Dash who will sell $55 million worth of shares if the deal goes ahead, and convert the rest of his stake into a 33 per cent shareholding in the Fox subsidiary. The deal values his stake at $255 million.
The $2.21-a-share offer represents a 30 per cent premium to where the shares were trading on May 29, when Fox first approached the group with the group with a confidential proposal. The stock closed 6.3 per cent higher at $2.19 on Monday.
"The board [...] believes the proposed transaction is in the best interests of the company and its shareholders - and unanimously recommends shareholders vote in favour of the transaction," said Credible chairman Ron Suber.
The deal will require the approval of all shareholders excluding Mr Dash. A meeting is expected to occur in October.
Thorney Opportunities Chairman Alex Waislitz believes the $585 million offer from Fox undervalues Credible Labs.
Credible said Fox's proposal values it at 10 times its estimated revenue for the year ending June 30.
The transaction would reduce uncertainty by "providing it with access to significant resources from Fox", including the commitment to invest up to $US75 million of additional equity funding.
"The proposed partnership with Fox will enable Credible to further innovate on its consumer offering and position itself as a leading independent personal finance marketplace in the United States," it said.
Fox, the sister company to Mr Murdoch's Australian focused News Corp, owns television network Fox News and Fox Sports in the US.
Its operations have been vastly reduced with the sale of its movie and entertainment operations to Disney earlier this year.
Mr Dash said the distribution power of Fox was a big attraction.
"Fox is a diversified media organisation with assets across sports, news, business, entertainment, and then all their local TV assets, so they have a very broad offering," he said.
