Just when you thought the West Midlands Metro extension up Broad Street was taking forever, this stunning timelapse video shows how a concrete gang smashed a 230m stretch in one day with four hours to spare
When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
It's been a long time since anyone got plastered along Birmingham's nightlife capital Broad Street - but the hot weather gave a concrete gang working for the Midland Metro Alliance the chance to really smash it in daylight.
As the fascinating timelapse video above shows, they unloaded an astonishing 55 trucks full of concrete in just ten hours, four hours ahead of target.
Supplied by Aggregate Industries’ local plants, the concrete was used to bed in 230m of brand new tracks which were lying in a state of suspended animation.
The length of track covered would have taken Usain Bolt more than 20 seconds to run in his Olympics heyday.
The day 230m of concrete was delivered to bed in the new tracks for Phase Two of the Westside Metro extension along Broad Street (Image: Courtesy of the Midland Metro Alliance)
But as you can see by the sun's shadows moving around them in the fast-paced timelapse video above, the concrete relay team performed just as quickly in their own way.
The load, equivalent to 360m3 of concrete, was delivered at the rate of six trucks per hours as the team took full advantage of lockdown's lighter traffic.
The only pity for the workers toiling on the hottest day of the year to date - Wednesday, June 24 - was the lack of anywhere to go for a drink afterwards.
On Tuesday, June 23, prime minister Boris Johnson said the country would have to wait until Saturday, July 4 for pubs to reopen.
Despite the disruption on Broad Street caused by the tramworks, JD Wetherspoon told BirminghamLive earlier this week that it would reopen The Soloman Cutler / Lloyd's No 1 bar and The Figure of Eight at the same time as its other city centre pubs, The Briar Rose, The Square Peg and The Dragon Inn.
In suspension: the 'floating' tram tracks between Bishopsgate Street and Lee Longlands before they were concreted in on Wednesday, June 24, 2020 (Image: Graham Young / BirminghamLive)
Work to extend the West Midlands Midland Metro line from Snow Hill began in 2012 and in May, 2016 the line began to serve Grand Central via Corporation Street.
The Birmingham Westside Metro extension began in 2017.
Phase One was completed last year when the first public journeys began to serve Centenary Square on December 11, 2019
Six brilliant breweries in Worcester...
By that point, work had already been underway for a year on Phase Two which is set to see the line extended up to 54 Hagley Road in time for Christmas, 2021.
This week's massive concreting session saw tracks being filled in from Lee Longlands furniture store up to Cineworld / Bishopsgate Street.
Earlier this year, track and asphalt was laid through the Five Ways underpass which links the top of Broad Street with the Hagley Road in Edgbaston.
Marta Gasch, Track Engineer for the Midland Metro Alliance, checks progress during the largest, continuous concrete pour in another major milestone for the project. (Image: Courtesy of the Midland Metro Alliance)
The West Midlands' elected mayor Andy Street said: “Public transport has a critical role to play in our region’s future, including the short-term bounce back from coronavirus, and I am pleased to see this Metro scheme mark another milestone.
"Once complete the Birmingham Westside Metro extension will offer people quick and convenient access to many attractions and businesses in and around Broad Street.
Paul Brown, Construction Director for the Midland Metro Alliance, said: “The completion of the first continuous concrete pour on the project marks a momentous achievement, not only for the project but the construction team.
The scene after 6pm in this view looking from Transport House towards Cineworld and Five Ways (Image: Courtesy of the Midland Metro Alliance)
"Their remarkable efforts allowed these works to be completed successfully and to schedule, even during these uncertain times and whilst maintaining all the government’s guidelines as well as social distancing at all times.
"They have adapted to changes in working practices in order to ensure progress continues to be made so that the area will be presentable when businesses start to return.
