Five-star quarterbacks Bryce Young and DJ Uiagalelei represent two of the elite eight incoming freshmen recruits who will be college football superstars.
Prepare to meet the next generation of superstars in college football.
National Signing Day has come and gone and, with that, college football programs throughout the country have tried to lay the foundation for their futures.
And while a strong overall class is critical to doing so, having a star-in-the-making among your recruits doesn’t hurt either. These are the elite eight incoming freshmen who will be superstars on Saturdays so get to know them now before they become household names as early as this fall.
Travis Etienne is returning to Clemson for his senior season in one of the more shocking NFL Draft decisions of the offseason, so Demarkcus Bowman will initially play a complementary role for Dabo Swinney ‘s team.
However, he and DJ Uiagalelei can form the perfect replacement duo for Etienne and Trevor Lawrence . Bowman has elite speed in the same vein as Etienne, already running a sub-4.5-second 40-yard dash in 2019. With that and his compact frame with a low center of gravity, he’s going to be a nightmare for ACC defenses to handle and a star in his own right for the Tigers.
Noah Sewell will join his brother, elite offensive tackle prospect, Penei Sewell , on the Oregon Ducks and figures to have the same type of impact in the middle of the defense as Penei has for on the left side of the offensive line. Much like his brother, Sewell boasts elite athletic traits for a player his size at 6-foot-2 and 266 pounds.
The No. 13 overall recruit and No. 2 inside linebacker has the ability to not only click and close quickly in the thick of the play in the trenches but also has good speed to go from sideline-to-sideline and use his frame as a physical player in coverage. He has every bit of the potential to be a tackling machine for the Ducks for as long as he’s in Eugene.
From his sophomore to senior seasons in high school, five-star running back Bijan Robinson rushed for over 6,500 yards and 99 touchdowns on less than 500 carries. That’s the type of player Tom Herman ‘s Longhorns are getting in the No. 1 running back (No. 15 overall) in the 2020 class.
Robinson can carry the load in the Texas offense as both a runner and pass-catcher operating out of the backfield. While not the fastest running back in this recruiting class, he has plenty of speed and the size-quickness combo to make any tackler miss in the open field. He should see the field right away and make an instant impact alongside Sam Ehlinger .
CJ Stroud is the only four-star prospect we’re going to anoint as a future star here but there’s good reason to believe in his high-end potential when he gets in Ryan Day’s offense at Ohio State. The No. 2 pro-style quarterback in the 2020 class puts him in a tremendous position to succeed as Justin Fields’ successor. Day has proven his ability to design versatile offenses that allow his quarterbacks to thrive and Stroud looks to be the next great Buckeye quarterback.
For many, if they were to pick an LSU recruit as the next future star, they would likely point to tight end Arik Gilbert, the No. 5 overall player and top player at his position. However, this is DBU we’re talking about and Elias Ricks figures to be the next to take up the mantle as the “next big thing” in the Tigers secondary. He ranks as the No. 14 overall recruit and No. 2 cornerback, according to the 247Sports Composite Rankings.
While Ricks isn’t the fastest, he makes up for it with his physicality and coverage instincts, both of which form a bonafide playmaker on the boundary. Should he see the field as early as Derek Stingley Jr. , he could make similar waves for this defensive back group.
Clemson found the successor to Trevor Lawrence with DJ Uigalelei who is already enrolled and helped the Tigers prepare for the National Championship Game vs. LSU. The 6-foot-4.5, 245-pound Uiagalelei is the No. 1 pro-style recruit and No. 10 overall recruit. He is as toolsy of a quarterback as you’re going to find coming out of high school.
The St. John Bosco product is blessed with an arm that many have touted as one of the best they’ve ever seen from a player his age. Couple that with nice touch, accuracy with the ability to contain his arm strength, and a familiarity with playing his best on the biggest stages, and Uiagalelei is the perfect fit for Clemson. Don’t be surprised if he replaces a No. 1 pick and later becomes one himself.
While you probably didn’t expect to see the Maryland Terrapins on this list but landing Rakim Jarrett changes that. The five-star wide receiver already has a nice frame at 6-foot, 208 pounds but also has elite physical traits with speed and short-area quickness that could make the Under Armour All-American a dynamic weapon right away.
Also factoring in his well-developed hands and route-running for an incoming freshman, Jarrett, the No. 4 receiver recruit, figures to soon be a focal point of the Maryland offense. As the top dog in the offense as soon as his freshman season, Jarrett is sure to emerge as a star in a lesser-heralded Power 5 program.
While undersized at 5-11 and 183 pounds, Bryce Young appears to be up to the task of filling the large cleats of Tua Tagovailoa in the Crimson Tide offense. The No. 2 overall recruit has a nice arm that packs plenty of pop in his throws whether he’s in the pocket or on the run and is most often on target.
Speaking of his ability to run, Young is a threat to break off big chunks of yardage with his legs but he also uses that to his advantage to escape pressure, break down the defense and then look down the field while on the move. He could be the next Kyler Murray if he stays healthy. If you thought offensive-minded Alabama football was going to be a thing of the past, Young will prove otherwise.
