Seders are held on the first two nights of the Jewish holiday, which begins April 8.
As a child, my parents taught me that the door to our home was an open one, particularly around the Jewish holidays. It was a “mitzvah,” a good deed, to share our traditions with others and to engage with their traditions, too. The Haggadah—the Jewish text that guides the Passover seder and retells the story of the Jewish people’s exodus from slavery in Egypt—opens with a similar invitation to “let all those who are hungry come and eat.”
Unfortunately, in the time of coronavirus, we’re encouraged to keep our doors closed. But that doesn’t mean we can’t, or shouldn’t, celebrate. In fact, Passover 2020 may be coming at just the right time because it is, in part, a story of freedom.
Citizen Rail , a wood-fire fueled restaurant near Union Station, had planned to host a community seder on the first night of Passover, April 8. (Seders are held on the first two evenings of the holiday to mark the anniversary of the end of Jewish enslavement, when the story is retold over a ritual-laden meal along with four symbolic glasses of wine.) The intended menu was inspired by general manager Jason Gordon’s family customs.
Since Denver restaurants are closed for on-site dining until at least May 11, chef Christian Graves is sharing his recipes so home cooks can still dig into the traditional dishes of matzo ball soup, brisket, and more.
Graves says it wasn’t difficult to adjust his cooking to accommodate Passover’s strict dietary restrictions (for Ashkenazi Jews like myself, that means no rice, corn, or beans in addition to no leavened grains, like wheat, oats, and rye). “The recipes kind of wrote themselves,” he says. “We already have consommé on the menu and it’s delicious, so making the matzo ball wasn’t a big deal. It was fun.”
Graves attended his first seder in San Francisco when a neighbor invited him to an “orphan Passover,” basically a dinner for those living away from family. He loved the community feel and the opportunity to learn more about Judaism and the symbols associated with the holiday.
Gordon, on the other hand, grew up in a “relatively religious home” in Ohio; his father was Orthodox, his mother conservative. Every seder began the same way: His grandfather, father, and friend’s father would take a shot of Slivovitz, a clear fruit brandy from Eastern Europe that’s known to burn on the way down. Citizen Rail’s bar team toned things down for you, though: Find a recipe for a Slivovitz-based cocktail below.
We hope you enjoy these recipes and share them with friends. A seder for one person at home or for 18 people over FaceTime is still a seder, after all. Chag sameach. (That’s Hebrew for “happy holidays.”)
Matzo ball soup from Citizen Rail. Photo courtesy of the Denver Dish
