The new Collins Aerospace HEPA filter drop-in option for the DASH 8, certified and ready to fly
Most modern jets feature high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters, helping to reduce the spread of disease on board. For airlines that is a critical component of convincing customers it is safe to resume their travel patterns. But not all aircraft feature the filters.
For those (generally older) planes, getting to HEPA levels of filtration has generally been a challenge. Collins Aerospace introduced an option for the DASH 8 line of turboprops this week, bringing a “drop-in” retrofit capability to the market.
Our customers are searching for partners and solutions that can provide higher air quality for their passengers as we work together through the changing aviation landscape. These HEPA filter kits are simple to install, improve cabin air purity and provide a more comfortable aircraft environment at a low replacement cost.
The current cabin environment on the Dash 8 sees air drawn from the cabin and mixed with fresh air before being distributed back to the cabin. The process includes minimal filtering. The updated HEPA filter solution from Collins enables cabin air to be filtered before reaching the condenser mixer. The kit can be fitted to the Dash 8 (-100/-200/-300) types.
The new HEPA filter design drops in to the existing frame, making it an easy swap for airlines
Trevor Skelly, vice president and general manager for Collins Aerospace, also notes that while this specific solution “is an exclusive drop-in replacement for Dash 8 operators,we’re ready and able to partner with airlines and operators of other platforms to help deliver a HEPA filtering solution to best fit their existing fleet, as well.”
The company states five separate airlines operating Dash 8 aircraft have placed orders and adopted the Collins Aerospace HEPA filter solution.
Like what you're reading? Subscribe to PaxExTRA for a weekly update on the Passenger Experience industry.
Seth Miller has over a decade of experience covering the airline industry.  With a strong focus on passenger experience,  Seth also has deep knowledge of inflight connectivity and loyalty programs.  He is widely respected as an unbiased commentator on the aviation industry.
He is frequently consulted on innovations in passenger experience by airlines and technology providers.
