Since coronavirus emerged, the demand for hand sanitiser and face masks significantly increased globally, a Foodstuffs spokesperson said.
Some stores may be out of stock and others may have limited supplies.
"We are continuing to work closely with vendors to secure more stock as soon as possible, and exploring new brands to fill the gap, but volumes are limited due to international demand."
The patient is currently being treated in Auckland City Hospital and is in isolation in a negative pressure room to prevent any spread of the disease. They have been in the room since arriving at the hospital.
The health ministry insists that the risk of a community outbreak of coronavirus from this patient is low.
The patient had travelled to Auckland on Wednesday, February 26, on Emirates flight EK450 to Auckland via Bali, from Tehran.
Director-general of health Ashley Bloomfield said public health officials had been working to trace who the person had been in close contact with. This included people on the flight involved, particularly on the final leg, which came from Bali to New Zealand.
Officials would be contacting people within the same row as the individual, along with the two rows ahead and behind the person. Cabin crew members would also be contacted.
A 60-year-old patient being treated for coronavirus at Auckland City Hospital.
They would be required to self-isolate for 14 days.
While travelling, the person was "unwell", Bloomfield said. He understood they were wearing a mask on-board the flight.
Once they arrived, they had travelled by private vehicle to their own home, with family members only.
People are being urged not to stock pile.
Later that same day, when family members became concerned with the person's condition, Healthline was phoned, Bloomfield said.
After being advised to go to hospital, the person was taken there by family members.
All were wearing masks on arrival. As a result of the individual's symptoms and travel history they were admitted and tested.
The ministry had no evidence the person had transmitted the virus to anybody else.
