This is the trouble with crashes, they can easily become vicious circles.
Happily the government got its training in how to respond in the global financial crisis or as it was called then, the credit crunch. They simply print money and get it into the system, so that no lender runs out of cash or is forced to pull funds in and instead is pressured to themselves push money out into the market to the cash hungry.
As such, there is zero chance of a repeat of 2007-2009, in so much as the banking system will not be a “single point of failure.”
However, this is a new emergency because the future is going to be about a demand shock, in so much as people are going to slow down spending dramatically for a period and perhaps even a supply shock if China and other economies don’t come back onstream fast enough.
Lots of new credit and insufficient supply could create an unexpected outcome, but we have to expect supply capacity to catch up faster than new money reaching the hands of spenders. So the biggest risk is how the developed economies will bridge the demand shock already underway.
We may well be on the brink of helicopter money as a solution that will come in the form of tax cuts, financial holidays and/or jubilees of one flavor or another, but the trouble is you can’t make people spend money. When they are scared they stash it, so handouts do not create the desired demand.
All this says to me is that this remains the beginning of this situation and while we might bottom in the markets in the next few days/week, we won’t get a fast recovery, instead we will be in for a lazy one as per 2008.
There is one critical question that will need solving and it is yet to be addressed. Who and how are the mountains of corporate debt going to be rolled? We live in a highly leveraged world and there will need to be a way big business can roll their bonds. A high yield is simply not going to be enough to create investment appetite from a cash hoarding world for many businesses. This is where the governments of the West need to be building solutions.
When you try to bridge a gap, which economically is exactly what this crisis will create, an inch is as bad as a mile. It is that economic gap that needs to be bridged and the criticality will be corporate debt in the form of bonds. This is not really that much of a liquid market and somehow a lot of liquidity will need to be injected into it. Somehow a new deeper kind of QE (quantitative easing) will have to be engineered that can reach into a tier or two lower than the current reach of U.S. and European QE programs.
Until that is mooted or we see the pieces come together, investors need to be very careful about the equity markets because right now the U.S. market is not seeing the sort of crash Europe has seen—hitting 2016 levels—and who is brave enough to say the U.S. won’t follow that path?
The “demand shock”’ ahead guarantees an extremely bumpy road ahead and cash will be king for a long time to come.
Free From Forbes: Get important investing news and information delivered to your inbox from Forbes Investing Digest. Sign up now.
Clem Chambers is the CEO of private investors website ADVFN.com and author of 101 Ways to Pick Stock Market Winners and Trading Cryptocurrencies: A Beginner’s Guide .
Chambers won Journalist of the Year in the Business Market Commentary category in the State Street U.K. Institutional Press Awards in 2018.
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I wrote a stock column for WIRED – which described me as a ‘Market Maven’ - and am a regular columnist for numerous financial publications around the world. I have written for titles including:  Working Money, Active Trader, SFO and Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities in the US and have written for pretty much every UK national newspaper.  In the last few years I have become a financial thriller writer and have just had my first non-fiction title published: 101 ways to pick stock market winners. Find me here on US Amazon.
You’ll also see me regularly on CNBC, CNN, SKY, Business News Network and the BBC giving my take on the markets.
