Say so long to Holler & Dash, the fast-casual biscuit house brand aimed at millennial diners that Cracker Barrel debuted more than three years ago.
The Lebanon-based family dining chain announced last week it will convert all seven Holler & Dash locations into Maple Street Biscuit Company , a growing Florida chain that Cracker Barrel acquired for $36 million.
Those conversions from Holler & Dash to Maple Street Biscuit Company will happen “in the coming months,” according to a media release.
There are Holler & Dash restaurants on Franklin Road in Brentwood and 8th Avenue South in Nashville, in addition to locations in Alabama, Florida, Georgia and North Carolina.
"The breakfast and lunch-focused fast casual category is an attractive segment, and our experience with Holler & Dash has reinforced this belief. We have long admired Maple Street Biscuit Company with its emphasis on made-from-scratch food and hospitality. It is a proven brand with attractive unit economics and strong growth potential, and it is positioned to become a leader in this category,” Cracker Barrel CEO Sandy Cochran said in a statement.
Cracker Barrel debuted Holler & Dash in Homewood, Alabama, in 2016. The restaurant serves breakfast, brunch and lunch every day, featuring biscuit sandwiches, scrambles, avocado toast, beignets and more.
The new brand positioned Cracker Barrel to compete in one of the fastest-growing segments of the dining industry and to target a new, younger clientele. The Holler & Dash restaurants are in bustling parts of town, unlike Cracker Barrel stores/restaurants that are typically located near highway exits.
The fast-casual Maple Street Biscuit Company was founded by Scott Moore and Gus Evans in Jacksonville, Florida, in 2012. There are 28 company-owned and five franchised locations across seven states.
Moore will remain CEO of Maple Street Biscuit Company and will report to Cochran, according to a media release.
"From the beginning, Maple Street Biscuit Company has focused on serving its communities through comfort food with a modern twist and gracious service,” Moore said in a statement. “Our brands share many similarities such as scratch cooking and an emphasis on hospitality. I'm excited about this opportunity, and I believe Cracker Barrel will help us grow our brand and further achieve our mission of helping people, serving others, and being a part of the community."
Maple Street’s menu includes biscuit sandwiches, biscuits and gravy, waffles, bowls and salads.
Specific menu items include The Squawking Goat biscuit topped with all-natural fried chicken breast, fried goat cheese medallion and house-made pepper jelly; the Sunshine in the Garden Bowl with a flaky biscuit, two sunny side eggs, fresh basil, feta cheese and a tomato-based sauce with shallots and green pepper; and The Iron Goat biscuit topped with goat cheese and sauteed spinach.
Also this year, Cracker Barrel agreed to invest up to $140 million in Punch Bowl Social, the trendy Denver-based chain that pairs made-from-scratch food and craft drinks with social gaming.
