Cracker Barrel Old Country Store has snapped up a seven-year-old fast-casual restaurant company for $36 million in cash, its second notable investment this year in brands beyond its core offering.
Maple Street Biscuit Co. runs 28 company-owned and five franchised locations from Texas to North Carolina. (Its locations closest to Nashville are in Chattanooga.) That number will grow in short order as Cracker Barrel leaders said Friday they will convert their seven Holler & Dash Biscuit House spots to Maple Street location in the coming months. Maple Street’s unit typically have annual sales of about $1 million — compared to $3.7 million for Cracker Barrel’s 660 restaurants — and aim for unit earnings before interest and other factors of 17 percent.
“We have long admired Maple Street Biscuit Company with its emphasis on made-from-scratch food and hospitality," Cracker Barrel President and CEO Sandy Cochran said in a statement. “It is a proven brand with attractive unit economics and strong growth potential, and it is positioned to become a leader in this category.”
Cochran and her team expect their acquisition to be neutral to per-share profits in the company’s current fiscal year before acquisition and integration costs. Maple Street founder and CEO Scott Moore will stay in charge of the brand and report to Cochran.
"Our brands share many similarities such as scratch cooking and an emphasis on hospitality,” Moore said. “I’m excited about this opportunity, and I believe Cracker Barrel will help us grow our brand and further achieve our mission of helping people, serving others, and being a part of the community."
Word of the Maple Street comes nearly three months after Lebanon-based Cracker Barrel said it had invested $140 million in Punch Bowl Social , an eatertainment concept based in Denver and with about 20 locations and plans for another 10 in the next year and change.
Shares of Cracker Barrel (Ticker: CBRL ) were up slightly to $159.09 Friday afternoon. They have risen about 3 percent in the past six months.
