Credit risk funds can bring over 9 per cent returns, but with a dash of risk
Summary Credit risk funds, which invest at least 65% of their corpus into AA+ funds and lower, have seen outflows of ₹8,000 crore in the last three months.
Investors with appetite for risk could put money into credit risk funds which could return about 9% in the next one year. This debt scheme category, which invests predominantly in lower rated papers , has seen sharp outflows in recent times because of a slew of defaults and ratings downgrades in the wake of the IL&FS fiasco.
“Valuation is attractive due to higher spread of the schemes, yield to maturity (YTM) over the repo rate ,” says Sankaran Naren, executive director, ICICI Prudential Mutual Fund .
Credit risk funds, which invest at least 65% of their corpus into AA+ funds and lower, have seen outflows of ₹8,000 crore in the last three months. As investors poured money into quality paper and fund houses to buy more AAA rated paper and government bonds, the spread between AAA rated paper and other securities has increased sharply. In the current scenario, fund managers point out that while a AAA rated paper gives a yield of 7.25%, an AA paper could give yields of 9% and an A rated paper could give 10%. These spreads are the highest in the last decade. For instance, the current spread of the portfolio of ICICI Prudential Credit Risk – one of the biggest in the category – over the repo is as high as 4.91%, the highest since December 2010. The average spread is 2.9%.
“The credit market is tight and good companies at higher yields. Fund houses with good process for credit evaluations should be preferred,” said Rupesh Bhansali, head (distribution), GEPL Capital.
He recommends ICICI Prudential Credit Risk Fund and Franklin India Credit Risk Fund, which have given returns of 8.85% and 8.37% over the last one year.
In the last one year, investors have lost money in credit risk funds. For instance, Boi Axa Credit Risk Fund lost as much as 48% of its value, while many others lost 2-5%.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
