All major coins are rangebound with a bearish bias on Wednesday.
DASH is the best-performer with 16% gains on a daily basis.
The cryptocurrency market has resumed the sell-off. While Bitcoin and all major altcoins are still within the recent ranges, the overall sentiments have already turned bearish. The total market capitalization has reached $148 billion. The average daily trading volumes settled at $114 billion. Bitcoin's market share is 63.2%.
Bitcoin is hovering around $5,100 amid growing bearish pressure. The coin is down nearly 3% on a day-to-day basis, while a sustainable move below SMA50 1-hour makes it vulnerable to further losses. If $5,000 is broken, the sell-off will gain pace.
Ethereum retreated from the intraday high above $118.00 to trade at $110.20 at the time of writing. The second-largest virtual coin has lost over 4% since the beginning of the day as the downside momentum is gaining traction. ETH is moving in sync with Bitcoin.
Ripple's XRP is hovering around $0.1400 on Wednesday after a failed attempt to break above $0.1500 during early Asian hours. The third-largest coin has lost 2.5% in recent 24 hours and 4% since the beginning of the day.
Chainlink (LINK) is the worst-performing coin out of top-20. It has lost over 5% on a day-to-day basis, following a massive sell-off on Tuesday. DASH is the growth leader. The coin has gained 6% despite the major sell-of on the market.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
