The show, which debuted in January of 2016, follows the children of hip hop stars as they pursue their professional paths.
Others profiled on the cable series include Angela Simmons, the daughter of Run–D.M.C.'s Rev. Run; Romeo Miller, the son of 90s rap phenom Master P; and Briana Latrise, the stepdaughter of R&B stalwart Mary J. Blige.
It's the latest family-related legal tangle for Dash, whose ex-wife Rachel Roy and ex-girlfriend Cindy Morales last month sought legal intervention toward eliminating him from the process of recouping their back child support.
Donnell Suares, a lawyer for Roy and Morales, asked a New York City court to approve an arrangement that would essentially garnish an incoming settlement Dash is set to receive from Empire creator Lee Daniels over a separate matter. Suares presented the plan during a hearing regarding Dash's outstanding balance when it comes to child support.
The deal was laid out in detail along with Natraj Bhushan, who is Dash's lawyer in the case, and a judge just needs to OK it, TMZ reported. Dash and Daniels agreed to a settlement in 2019 stemming from a $5 million suit Dash had filed.
Per the terms of the proposal, Roy and Morales would receive payments in the thousands until the balance is eliminated. The proposal was derived from a similar arrangement Roy and Morales sought in filing a suit against Daniels.
In addition: Dash's ex-wife Rachel Roy and ex-girlfriend Cindy Morales are looking to eliminate him from the process of getting their back child support. The music mogul was snapped in NYC in 2018
The latest legal turn in the case came weeks after Dash was arrested in connection with $404,000 in unpaid child support to Roy and Morales November 19.
Dash was handcuffed and taken to Bronx Family Court amid a pair of felony warrants, the New York City Sheriff’s Office told Page Six . Sheriff Joseph Fucito said authorities had been 'looking to arrest [Dash] since 2015,' as a warrant was issued in April of that year over $62,000 he owed Morales.
Earlier this year, another warrant was issued over a contempt of court conviction, with the court ordering him to pay an additional $342,000.
Dash was released after he went to a Manhattan court and paid a debt of about $1 million for an outstanding warrant. He was then taken into custody by seven deputies as he headed to handle his other warrant, he told TMZ of the incident.
He was then reportedly processed and transported to the Bronx Family Court to handle the outstanding remainder of his balance. Dash told TMZ that the deputies were very understanding and cooperative in the process.
Officials had previously urged Dash to turn himself into custody but he left New York, a police insider told Page Six.
Dash, who co-founded Roc-A-Fella Records along with Jay-Z, told the court last week he's got a 'virtually nonexistent' income, and was only surviving on money from a $2 million debt owed to him by Daniels following a recent court settlement.
Dash told the court he's strapped for cash as he's expecting another child with fiancee, Raquel Horn.
Dash was married to fashion designer Roy, 46, from 2005 to 2009 and has two daughters with her - Ava, 20, and Tallulah, 11.  He's also father to Boogie, 27, with ex Linda Williams, and a son named Lucky with Morales.
