Dano's Tequila Shares Recipes, Offers Virtual Cinco de Mayo Celebration to Benefit the Bartender’s Guild Relief Fund, Will Donate up to $50,000
To celebrate Cinco de Mayo this year, Dano's Tequila will be hosting a special edition of its Cocktails & Culture virtual happy hour
STEAMBOAT SPRINGS, Colo.--( BUSINESS WIRE )-- Dano’s Tequila , makers of ultra-premium, 100% agave tequilas hand crafted in a family-owned distillery that dates back to 1840, today announced a special Cinco de Mayo edition of its "Cocktails & Culture" virtual happy hour.
"With the current COVID-19 situation, Dano's Tequila fully supports the countless people making sacrifices to stay inside in order to keep themselves and their loved ones safe," said Conley Fitzpatrick, CMO of Dano's Tequila. "We want to ensure that any 21+ year old adult, regardless of their current social distancing situation, is still able to celebrate Cinco de Mayo from the comfort of their own home! That's where this week's Cocktails & Culture virtual happy hour comes into play – what else do you need to celebrate the holiday other than lively conversation and of course, great tequila?"
With "Cocktails & Culture," Dano’s Tequila is collaborating with bartenders across the country to help people feel connected, inspired and come together to support bartenders by hosting virtual cocktail hour and cocktail lessons for those 21 years of age or older. Each cocktail hour features a guest bartender- who is paid by Dano’s Tequila for their efforts, with the option for participants to tip as well. You can find the event information for "Cocktails & Culture" here: facebook.com/events/1301923573330861/ .
Guest bartenders will teach people how to make the best homemade margaritas, palomas and more and will share out recipes. What’s more, for every person that joins the happy hour, Dano’s Tequila will donate $5 to the US Bartender’s Guild Foundation, and for every person who orders a bottle for delivery via ReserveBar, the brand will donate an additional $5 with the goal of donating up to $50,000. The happy hours, previous held on Friday evenings, will move to Tuesdays beginning May 5 at 6:30pm ET to celebrate the Cinco de Mayo holiday.
Dano's has also developed a collection of mixologist-curated recipes that are suitable for any situation calling for tequila – but the following two are perfect for providing responsible drinkers at home with incredibly refreshing and satisfying options to properly celebrate Cinco de Mayo this year:
Stir with ice into a rocks glass.
Garnish with orange peel and toasted cinnamon stick.
Founded in Steamboat Springs, Colorado in 2018, Dano’s Tequila offers a line of ultra-premium, 100% agave tequilas, each of which are hand crafted (yes, actually by hand) in a family-owned distillery dating back to 1840 in Tequila, Jalisco, Mexico. As a result, each tequila is exceptionally smooth. Dano’s award-winning tequilas include its signature Pineapple Jalapeño Infusion– as well as a Blanco, Reposado and Añejo. The Dano’s difference is in its detailed process, rooted in a tradition and practice overseen by a fourth generation of family craft distillers. Dano’s Añejo tequila won Best in Class and Double Gold in the 2020 San Francisco World Spirits competition and its Reposado tequila won Gold. Dano’s also won the Gold Medal in the 2019 Wine & Spirits Wholesalers of America (WSWA) Tasting Competition, and the Double Gold and Gold in the 2018 SIP Awards. Dano’s Tequila is available in seven states and online at Reservebar.com . Visit danostequila.com
