By Maheen Hernandez June 23, 2020 Off
Dash Instant Payments makes it possible to transfer DASH within a second and it happens instantly.  When it comes to withdrawing cash, among the cryptos first to launch ATM services, DASH allows you to withdraw money at the nearby ATM.
Dash Thailand tweeted:  “Dash Next partnering with BitBns to boost Dash adoption around the world. In addition to listing DASH/USDT Indian Rupee, Thai Baht, UAE Dirham, Bitbns is hosting an absolute Dash carnival including withdrawal fee refunds, trading competitions, AMAs, etc. over the next 2 weeks.”
Dash is trusted by merchants from across the globe.  More than 4800 merchants and businesses use Dash.  The fees is feasible and DASH charges less than a cent in fee, thereby placing it among the most feasible payment options in the present day.
Joel Valenzuela tweeted:  “This was a really great podcast with JScigala of Vaultoro. From gold to Bitcoin to seeing the crazy potential of Dash (while still loving the other two). We’re making history here. Also don’t forget that TaxationIsTheft! Dashpay.”
Dash is now beginning to dominate Nigeria.
Bitcoin is dominant in the exchanges; however, Dash Nigeria at this point in time is making a difference by pushing for the adoption of Dash; however, not just in Nigeria.  They are focusing on improving the economic growth of Nigeria with Dash.
They are getting involved in rural communities, youth, media, women and other stake holders to help in the process of exploring the opportunities which the digital currencies present.  The good thing they see about Dash is that it takes just a few seconds to go through when compared to Bitcoin.
There has been a steady increase in the number of businesses accepting Dash.  They are accepting Dash for delicacies, fashion stores, and electronic accessories.
There is a lot of competition going on with banks and cryptocurrencies striving for greater scalability and application cases. The elimination of a centralized authority is triggering fears of scandal.  However, the introduction of the global currencies is set to help with the different barriers in cross-border transactions.
While there is high polarity between the centralized and decentralize world, there is a lot of political activity happening among heavy weights.  We need to wait to see if something fruitful for the decentralized world happens in terms of improved mass adoption.
