Houston Dash goalkeeper Jane Campbell is scored against by the Utah Royals FC free kick during the second half of an NWSL Challenge Cup soccer match.
In a year marked by change and transition, a retooled Dash team appeared on pace for a statement win in its NWSL Challenge Cup opener Tuesday. But the team faded in the closing minutes, settling for a 3-3 draw against Utah Royals FC at Zions Bank Stadium in Herriman, Utah.
“We’re obviously a little disappointed. We got ourselves in a great position — 3-1 up with probably 10 minutes to go — and unfortunately, we gave away two really soft goals that cost us three points,” Dash coach James Clarkson said. “It was the first game in eight or nine months, so to come out and score three goals playing well for long periods of the game, I’m quite happy. Just disappointed in the result.”
The Dash hadn’t scored three goals in a game since August 2018.
Before they could score against Utah, the Royals took the lead in the 35th minute. Lo’eau LaBonta threaded a ball to put Amy Rodriguez on the attack. Rodriguez shipped the ball in to Diana Matheson, who outmaneuvered a pair of Dash defenders to redirect the ball into the net.
Royals goalkeeper Abby Smith marshaled the defense well enough to repel a few Dash opportunities as the half waned. But in first half stoppage time, a long ball gave Dash forward Veronica Latsko space down the left side of the field.
She popped a pass toward Rachel Daly in the center of the box. Daly gathered the ball then slotted it into the top shelf to draw even.
“Exactly what we expected and what we’ve seen through preseason. That’s the sort of thing that Rachel can give us,” Clarkson said. “She’s a constant thorn in the opposition’s defense, and it really stretches the back line.”
The Dash seized control in the opening moments of the second half.
In the 47th minute, midfielder Kristen Mewis booted a corner kick to the center of the area, and Daly rose to head it into the top of the net to take the lead.
In the 61st minute, Daly almost scored a hat trick when she jabbed the ball away from Smith as she tried to clear it. Daly pounced on the loose ball and poked it into the net before it rolled past the endline, but referee Karen Abt ruled that Daly had prevented Smith from playing the ball and disallowed the goal.
Seven minutes later, new acquisitions Katie Stengel and Shea Groom connected for a goal that gave Houston a two-score advantage with 23 minutes left in regulation.
Following an offseason of notable roster moves, months of waiting to start the season and the erasure of its preseason, Houston appeared to have an early statement win by the time Daly, Stengel and Groom had all been substituted out with 10 minutes to play.
Utah midfielder Veronica Boquete took the sheen off the would-be win when she scored in the 82nd minute.
Houston’s lead permanently deteriorated when Boquete located Tziarra King on a long free kick that ultimately leveled the match in the 89th minute.
“We are excited to get back on the field. I thought we put together some really good football today,” Groom said. “Obviously, we are not happy with the result at all. I think it is a good place to start, to place three balls in the back of the net, it was good for us.”
