By Steven Anderson May 7, 2020 Off
Dash has facilitated access to their newsroom.  Press inquiries need to be directed to the press team at the newsroom. Dash is eagerly waiting to hear press inquiries.
Dash tweeted :  “Welcome to the Dash Press Room. Here you will find the latest press releases, media materials, and product updates on Dash Digital Cash.”
The latest press releases are made available from the Dash Newsroom.
Sydney Ifergan, the crypto expert, tweeted : “Excited to see Dash welcoming press inquiries and dedicating a Dash News Room for the purpose.  Nothing like the press to improve the reach of any product or service. Cryptocurrency is no exception.”
In a recent AMA with OKEx, Dash Core Group CMO @Fernando was questioned on Dash Future Plans.
Fernando Gutierrez clarified on why the Dash Platform is an important and exciting technology.
Dash Core Group CMO, when questioned on what are the future plans for Dash? He replied, our most exciting upcoming technology launch is the Dash Platform.  Dash Platform will add many new capabilities to the network.  It will allow developers to build Dash-Native applications in an easy way that leverage Dash as a payment method while providing the user experience that consumers have to come to expect from traditional payments apps.
He further clarified, Dash Platform turns the network into a decentralized, consensus-backed database-as-a service.  We are providing the mission data layer in the vision for a decentralized web. For the developers out there, our product is analogous to a decentralized version of Cloud Firestore from Firebase.
By registering a data contract with the platform, users can benefit from Dash Consensus being performed against the state of your data as users submit and retrieve information from the network.  One of the first use cases for our platform is our decentralized name service, which provides human-readable usernames that will replace the need for exchanging cryptographic addresses to make payments.
Dash platform is crucial to the major upgrades we are making to our wallets, which will allow for contacts, payments by username, and, in general, user experience on par with any major payments application.  All of this will come without sacrificing any of the security and privacy that makes decentralized networks so valuable.
Fernando also clarified about how ChainLocks play a role in protecting the network versus 51% attacks, thereby enabling LLMQ-Based InstantSend transactions to become FINAL in a second with ZERO confirmations! This he stated permits #Dash to be the digital cash, as the payments are secure and instantly re-spendable!
