Dash is planning to expand its growth in Latin America in the coming years. Rodrigo Ambrissi from Dash Dinheiro Digital arranged a YouTube Video conference session to discuss the Dash’s growth and adoption of cryptocurrency. Many leaders of Dash from various states and sectors like Venezuela, Brazil, Cabimas, Dash Text, Dash Help, and Mexico, etc., participated in the video conference.
According to Giorgio Marinetti of Dash Help, the adoption of cryptocurrency can take place by improving communication. It means that the essential documents and instructions like marketing materials, general guidelines, and technical documents should be in the Latin language like Spanish and Portuguese. In the video conference, he discussed the businesses that need to include Dash, but they need a little help to do so. The Dash Cabimas helped mall parking garage to adopt Dash, and soon, it will expand into other parking garages in the city.
Roel Castano of Dash Mexico discussed the remittances which are the best for Dash and cryptocurrency. It is not because of the transaction speed of Dash and inexpensiveness, but some areas cannot access the remittance nearby. On the other hand, Brazil is highly corrupted and has economic issues but then also has a decent economy. Therefore, Dash Brazil is planning to have a market segment for Dash by spreading awareness about the efficient ways to save and spend the money.
In the video conference, the entire focus of cryptocurrency adoption was in Latin America. Many countries like Venezuela are dealing with hyperinflation, and countries like Mexico are looking for a method, and individuals to help them in sending and receiving remittances. Dash combined with many exchanges, digital currency ATM providers, and remittance solution provider, Bitnovo to chase the remittance markets.
Many other projects that can help in the growth of the world have already initiated in Latin America due to the market demand like Dash Text. In Latin and South America, the majority of the population do not have smartphones and not even basic mobile phones. They lack advanced functionality features in smartphones; hence, they need any other simple way to spend Dash. Some problem is sorted out by the Dash Text which allows a user to send Dash by an SMS text. Now, it will expand in Latin, South, North America as well as Europe via SMS service and integration of Telegram.
