Dash uses the X11 Chained hashing algorithm which is designed to increase decentralization and ASIC resistance.
The cryptocurrency market is quickly becoming one of the biggest industries in the world. The technology behind cryptocurrencies is disruptive and capable of supporting a wide variety of use-cases. There are thousands of start-ups and small businesses interested in cryptocurrencies, but the landscape is about to change quickly as giants such as Facebook have also expressed a clear interest in blockchain technology.
is a cryptocurrency that allows faster and more private transactions while being user-friendly and more scalable overall. Currently ranked 19th by market capitalization, Dash is still one of the most popular cryptocurrencies .
Dash was initially known as "Xcoin" but was quickly renamed to "Darkcoin". It was designed as a privacy-centric cryptocurrency based on the original cryptocurrency,
. One of the main features of Darkcoin was the ability to send anonymous transactions, something that Bitcoin did not offer.
The team of Darkcoin created ‘DarkSend’, a decentralized implementation of CoinJoin to stack transactions together and send them anonymously. Evan Duffield, the creator of Dash, had different ideas on how to improve Bitcoin, but his ideas were not taken seriously by the core members of Bitcoin at the time.
DarkCoin was eventually rebranded to Dash, which is derived from the term "digital cash". Dash uses a Masternode Network that allows users to run a masternode if they control over 1,000 coins. Masternode operators are rewarded regularly for providing their services to clients on the network.
Some basic information about Dash:
The main mission of Dash has always been to become an improved version of Bitcoin. Its creator, Evan Duffield, wanted to implement an improved version of the original proof-of-work consensus algorithm and create a more scalable network.
Duffield believed that Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies had a problem with privacy. Dash is looking to solve this issue by allowing users to anonymize their transactions optionally.
One of the most notable features of Dash is ‘Masternodes’. These are defined as ‘any computing device that maintains the network’. Basically, Masternodes are like a second tier of confirmation for the Dash blockchain. Masternodes allow Dash users to access instant transactions as well as private transactions.
Users are free to run a masternode whenever they want as long as they meet the necessary requirements. They are incentivized to do so because they are rewarded with a portion of the Dash mining rewards.
The main use case of Dash is payments. Most cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin are quite slow when it comes to the confirmation of transactions, which makes them impractical for small payments. Dash, on the other hand, provides instant confirmations which allows the digital asset to be accepted in a broader range of businesses and markets.
Where to buy Dash and how to store it?
Being one of the most popular cryptocurrencies in the world, buying Dash is quite easy as it is accepted and listed on numerous exchanges. Dash has a USDT pair on Binance , the most popular cryptocurrency exchange, but you can also find Dash on many other popular exchanges like OKEx , Bitfinex and Huobi .
There are dozens of wallets available for Dash. You can simply store Dash on your Dash wallet or buy a hardware wallet like a Ledger Nano S or Trezor One for a more secure storing option.
Before downloading and using any cryptocurrency wallet software, make sure that you are downloading it from a legitimate source and that the software is up to date!
The main competitors of Dash are other coins offering private transactions or that are fully private like Monero , Zcash or PIVX . Although Monero is a private coin, it doesn’t allow users to opt-out of sending private transactions, all transactions are private and anonymous.
Dash is still one of the most popular cryptocurrencies in the world and its use has been increasing significantly. The ability to instantly confirm transactions as well as the possibility to send private transactions makes Dash a potential candidate to climb back intoto the top 10.
The team behind Dash has been working really hard to achieve the proposed roadmap and partnerships have been stacking up. The digital asset is already accepted in thousands of businesses across the world.
