Players from the North Carolina Courage and Portland Thorns FC knee out of respect for the Black Lives Matter movement during the first round of the NWSL Challenge Cup at Zions Bank Stadium.
The Houston Dash enter the NWSL Challenge Cup, which started Saturday, without their former captain, a U.S. national team player on the roster or a winning season in their history.
As it prepares to open the competition against the tournament-hosting Utah Royals on Tuesday, it’s looking to make a statement beyond the field.
“We’ve never made the playoffs, which isn’t good,” coach James Clarkson said. “Just pushing to be competitive in the league, to be in that top four and making that next step. We traditionally haven’t done well against the top four teams which, in a nine-team league, isn’t a good recipe to be successful.”
For Clarkson, there’s no better time to take that step. One of Houston’s four opening stage opponents (Reign FC) made the playoffs in 2018 and 2019.
Houston’s offseason changes have also opened the door for it to begin to establish its identity in what will amount to Clarkson’s second year.
“I think people see us as a team that doesn’t give up,” he said. “We’ve just got to add a bit of quality to that grit and determination.”
A new-look Reign team, which plays the Dash on July 4, now features former Dash regulars Amber Brooks and Sofia Huerta. Newly acquired defenders Megan Oyster and Katie Naughton are expected to bolster the heart of Houston’s backline after Brooks’ departure. Kealia Ohai Watt, the team’s first college draft pick in 2014, was traded to Chicago in exchange for Naughton and a draft pick.
Despite splitting the team’s goal-scoring lead with Huerta in 2019 (five), current forward and co-captain Rachel Daly enters the tournament looking to shoulder more of team’s offensive load.
Up front, Canadian forward Nichelle Prince is healthy following a knee injury during last year’s World Cup, which ended her 2019 league season. She’s expected to play in Utah despite losing her father last week. The Dash will also rely on a pair of young forwards who have impressed coaches in CeCe Kizer and Veronica Latsko
They’ll be supported by an experienced midfield that includes Sophie Schmidt and Kristie Mewis, who found her rhythm and finished second on the team in goals last season (four).
Clarkson’s most urgent focus is on defense, where goalkeeper Jane Campbell allowed a league-high 36 goals despite receiving multiple national team training camp invitations.
“A lot of it has to do with not giving up tough goals,” he said of Houston’s defense. “Then really improving on the counterattack because we weren’t very dangerous on the counterattack last year.”
Clarkson wants to win the tournament, but for Houston’s abridged season to be considered a success, he wants to see a competitiveness and a fluidity that he hasn’t consistently seen in its play.
“I think it’s obvious, we don’t have any (U.S.) national team players. We want to be a destination, a place that players want to come to, and part of that is being successful,” Clarkson said. “It’s potentially only five to seven games in the season, so it’s just a small snapshot, but we’ve got to be a team that people look at and go, ‘I think something positive is happening with the Dash and we want to be part of it.’”
