Home » Dash for use in Real Life Clarified in Webinar on April 29, 2020, Using the Dash Pay
Dash for use in Real Life Clarified in Webinar on April 29, 2020, Using the Dash Pay
By Maheen Hernandez April 29, 2020 Off
Dash Satang have waived the trading fees for Dash/THB, and Dash are further providing some decent merchandise for the winner.
PolisPay Crypto Wallet & Cards are organizing and broadcasting a webinar on April 29, 2020, Wednesday in which they will be detailing on how to use Dashpay in real-life goods.  They are also going to answer questions.
Dash retweeted :  “Voting is open for the @DashPay Trust Protectors Election & our CEO @PerryWoodin is on the ticket!  The Dash DAO Irrevocable Trust adds even further strength to the infrastructure & he’d love the opportunity to serve the DASH community for another term!”
There has been a lot of praises for the Dash Podcast on Friday for which the YouTube link in facilitated.
The Dash Podcast is considered significant because Hytham Abdel-Karim, also known as Unchained, of the Dash Investment Foundation (DIF) joined the podcast.  He spoke about the upcoming DIF supervisor election. He also spoke about the foundation using Vaultoro to hedge into gold, thus creating a situation where it will be possible to consider Dash to be partially backed by gold.
The podcast also discusses going deep into the DIF’s decision on beginning to work on GitHub, in a way making the whole open-source accountable and thus making a collaborative revolution possible in a completely non-technical part of the Dash ecosystem.
The Dash Podcast also covered the #FiatFreeChallenge, thereby creating an urge to get many people to living on Dash as much as possible to escape the potential future hyperinflation.
Sydney Ifergan, the crypto expert, tweeted :  “The Dash Podcast with Hytham Abdel-Karim gives a decent coverage on how far collaborative organizations have come. Venezuela continues the magic to work for Dash Text Adoption.”
Whether Fiat Free Challenge or anything else, it is normal for us to hesitate to take to any kind of change.  However, money is changing, and the world needs to adapt to the change slowly. Maybe the challenge can be a step forward to being living with Dash as a Fiat Free Solution, a spending alternative.
Dash has been around for 6 years now, and it is here to stay, and they are continuing to incorporate changes in payment systems.  The incubation period has been slow; it is set to get viral once people are trained to change from their old fiat ways to new crypto ways.
