EXCLUSIVE: Glenn McCuen (Bucket and Skinner’s Epic Adventures), Michael Park (Stranger Things), Gideon Emery (Teen Wolf), Jennifer Ikeda (Maniac) and Diego Guevara (Strapped for Danger) are set to recur in Dash & Lily, Netflix ’s 2020 romantic comedy series from Shawn Levy’s 21 Laps and Nick Jonas’ Image 32.
Based on the YA book series Dash & Lily’s Book of Dares by Rachel Cohn and David Levithan, the eight-episode holiday comedy revolves around cynical Dash (Austin Abrams) and optimistic Lily (Midori Francis). Trading dares, dreams and desires in the notebook they pass back and forth at locations all across New York City, they find they have more in common with each other than either expected.
McCuen will play Edgar Thibaud, a popular prep school boy from a privileged upbringing. Confident, flirtatious and sometimes oblivious, he’s a former bully who’s trying to reform.
Park is Gordon, Dash’s father, a world traveler who skis, sails and always manages to make his son feel small.
Emery will portray Adam, Lily’s father, a school administrator and works hard to shelter his children from the harsher realities of the adult world.
Ikeda is set as Grace, Lily’s mother, a poetry scholar who’s taught her daughter to find the beauty in everyday life.
Guevara plays Benny, the boyfriend of Lily’s brother Langston (Troy Iwata). He’s a compassionate romantic who encourages Lily to step out of her comfort zone.
Joe Tracz is writer, executive producer and showrunner for Dash & Lily. Levy and Josh Barry executive produce for 21 Laps and Jonas for Image 32. Cohn and Levithan co-executive produce.
Brad Silberling will direct and executive produce the first two episodes. Fred Savage and Pamela Romanowsky (Riverdale) also will direct.
Ikeda is repped by Artists & Representatives Agency and manager Sullivan Talent Group. Emery is repped by Artists & Representatives Agency. Guevara is repped by The Price Group. McCuen is managed by Michael Yanni.
Subscribe to Deadline Breaking News Alerts and keep your inbox happy.
