By dan saada June 18, 2020 Off
Dash pay is trending to be one of the biggest names in cryptocurrency. While there are several other cryptocurrencies, it is not easy for investors to know which one to trade and why?
Dash has been around since its launch in 2014.  Dash is hailed as a practical alternative to cash and credit cards.  They are also serving the international remittance market.  Several businesses accept Dash and when it comes to real-world adoption the project is a real leader.
Dash is the first blockchain to have implemented the idea of Masternodes.  MasterNodes create a second layer on the top of the mining layer.  This is used to validate activities on the Dash network. Of note, 45% of the block rewards are allocated to the masternode network.
The Dash Masternode Technology enables several key features like InstantSend, Privatesend and lot of other features.
Sydney Ifergan, the crypto expert tweeted:  “Dash helps transact value instantly and there is no need to wait for long confirmation times. InstantSend.”
InstantSend is good because the transactions can be possibly finalized on a timescale in the order of 1 to 2 seconds.
The good thing is that the master node network verifies the allocated funds for the transaction.  The funds are locked in.  After 1 to 2 seconds the recipient of the funds will be able to spend it immediately.  There is no need for any kind of uncertainty.
Several other cryptocurrencies are trying to achieve what Dash is able to already do in just one to 2 seconds.
Dash PrivateSend permits the users to mix their Dash via different network participants, the good thing is that the origin of funds will be obfuscated in the given transaction.  This is a good thing for users who are willing to transact anonymously at the same time maintaining their transactions private.
The major idea is to accumulate more gold by rebalancing the two uncorrelated assets.
Demelza Hays, the strategist clarifies, “Any money made on our investments can be used to buy Dash off of the open market, which we then burn. Burning Dash reduces the supply, and theoretically should increase the price of the Dash. This is one way the Foundation can give back to the community without having an ultimate beneficial owner.”
“The main idea is to sell Dash for Gold when Dash breaches 50% of the portfolio and to sell Gold for Dash when Dash falls below 10% of the portfolio. This ensures a countercyclical trading strategy that sells assets high and buys assets low.”
The Dash to gold rebalancing strategy is the widespread talk in the community.  The Dash Investment Foundation claims to be the first of its kind ownerless and membership less investment fund.  The focus is to improve on the value held by DIF.
