By dan saada May 4, 2020 Off
Dash has partnered with AnkerPay to grow the ecosystem in the sub- Saharan Africa.  Dash is hailed the top digital currency for payments in e-commerce.  AnkerPay is a South Africa based cryptocurrency payments and ATMs company.
AnkerPay has decided to integrate several features from the Dash Ecosystem in their payment processes.  Instasend, is one of the key features of Dash.  It is good because the Instasend feature completes all the transactions on the network within just two seconds, which is inclusive of settlement.  The good thing is that the funds can be re-spent by the recipient immediately.  Therefore, it provides for excellent user experience when purchasing goods or services.
The transactions are converted to the local, national currency, thus making it easy for the merchant to be able to accept Dash payments without having to worry about volatility and conversion issues.
South Africa has a usage pattern of both fiat and digital currency in a healthy mix. Thus, this move is considered to be a good move for Dash users in South Africa. They will now be able to pay for goods and services; however, now they will be able to purchase Dash Directly. This is a very clear use case.
Since AnkerPay has several adoption based software providing for interoperability and improved functionality, it is easy for merchants, users, and corporations to integrate cryptocurrencies.
Sydney Ifergan, the crypto expert, tweeted :  “Dash has already proved their use case in terms of paying for purchases and services, what is happening now is an expansion of their capabilities to extended territories across the world.”
Payment is the most important use case facilitated by Dash. While it feels like crypto payments are everywhere, the adoption, in reality, did not actually make it to all members in the community. Several customers hold the Dash, and they have not spent it.  The trend of spending Dash cryptocurrency for local transactions is slowly accelerating.
Dash has been working across different communities across the world in improving on merchant adoption. Accepting Dash using QR code is one of the popular methods.  The sooner a merchant is ready to accept Dash; they are further provided with all the help to advertise their acceptance of the cryptocurrency. Several industries are accepting Dash.
Dash is also working in several areas as a non-payment company. It is working as a decentralized autonomous organization.  By DAO, it means the core processes of the business are predefined in computer code. There is no CEO for Dash, and it works like a democracy, where people participate in a rule-based manner.
