Dash Wilder Shares Possible New Ring Name, Takes Shot At WWE
Dash Wilder dropped a tease on his new ring name, and he couldn't help but take a couple of shots at WWE.
The Revival 's departure from the WWE has been obvious for quite a while, and at this point, we're simply awaiting a formal announcement from one of the parties.
Last year, it was reported that The Revival, along with Mike and Maria Kanellis, requested to be released from WWE . The company never followed through with those apparent wishes, but Scott Dawson and Dash Wilder reportedly asked again in January , only to be turned down.
The Revival have already filed for numerous trademarks , including the name "Shatter Machine." Now, Steven Fernandes of PWInsider.com is reporting that Wilder applied a trademark for "Cash Wheeler."
On his Twitter page, Wilder changed his name to "D. Wheeler," and he removed his old avatar. However, his Twitter username is still @DashWilder WWE.
Not only that, but Wilder took some apparent shots at WWE, responding to tweets from Riddick Moss and Gentleman Jack Gallagher.
Everyone does now. Sad, really. Sorry you had to go through that. https://t.co/Q0pfU05AJP
These are, of course, even stronger signs that The Revival are preparing to leave WWE for good. Wilder wouldn't trademark a new ring name nor take shots at the company if he and Dawson were planning to sign new contracts.
RELATED: Backstage Update On The Revival's Status, Initial Plans For Them At WrestleMania
It was reported several weeks ago that WWE pitched The Revival offers worth around $700,000 annually . But money doesn't seem to be the top priority for Dawson and Wilder, who are obviously keen on new opportunities.
But don't get too excited about these two heading elsewhere just yet. Though Dawson's deal expires next month, reports state that Wilder's runs through mid-June, as WWE added time on his contract due to time missed.
The Revival will go down as one of the most accomplished WWE duos of the 2010s, with five total WWE tag team championship belts on their resume. But the company hasn't maximized the skill sets of these two stars, and you can't blame Wilder and Dawson for wanting to leave. WWE has ignored the tag team division for far too long, and other companies (hello, AEW) would make better use of the two superstars.
