By Steven Anderson March 21, 2020 Off
The current time period is weird for the cryptocurrency market and investors; however, such updates keep things moving.  What is happening now is a health care issue and is extreme in nature.  We cannot judge the overall situation by the current trend alone. It just seems like irrespective of whether the market is bullish or bearish, DASH keeps building.
The markets are sure scariest now; however, this will all change.
The #Dash block reward decreases by 7.14% every 383 days. The Reduction ETA is on Monday, 27th April 2020.
Dash involves mining, which is about repeated solving of hash algorithms until a valid solution is arrived.  The new units of currency created by the miner are the block rewards.  To prevent the endless inflation of the currency, the block reward is reduced at regular intervals.  Reducing the block reward by a smaller amount every year provides a smoother transition to a fee-based economy.
Sydney Ifergan, the Crypto Expert, tweeted :  “Keep Moving to the next best step.  Dash cryptocurrency and the rest of the Altcoins are doing exactly this while keeping up the quarantine. Despite things being slow, we will hopefully deem it to be sure.”
Dash recently joined Skrill, while built on the top of blockchain technology, Dash operates on a self-funding and self-governing model.
And, yet another disruptive facet of Dash is that they call it RIP for traveler’s check as they feel it is convenient to use digital currency.
Dash came up with the release of Dash Platform v0.11. This release facilitates the ability to register public data contracts with DAPI for web browsers.  It also offers installation packages for Evonet and local development.
The Release announcement stated that the very important component of this release is to update Evonet. Also, developers will be able to experiment with the software in other environments like in local development or private devenet.  The light client work is ongoing, and significant security improvements have been made, thereby making it possible for anyone to be able to create and register data contracts.  Thus the Dash Platform can be unlocked and be used as a decentralized, consensus-based Database-as-a-service.
This release has breaking changes.  Therefore, that data previously on Evonet will become incompatible with the newest version.  Therefore the preexisting data on Evonet has been deleted, and developers were requested to wipe any data stored on their local setup.
