ECB Lagarde’s screw-up horrible trading day into a catastrophic one. Her remark during the central bank’s press conference that the ECB is “not here to close spreads” sent stock markets and peripheral bond markets into tailspin. The ECB’s earlier announced easing package had already received a lukewarm response, painfully pointing out that there’s not much the central bank can do and that coordination with fiscal policy (e.g. UK) is totally absent. European stock markets recorded double digit losses with the Euro Stoxx 50 closing below key 2673 support, suggesting a technical return to the 2011 low (1935). US stock markets lost over 9% with the S&P 500 closing in on the 2018 low (2346). Peripheral bond spreads widened significantly: 58 bps for Italy, 52 bps for Greece, 32 bps for Portugal, 25 bps for Spain, but also 20 bps for Belgium and France. This week’s crisis mode on financial markets results in a significant dash for cash with investors getting rid of all illiquid assets (e.g. decline of gold prices). It could also be the reason why (long-term US) bond yields didn’t drop during yesterday’s huge risk aversion. Daily changes on the US yield curve ranged between -9.8 bps (5-yr) and +5.2 bps (30-yr). Changes on the German yield curve varied between -0.3 bps (10-yr) and +3.7 bps (5-yr). Towards the end of yesterday’s trading session, the Fed announced a third increase this week in the amount it puts available for repos. Over the next month, they are prepared to inject a cumulative total of above $5tn in funding markets.
Asian stock markets reverse part of the opening losses, but remain in negative territory. Japan and South Korea underperform. Core bond yields are slightly higher. We stick with our view and prefer to err on the side of caution. Ignore any bear market rallies at this stage. There remains too much misplaced trust in what monetary policy can and fiscal policy is willing to do. Yesterday’s ECB meeting was exemplary. The dash for cash is creating dollar scarcity off US shores, prompting questions whether the Fed should re-install USD swap lines with other major central banks like it did in 2008. Such sign of coordinated action could be a possible trigger for some market calm. The same could be true in case of a strong G7/G20 commitment over the weekend on the fiscal front. Low oil prices continue to pose another risk, which could cause problems in the US junk bond market where energy companies are the biggest representative. Free cash flow is a scarce good. Credit spreads in general are coming under pressure and add a credit crisis element to the current economic downturn. It’s hard to see a lasting improvement in risk sentiment against this background. Technically: The speed of decline in core bond yields is slowing. We might get some stabilization at best.
This non-exhaustive information is based on short-term forecasts for expected developments on the financial markets. KBC Bank cannot guarantee that these forecasts will materialize and cannot be held liable in any way for direct or consequential loss arising from any use of this document or its content. The document is not intended as personalized investment advice and does not constitute a recommendation to buy, sell or hold investments described herein. Although information has been obtained from and is based upon sources KBC believes to be reliable, KBC does not guarantee the accuracy of this information, which may be incomplete or condensed. All opinions and estimates constitute a KBC judgment as of the data of the report and are subject to change without notice.
