The movement to stop the Phase II portion of the Devola sewering project is holding another meeting to seek community support.
DASH – Devola Against Sewering Homes – has engaged a Canton attorney and is now trying to raise enough money to litigate a case against the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. Andrew Whittaker, the group’s president, said Gregory DeGulis has the experience and expertise to take the case to court with some promise of success.
“There’s been an ad hoc sewer group in Devola since 2013,” Whittaker said, noting that the Ohio EPA’s intent to order sewering in the community became known that year. “They have met with lawyers in the past, but nobody told them how to get organized and protect themselves. You do that with an association, so that if there’s any legal blowback, it’s against the association, not the individuals. He told us how to organize that, he went over some of the issues. He’s the only one we’ve talked to who really seemed interested in fighting for us.”
Whittaker said at this point the group is primarily concerned with opposing the EPA order, not fighting a second lawsuit that the city of Marietta has against the county for not sewering Devola. He said the group is taking things one step at a time.
“As of right now, we have no plan to file suit against the city or the county,” he said. “We are fundraising, we’ve hired an attorney, the law firm is finished with their research and have a strategy, and we’ll be taking action soon.”
The Devola sewer situation is complicated, with the Ohio EPA having years ago ordered the community to come off septic tank and dry disposal wells. The county struck an agreement with the city of Marietta for waste treatment, and the city upgraded it wastewater treatment plant. The city is suing the county because it built additional capacity into its treatment plant to handle sewage that never came.
The lawsuit is scheduled to be heard in the first week of June, Whittaker said.
The county is now in the design stage for the collection system but hasn’t gotten to the stage of taking construction bids.
Whittaker said the group is primarily opposed to what is termed “double remedy.” The matter originated from a complaint in 2009 when a county board of health study found nitrate levels above permissable thresholds in the community’s drinking water supply. A reverse osmosis treatment plant was commissioned in 2013 to address that problem, but the groundwater contamination remained, and the state EPA directed the county to remedy that with a sanitary sewer system.
“Our drinking water is fixed, so why do we still need to be sewered?” Whittaker said.
DeGulis, contacted Tuesday, said details of the legal strategy are bound by client confidentiality and couldn’t be disclosed, but he said he’s prepared.
“I’ve reviewed the pleadings, looked at almost everything,” he said.
DeGulis said he was approached by the Devola group.
“Our firm concentrates on environmental law, we’ve done a lot of challenges to EPA orders,” he said.
The DASH group is scheduled to meet again at 6:30 p.m. March 20 in the Elizabeth Sugden Broughton Community Building on State Route 821.
Michael Kelly can be contacted at mkelly@mariettatimes.com.
• Nonprofit organization formed to oppose Devola sewerage project.
• Donations used for legal expenses.
• Group will meet at 6:30 p.m. March 20 at the Elizabeth Sugden Broughton Community Center.
