• The overall outlook of the coin market is bullish in trend.
• The bears may have a temporal control.
• Resistance levels : $130.00, $140.00, $150.00
DASHUSD price may head towards $120 as crypto traders turn bullish. After a few days of increased actions by the bears, the momentum lost and bulls return to take over. $81.35 bullish candle opens yesterday’s session in the resistance area with high $88.18 and low at $80.52 returns the crypto within the range.
Today’s daily candle at $85.75 opens with the formation of a pin bar hammer in the resistance area.
Price of Dash is initially up at $87.70 above the two EMAs in the resistance area, an indication of upward momentum in the price of the coin.
Hence, the stochastic signal pointing up at level 81 % in the overbought region is an indication that the crypto’s price is in upward momentum, and buyers are in control at the moment in the medium-term.
The coin is in a bullish trend in its short-term outlook. The bulls’ increase momentum moves the price up at $88.18 with its wick touching the resistance line area during yesterday's session.
Today’s 4-hour opening candle at $85.75 in the resistance area is bullish as the bulls remain dominant in the market.
DASHUSD rises further to $87.70 in the resistance area. Bear’s brief return drops the price down at $85.42 in the support area as the session continues.
Reactions from the bulls now move the price up at $86.49 above the two EMAs, which indicates that the bulls are in control of the market at the present.
The signal of the stochastic oscillator points up at level 79% in the overbought region implies upward momentum in the price of Dash within the range in the short-term.
Disclaimer: The presented information is subjected to market condition and may include the very own opinion of the author. Please do your ‘very own’ market research before making any investment in cryptocurrencies. Neither the writer nor the publication (bitcoinexchangeguide.com) holds any responsibility for your financial loss.
I will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.
