Dash leads the cryptocurrency recovery, testing the short-term resistance at $78.
DASH/USD grinds towards a possible triangle breakout, targeting $90.
Dash is among the biggest single digit gainers in the cryptocurrency market. Volatility is returning to the digital space following a drab action on Tuesday. DASH/USD is trading 5.46% higher on the day. The European session is likely to experience further upward movement ahead due to bullish trend and high trading volume.
The price is currently above the moving averages where the 200-day SMA is offering immediate support while the short term 50 SMA is in line to offer support at $70.00. Both the MACD and the RSI double-down in the increasing bullish influence. For instance, the RSI has bounced off support and point upwards. In other words, there is still room for growth before hitting oversold levels. Moreover, the MACD is in the positive region, emphasizing the growing bullish grip.
If the bullish action continues, Dash could break above the triangle resistance; a move that could stretch the bullish leg towards $90. Dash traded highs above $140 January before retreating in February and plunging to lows under $40 in March.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
