Dash Living Expands into Singapore Adding 200 Units, Quickly Becoming One of the Largest Coliving Contenders in Asia Pacific
HONG KONG and SINGAPORE, Jan. 7, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Dash Living , Hong Kong's #1 serviced living community, has expanded its presence to Singapore, its first stop of paving the way into Asia Pacific, through the acquisition of Singapore coliving company Easycity.
Backed by MindWorks Ventures , with US$10 million of funding to date, Dash Living will have over 900 units across two of the most vibrant cities in the Asia-Pacific region, with the new addition of 200 units from its Singapore entity. "All-inclusive, affordable and flexible accommodation for millennials is a sizable problem which impacts the next generation. Being a millennial myself, I'm excited to share Dash's offerings regionally beginning with Singapore," said Aaron Lee.
In Hong Kong, Dash Living has over 100,000 sqft under its management, spanning across prime locations such as Causeway Bay, Wan Chai, Central, Tsim Sha Tsui, and Jordan in Hong Kong, and are expected to announce more new projects in the foreseeable future.
As for its latest additions in Singapore, the Dash Coliving units are located in CBD areas as well as city-fringe areas such as Geylang, Paya Lebar, Farrer Park, Balestier, Pasir Panjang, and Clementi. Fuelled with Dash Living's technology and resources, an aggressive expansion in Singapore has been planned, under the leadership of Aaron Lee and ex-Easycity founders Alex Liu and Wesley Wen, now appointed as the executive management team of Dash Living Singapore. "Dash Singapore is aiming to provide its members with much wider choices of locations and features across the island. Enhanced by the upgraded services, new perks, and the tenant community, living with Dash will be more convenient and exciting than ever before," said Alex Liu.
Coliving is now the fastest-growing product of Dash Living. Dash Living has just announced the official launch of its 51-unit coliving product in Hong Kong in October 2019, where the product occupies 4 floors of ensuite studio bedrooms, almost 2,000 sqft of common space including a fully equipped kitchen, a balcony, and a rooftop. With the new addition of the Lion City units, Dash Coliving is now located at the heart of the primed Tsim Sha Tsui district in Kowloon, Hong Kong, as well as across the Singapore island.
Dash Living is the new generation of rental solution in Hong Kong for urban professionals. Through Dash Suites, Coliving, Hotels, and Dashare, our mission is to create a global accommodation community through sharing economies and tech, empowering today's hyper-mobile, tech-savvy millennials to live in the most expensive cities in the world.
MindWorks Ventures was established in 2014 and is a venture capital firm with its headquarters in Hong Kong and offices in Beijing and Jakarta. MindWorks utilizes a Pan-Asia strategy to source direct investments in technology companies across both Greater China and Southeast Asia.
MindWorks currently manages US$410 million in total net asset value across its three funds and is a co-investment partner of the Innovation Technology Venture Fund initiated by the Hong Kong government.
