By Maheen Hernandez January 21, 2020 Off
Dash is 6 years old and is actively progressing.  The numbers of active android devices with Dash Wallet in Venezuela have increased by 562% from May 2019 through December 2019.  The real world liquidity for the Dash network is increasing from the top 20 exchanges.
Ryan Taylor, CEO of Dash Core Group one of the organizations that work for Dash Network, in the past stated that the central bank issued cryptocurrencies will be the real future of cryptocurrencies.
Sydney Ifergan, the Crypto Expert, tweeted :  “The coming of Dash Debit Cards and the Listings in Multiple Cryptocurrency Exchanges is making Dash a more practical cryptocurrency. I’m staying tuned to the important developments with Dash.”
Dash has been following a sustained uptrend from the beginning of January 2020.  The utility of Dash in Venezuela is the major contributing factor. The use of Dash in Venezuela dominates Bitcoin in the country.  The shifting sentiments in the overall cryptocurrency market could be the reason for the price improvement.
However, the price of DASH/USD declined by 30% from its peak value of $144.  There is a trend reversal, and the bullish action is taken over by the bears. The surges seem to be tiring.
Dash tweeted :  “CoinBene global has added Dash/USDT and more features to our partnership! This agreement adds even more real-world liquidity for the #Dash Network from a top 20 exchange. @CoinBene users can now transact on Brazil and global platforms as well! #crypto.”
Dash cryptocurrency is a lot ahead of its competitors. Interestingly, the cryptocurrency space has evolved to be something more than just Bitcoin and Litecoin .  A range of Altcoins is competing with each other with excellent use cases.
In 2020, the Blockchain usernames will be replacing alphanumeric addresses.  Instant send facilitates instant settlement and immediately re-spendable transactions.  Optional privacy is promoted at the protocol level.  The core team enables an irrevocable trust with commit access that is legally controlled by the Network. A wide range of decentralized applications fuels mass adoption.
Being able to spend Dash anywhere is a plus.  Any amount any time to spend on groceries, coffee, or a phone bill makes is too practical.  People are not interested in owning money they cannot spend.
People are looking at money that they can spend on their everyday affairs. Dash fulfills the need. And the Dash is on the agenda to improve on more of these features in 2020.
Mass adoption is expected to get a lot easier than before.
