Public transit companies are making efforts to keep passengers healthy this spring.
Local transit companies are making efforts to keep commuters healthy and safe this spring as fears of coronavirus concern travelers.
“We’re a public transit agency, so of course safety is always our top priority. We are taking precautions and preparing in accordance with CDC guidelines to protect both our passengers and our personnel,” said Stephanie Salzone, DASH safety and security manager.
DASH is increasing facility and vehicle cleaning with a special focus on critical touchpoints such as door handles, handrails and other surfaces. These cleanings will incorporate disinfection procedures indicated to be effective against COVID-19. These measures apply to all DASH buses and King Street Trolleys. More information about DASH bus and other Alexandria Trasit Co. measures is available here .
The City of Alexandria, the Alexandria Health Department, Inova Health System, and the Alexandria City Public Schools will host an online virtual information session on Thursday, March 12, from 8 to 9 p.m., to provide information and answer questions about the COVID-19 coronavirus. The session will also address how government agencies, businesses and residents can prepare. A recording of the session will be available after the session ends.
The Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA), which operates Metro rail and bus, is also taking precautions against the virus.
Metro activated its Pandemic Flu Plan (PFP) on Jan. 29, based on early reports of a novel (new) coronavirus, and is now at phase two of the four-phase system. "Phase two puts Metro on a readiness footing to respond quickly in the event of an outbreak in our region. We are following the PFP’s guidance to ensure that Metro is prepared, including activation of Pandemic Task Force, an agency-wide team of senior-level officials from key departments at Metro," according to the agency. More information is available here .
Like DASH, Metro has stepped up cleaning efforts and reminds passengers of a few simple preventative measures:
Wash your hands before and after using public transit. If fresh running water and soap are not available, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol content.
Sneeze or cough into a tissue, discard the tissue as soon as possible and wash your hands.
Stay home if you are feeling under the weather -- even if it's "just" a sore throat.
Clean and disinfect frequently-touched surfaces.
