At 11 a.m. Eastern Time, on September 5, 2019, Dash Cash, the world's leading digital currency, was displayed on the iconic Nasdaq Screen in Times Square.
NEW YORK, NY / ACCESSWIRE / September 8, 2019 / At 11 a.m. Eastern Time, on September 5, 2019, Dash Cash, the world’s leading digital currency, was displayed on the iconic Nasdaq Screen in Times Square.
New York Times Square in New York is known as “the crossroads of the world”. Every year, the global business elites gather here. It is a well-deserved commercial core and a well-known landmark of wealth in the world. Among the many billboards at the Times Square, Nasdaq semi-cylindrical giant screen is one of the most remarkable landmarks, known as “the first screen in the world”, which has always been the display board for the world’s top outstanding companies. Outstanding brands such as Baidu, Huawei and Ant Financial Group are displayed on this screen.
This is the first time that Dash Cash has demonstrated to the world a new generation of mathematical cash that represents the mainstream direction of future development by virtue of the technological strength and model innovation of the world’s top blockchains.
Dash Cash adheres to the Decentralized Thought of Satoshi Nakamoto, and it is the realization of Satoshi Nakamoto’s ideas. It is completely de-centralized, which is the inevitable outcome of technological power. Dash Cash collects core advantages of the mainstream currencies in the world and subverts the traditional mining mode with the global innovative mode, thereby realizing the global seconds settlement, global minimum handling fee, high concurrent settlement capacity, ultimate privacy protection and no-net payment, etc. It is expected to become a global digital currency. Dash Cash integrates the bottom technology of blockchain into real life, making global payments safer, more convenient and faster, and thereby becoming the next generation of digital cash in the fast-growing world.
Dash Cash ‘s huge advertisement was displayed the Nasdaq screen, the landmark building of Times Square in New York, USA, to show the world Dash Cash’s ambition of internationalization strategy, which is also a strong proof of its growing strength.
As the pioneer of technological innovation in the next generation of digital cash payment application blockchain in the world, Dash Cash demonstrates its influence to the world and leads the development trend of global digital currency.
