By Maheen Hernandez May 27, 2020 Off
In the current situation where several projects are pivoting away from building efficient payment infrastructure and focusing on tokenization, Dash seems to be doing something right and therefore is attracting big names in the esports industry.
Dash tweeted :  “Use Dash digital cash to buy real-world goods and services such as games, movies & TV shows, music, clothing, food & more! CryptoRefills supports 100’s of Gift Cards in 180 Countries & top ups at over 600 Mobile Operators!”
Amanda asked the Founder of eSports gaming platform GetReadyRaider about what Dash on-ramps there will be for gamers! She also asked why he decided to use Dash as the exclusive payment method for the eSports gaming platform with guild management tools that has tournaments and leagues for games like World of Warcraft.
Sydney Ifergan, the crypto expert tweeted :  “With Dash gaining adoption at eSports the convenience which gamers looking for in making crypto payments in the gaming industry is very clear. Dash Proved Right over Again.”
Amanda B. Johnson acknowledged that it is understood that this is an exclusive integration as in there are’nt other cryptocurrencies used on ReadyRaider. So, why did you choose to make Dash Exclusive?
Jacob Ballou, Founder of ReadyRaider replied, “So, this is where we get kind of technical with things. When you are talking about the Esports functionalities for certain match types that we are integrating, the only viable option would be the one that has instant settlements. I wanted this to be a crypto related product. And, I really do love Bitcoin very much but for this purpose it didn’t make sense because of the higher fees and wait times for some of the transactions.
So, let’s say we are doing a pay-to-play match, if a player challenges another player in one of those match types to say, let’s say like ten dollars. Each player is then is expected to accept the match and ten dollars from each player’s wallet gets deposited in to the pot.  I need that transfer to be instant and for the fees to be minimal.
You can’t have these players waiting for their transactions to clear in order for the system to prove that their match got accepted and then once the winning entries are input in to the system you can’t have them being charged another higher fee and waiting longer than needed to collect their winnings.  It just didn’t make sense for us to incorporate any other form of payment.
We’re talking about Crypto and Dash had everything that we needed. “
