Dash remains under heavy downside pressure as the coin fell to levels not seen since Feb. 2017.
The DASH/USD pair has declined by over 30 percent since the start of November and is now trading over 50 percent below its current 2019 trading peak.
Technical analysis shows that the DASH/USD pair is heavily bearish while trading below the $57.00 level and is at risk of further protracted losses towards fresh multi-year trading lows.
The four-hour time frame shows that an inverted head and shoulders pattern has recently been negated, with the invalidation target located around the $42.00 level.
The daily time frame shows that a complex head and shoulders pattern has recently been triggered following the breakout under the $57.00 level.
The bearish head and shoulders pattern has been forming since 2016, with its overall downside target extend well-below the DASH/USD pair’s all-time trading low.
DASH desperately needs to start to even out above the $57.00 level in order to stabilize itself and secure its medium to long-term prospects.
The Relative Strength Index on the daily time frame shows that the cryptocurrency is now at its most oversold reading since the cryptocurrency began trading.
The four-hour time frame shows that key technical resistance is located at the $57.00 and $68.00 levels. Buyers ideally need to rally price above both these levels in order to form a large reversal pattern.
Key technical resistance over the medium-term is located at the $75.00 and $83.00 levels.
The four-hour time frame is showing that the DASH/USD pair has strong medium-term technical support around the $47.00 and $42.00 levels.
Critical long-term technical support for the DASH/USD pair is located at the $33.00 level.
Dash is at risk of further protracted losses below the $50.00 level, with the $42.00 level the likely near-term bearish target.
Failure to rally the cryptocurrency back above the $57.00 level should be extremely negative for the DASH/USD pair over the medium to long-term.
The information on or accessed through this website is obtained from independent sources we believe to be accurate and reliable, but Decentral Media, Inc. makes no representation or warranty as to the timeliness, completeness, or accuracy of any information on or accessed through this website. Decentral Media, Inc. is not an investment advisor. We do not give personalized investment advice or other financial advice. The information on this website is subject to change without notice. Some or all of the information on this website may become outdated, or it may be or become incomplete or inaccurate. We may, but are not obligated to, update any outdated, incomplete, or inaccurate information.
You should never make an investment decision on an ICO, IEO, or other investment based on the information on this website, and you should never interpret or otherwise rely on any of the information on this website as investment advice. We strongly recommend that you consult a licensed investment advisor or other qualified financial professional if you are seeking investment advice on an ICO, IEO, or other investment. We do not accept compensation in any form for analyzing or reporting on any ICO, IEO, cryptocurrency, currency, tokenized sales, securities, or commodities.
