Eighteen heat races, three dashes and multiple rounds of King of the Hill match races highlighted opening night of the Great American Stock Car Shootout on Tuesday at the Hamilton County Speedway in Webster City, Iowa.
Featuring the Christie Door Company Iron Man Challenge built by Medieval Chassis, competitors in the American Racer USRA Stock Cars and USRA B-Mods plus Mensink Racing Products USRA Hobby Stocks wrestled for some serious money and a spot in Wednesday high-dollar finales.
Six heat races in each division gave every racer two opportunities to earn passing points. The top 12 following qualifying were locked into a ten-lap Dash for Cash to determine the lineup for the first six rows of Wednesday night's main events. The remainder go to Last Chance Races on Wednesday.
USMTS boss Todd Staley of Webster City outran Ankeny’s Pat Graham to pocket the $400 winner’s share of the money in the Stock Cars. Mark Elliott of Webster City and two Decorah drivers—Mitch Hovden and Dillon Anderson completed the top five.
Staley then drew the No. 4 pill to set the invert for Wednesday’s championship feature. That put Hovden on the pole with Elliott joining him on the front row.
The B-Mod dash went to polesitter Ben Moudry of Protivin, along with a $300 check for his effort. Cody Thompson of Sioux City finished second, Dan Hovden of Decorah was third, fourth went to Jim Chisholm of Osage and Postville’s Josh Roney rounded out the top five.
Ninth-place finisher Carter VanDenBerg of Oskaloosa was elevated to the pole position on Wednesday night when Moudry drew No.9 for the invert following his win. Webster City’s Doug McCullough will join him on the front row for the start of the B-Mod main event.
Continuing their never-ending battle for supremacy in the Hobby Stock ranks, defending track and national champion Eric Stanton of Carlisle pocketed $200 by defeating five-time Summit USRA Weekly Racing Series national champ Dustin Gulbrandson of Sioux Falls, S.D., in their Dash for Cash.
While in Integrity Trucking Victory Lane, Stanton drew pill No. 7 out of 12 in the bag which placed seventh-place finisher Daniel Ayers of Webster City on the pole Wednesday night with Tyler Schlumbohm of Sioux Falls, S.D., on the outside of the front row.
Tuesday’s program concluded with the King of the Hill where competitors in each class squared off in one-on-one green-white-checkered match races with winners advancing to the next round until just one was left standing.
Dustin Gulbrandson earned $300 in the winner-take-all contest for the Hobby Stocks by defeating Scott Dobel in the final round. Ben Moudry added $500 to his take for the night by toppling Jim Chisholm in the B-Mods and Ricky Thornton Jr. downed Dillon Anderson to seize a $750 paycheck.
The Great American Stock Car Shootout continues Wednesday at the historic half-mile dirt oval in Webster City, Iowa, and features Last Chance Races and Championship Races in all three classes.
Stock Cars are racing for a $2,000 top prize with no less than $150 to each of the main event starters. B-Mod will battle for $1,500 to win and $125 to start while the Hobby Stock winner gets $1,000 with all other starters pocketing a minimum $100.
Wild Wednesday: General admission tickets are $18. Seniors (62+) and juniors (12-16) are just $15. Kids ages 11 and under get in for free. Pit passes are $35 with youth (6-10) only $25 and kids 5 and under free.
The pits open at 3 p.m., grandstands open at 5, hot laps begin at 7:15 and racing gets underway at 7:30.
The AmericInn by Wyndham is the Official Host Hotel of the Hamilton County Speedway. Located just off the exit from Highway 20 at 411 Closz Drive, check them out online or call (515) 337-2611 to book your stay.
New competitors are welcome to join the action Wednesday but will start at the rear of a Last Chance Race. Entry fees are $75 for Stock Cars and $50 for B-Mods or Hobby Stocks.
Summit USRA Weekly Racing Series national points and Christie Door Company Iron Man Challenge points will be awarded.
Opening in July 1910, the Hamilton County Speedway is the oldest speedway in the state of Iowa. In 1938, work began on the current location at the Hamilton County Fairgrounds. The semi-banked half-mile dirt track was completed in the spring of 1939, and the first races were held on the track in September of that year.
The Hamilton County Speedway is located off US 20 at exit 140, then 1.2 miles north, then 0.5 mile east on Bank St., then 0.4 mile south on Bluff St. to the Hamilton County Fairgrounds in Webster City, Iowa. The physical address is 1200 Bluff St, Webster City, IA 50595.
1. (2) 14RT Ricky Thornton Jr., Chandler, Ariz.
6. (7) 14RT Ricky Thornton Jr., Chandler, Ariz.
10. (7) 14RT Ricky Thornton Jr., Chandler, Ariz., $55.
Round #1 – Hansmeier defeated Panos; Anderson defeated Sybesma; Thornton defeated Staley; Hovden defeated Huls; Borchardt defeated Arends; Elliott defeated Falck; Keller defeated Brown.
Quarter-Finals – Anderson defeated Hansmeier; Thornton defeated Elliott; Hovden defeated Borchardt; Anderson defeated Keller.
Semi-Finals – Thornton defeated Hovden; Anderson had a bye.
Finals – Thornton ($750) defeated Anderson.
Round #1 – Moudry defeated McCoy; Hovden defeated Sachau; Joe Chisholm defeated Elliott; Jim Chisholm defeated ; Thompson defeated VanDenBerg.
Quarter-Finals – Moudry defeated Hovden; Jim Chisholm defeated Joe Chisholm; Thompson had a bye.
Semi-Finals – Moudry defeated Thompson; Jim Chisholm had a bye.
Finals – Moudry ($500) defeated Jim Chisholm.
3. (3) 8 Levi Vander Weide, Sioux Falls, S.D.
2. (4) 8 Levi Vander Weide, Sioux Falls, S.D.
8. (5) 8 Levi Vander Weide, Sioux Falls, S.D., $50.
Quarter-Finals – Dobel defeated Schlumbohm; Vander Weide defeated Rieks; Uhl defeated J. Crimmins; Gulbrandson defeated Sommerfeld.
Semi-Finals – Dobel defeated Vander Weide; Gulbrandson defeated Uhl.
Finals – Gulbrandson ($300) defeated Dobel.
