Emergency services workers inspect Ansett flight 703's wreckage on the foothills of the Tararua Range.
Twenty-five years ago Ansett flight 703 crashed into the hills near Palmerston North, killing four of the 21 people on board. Jimmy Ellingham reports.
On his way to Palmerston North for work, William McGrory is getting to know flight attendant Karen Gallagher.
It takes just over an hour for the regional flight to reach Palmerston North from Auckland and on the cloudy, wet and cold morning of June 9, 1995, McGrory and Gallagher wile away the minutes chatting.
McGrory is then an executive for Palmerston North-based Plumbing World and is meant to have been travelling with his then wife and two children, but they are put on another flight.
He has got some bold new ideas, so his boss asks him to fly down to Manawatū and share his knowledge, "because one day you might not be here".
Flight 703 passengers Jill Dixon, whose husband Reg died after suffering severe burns, and William McGrory back near the crash site in the late 1990s.
"'You might get hit by a bus', were his words, actually," says McGrory, now semi-retired and living in Waikato.
"We finally agreed a date, and I was flying down for that. It's quite ironical."
Among the other 18 passengers comfortably spaced out in a cabin that could accommodate about 40 are the Gray family, from Whangarei.
Ian and Maree, and their daughters Petra, 6, and Elle, 3, are moved from their original seats near the plane's left wing to the back, so they can sit together. They are heading to a surprise party in Masterton.
This move perhaps saves their lives, because the section of plane in which they originally sit is badly damaged in the crash.
"We consider ourselves extremely lucky considering what happened," Ian Gray says.
Fireman Paul Brigham carries Petra Gray, 6, to an ambulance.
Ansett flight 703 is just minutes away from Palmerston North Airport when McGrory, in a window seat on the plane's right, confirms Gallagher's observation that the landing gear on that side of the Dash-8 isn't extended.
After returning from the cockpit to talk to the pilots, Gallagher leans over the seat in front of McGrory as the two continue to talk.
That's when the plane strikes the foothills of the Tararua Range at more than 200kmh, about 9.20am, some 16 kilometres east of Palmerston North Airport.
As the plane careens up a slope, the tail smashes off, and then the left wing, before the fuselage comes to rest having turned 180 degrees.
Amazingly, most on board survive the impact. Some, such as McGrory, are conscious the whole time, others, such as Ian and Maree Gray, are not.
The flight disappears from air traffic control radar screens and its location isn't known. Luckily, as McGrory extracts himself from the mangled cabin he sees his briefcase, which contains his cell phone.
His reply when asked by the 111 operator whether he needed police, fire or ambulance is succinct: "The whole bloody lot."
The inside of the Dash-8 fuselage was mangled in the crash.
The problem is McGrory and the other survivors don't know where they are, apart from the obvious: on a cold and damp hillside.
In the Palmerston North Airport control tower chief controller Tony Chapman is told by police they'd had a call from a plumber who witnessed the crash.
Chapman rings the number and speaks not to a witness, but McGrory, who, when Chapman asks what he knows about the crash, says: "What can I tell you about it? I was on the bloody thing."
Around McGrory are survivors, some trapped, some walking around, some crying for help. A small, intense fire has burned out.
Tower chief controller Tony Chapman spoke to crash survivor William McGrory for 35 minutes as rescuers searched for the plane's wreckage.
Chapman tells McGrory to organise the survivors to huddle together in case shock and hypothermia set in. He also suggests finding clothing in luggage for warmth, but people's bags can't be found.
Two passengers, Peter Roberts and Dean Mason, build a shelter. Following Chapman's instructions, Roberts then follows a fence line up the hill, leading him to fencing around an early model wind turbine.
His pinpoint description of the area, relayed back to Chapman and then police, who follow up with local landowners, allows the site to be identified.
For about 35 minutes McGrory talks to Chapman over his Nokia phone. Then, at last, help arrives.
The day after the crash, they meet in Palmerston North Hospital, where McGrory  is treated for a broken vertebrae and a shoulder injury.
"The actual accident was just an impact and it was just all over so quickly," McGrory tells the Manawatū Standard, which records the reunion.
"There was just a massive thump and then we were sliding along the hilltop, sliding to a stop, and everything was getting thrown around everywhere.
"It was so quick. There was no warning of an impact at all. I don't think anyone was expecting it."
Flight attendant Karen Gallagher was killed on impact while talking to William McGrory.
Almost 25 years later Chapman and McGrory still keep in touch.
"The one thing that did stand out mainly was when I told him that the helicopters had arrived and one of the firemen on the back of a farmer's bike had arrived, and he said: 'OK, you can hang up now, William. I've done my job.'"
McGrory was on auto-pilot after the crash, he says, but is proud he showed great presence of mind.
"There was no heroism. I jumped out and ran. That's not heroic. If I'd been heroic I would have stayed in there and looked around and sorted things out straight away, but I came back after I had realised what it was.
"My first thing was obviously self-preservation and I think that's what happens to everybody," he says.
Perhaps most traumatic for the Gray family is other relatives not immediately knowing their fate. Maree Gray's parents, for example, endure a horrible flight to Palmerston North in foul weather.
"It was a hell of a sad day for a lot of families... It was pretty traumatic. As silly as it sounds, us on the hillside and in the hospital knew where we were and what was going on, and for a long time Maree's parents didn't know for several hours after the crash whether we were dead or alive," Ian Gray says.
"There was a heck of a lot of people who went through a lot that day and you can only admire and thank the people that rescued us and hospital staff, who did a fantastic job."
Eighteen people survive the impact, although 14 suffer serious injuries. Gallagher, 31, from Christchurch; Jonathan Keall, 43, from Auckland; and David White, 37, from Auckland, are killed.
Palmerston North man Reg Dixon, 47, flying home with wife Jill after their European honeymoon, dies of severe burns 12 days after the crash. He is caught in a flash fire as he tries to haul passengers from the wreckage. He is later awarded the New Zealand Cross for bravery.
Reg Dixon died 12 days after the crash from burns suffered when trying to rescue passengers from the wreckage.
Helipro's chief pilot and chief executive Rick Lucas is, on the Friday morning, heading to Central Hawke's Bay with pipeline company workers.
On the way he takes a call from the Standard's chief photographer Graeme Brown asking if he knows anything about a Dash-8 going down.
"I said, 'no, not a Dash-8'. He said a Dash-8 was missing. I kicked into gear and knew this was a big deal."
Lucas rushes back to base in Palmerston North, still with his two passengers, who are experienced in search and rescue and are happy to help. They head off to find the plane.
After checking around Wharite Peak, where conditions are clear, it is obvious the Dash-8 isn't there. Guy Beange, flying the NZ Rail Rescue Helicopter, and Lucas then search the Tararua hills.
Chopper pilot Rick Lucas was the first to spot the wreckage, about an hour after the crash.
It isn't easy work in conditions described as flying inside a milk bottle.
Over radio Lucas can hear McGrory talking to Chapman, but the downed plane proves elusive. Finally, Lucas picks up a signal from the wreckage, about 10.15am.
"I saw an upturned wing and then out of the fog came the fuselage.
"It was kind of surreal. It was eerie. There were people huddled in airline blankets under the side of this smashed-up fuselage... We had a big airliner lying in bits on the Tararua foothills."
As Lucas finds a place to land, a quad bike arrives with more help. Lucas remembers the hunt for the plane clearly, but from then it's a blur as he and other choppers rush the injured to Palmerston North Hospital.
Seventeen of the 21 aboard the Ansett Dash-8 survived the June 1995 crash.
Flying the Dash-8 are captain Garry Sotheran and first officer Barry Brown who, although injured, both survive the crash.
Problems begin when landing gear fails to fully lower and lock.
In his 1997 report, crash investigator Ron Chippindale finds the plane lost height while descending through cloud and the crew was distracted by confusion about the procedure to manually lower the landing gear.
Ansett is also criticised for its Dash-8 training and not informing pilots about undercarriage problems.
The plane's ground proximity warning system gives the pilots only five seconds warning of danger rather than the expected 17, although this is enough to pitch the plane's nose up and save it from total disaster.
In 2000, Ansett, which operated in New Zealand between 1987 and 2000, settles out of court with 12 of the injured passengers, but Sotheran is charged with manslaughter. He is acquitted after a long and complicated 2001 trial in Palmerston North.
Captain Garry Sotheran was in 2001 acquitted of manslaughter.
Ian Gray, 62, remembers the days after the crash for the kindness displayed to his family from hospital staff and complete strangers.
Maree Gray fractures seven vertebrae and a rib; Ian breaks several ribs and his jaw; and Elle suffers a broken leg. Daughter Petra suffers only bruising.
Paul Brigham, a firefighter photographed carrying Petra away from the wreckage, puts it best, Gray says.
"He said it was a hell of a way to meet nice people. He's right, we met some really, really lovely, caring people. They helped us a lot."
McGrory, 69, also talks fondly about the people he met through the crash. He says from day one he's been happy to talk about the ordeal and it's still a common topic of conversation.
"Most people are very happy to ask questions because they want to know what goes on in a plane crash. You don't get to talk to many people who have survived one.
"The first word is always 'wow'," he says of others' reactions.
The Dash-8's wreckage arrives in Palmerston North.
