By Maheen Hernandez May 23, 2020 Off
Ready Raider is an eSports platform that provides tools to players of popular eSports games.  They also host tournaments.
Dash tweeted :  “For gaming platform GetReadyRaider, Dash was an easy choice for payments”
due to its technology and community. Dashpay ‘s security and instant settlement via ChainLocks with instant responsibility was essential for competitive eSports gamers!”
Ryan Taylor, CEO of Dash Core Group, opined that this is indeed a significant step for Dash making into the eSports industry with the fast-growing partner.
Ready Raider’s tools are used by several gamers to improve on their competitive gaming experience.  Dash facilitates them with a seamless payment experience.  Thus Dash is getting a new audience of users who are now experiencing the benefits of using digital currency.
Jacob Ballou, The Get Ready Raider founder, explained why he choose Dash as the exclusive form of payment for competitive gaming.
Jacob Ballou opined that the world of competitive gaming and esports are growing at an exponential rate.  Ready Raider is looking to expand on their opportunities, eventually exploring new horizons partnering with Dash.  Dash is the exclusive payments provider for Ready Raider. He further clarified on how blockchain-based payment methods and user bases coincide with gaming communities.  By combining both these venues, they hope to provide competitive venues to gamers from across the world.  Thus, being able to work without the lockouts of traditional financial systems.
Ready Raider partnering with Dash has led to a lot of excitement in the community for obvious reasons related to adoption. Playing eSport Games, leagues, and tournaments and winning Dash prizes.
Dash tweeted :  “ReadyRaider is a platform for gamers to take part in competitive esports tournaments with #Dash prizes! @GetReadyRaider is an officially licensed @Blizzard_Ent tournament organizer and has on boarded over 5000 users in just 3 weeks!”
Ready Raider launched with the support for World of Warcraft, where players can use the platform to create a guild, keep track of their roaster, and, very importantly, track the in-game loot events. Of note, Ready Raider have recently facilitated support for Escape from Tarkov, which is a massive open-world online game that has become very popular with eSports players.
They also provide support for games like the League of Legends, Call of Duty Warzone, and more major esports top titles that will be integrated on Ready Raider in the near future.  This means an improved user base for Dash!
