ATLANTA, April  9, 2020 – Delta Cargo has expanded its 24/7 pick-up and delivery service  with Roadie to include DASH Heavy. Now customers can use the service for  packages between 101 to 300 pounds, or between 90 linear inches (length + width  + height) up to the maximum size that will fit on the aircraft, per piece for  loose shipments.
As  offices move to homes and businesses explore ways to reach existing and new  customers and clients, DASH Door-to-Door provides an easy solution in a matter  of hours instead of days. From fresh flowers to auto parts, medical and  electronic equipment to apparel, DASH Door-to-Door is a convenient logistics  service that offers the fastest cross-country door-to-door delivery.
Delta  partnered with Roadie, an Atlanta-based same-day delivery service, to launch  DASH Door-to-Door in 2019. The partnership is an industry first for a U.S.  passenger airline. The service is now available in more than 60 cities with  ongoing expansion.
"This  is an exciting opportunity for businesses to further benefit from DASH Door-to-Door  by shipping large items and making nationwide expansion a reality," said  Shawn Cole, Vice President – Delta Cargo. “We’re always looking for ways to  enhance product offerings and make life easier for our customers.”
DASH  Door-to-Door pairs TSA-approved drivers with air cargo to create the fastest  cross-country door-to-door service available in the U.S. with competitive  prices. Customers can send time-critical shipments through deltacargo.com with  a single booking for flights with pick-up/delivery and receive end-to-end  tracking and real-time status updates. The service is backed by a limited  service-level guarantee.
“We  ship architectural goods and love that we can do all bookings online and get  shipments picked up at our facility,” said Cheryl Tanner, Bruce Wall Systems  Corporation. “We used to pay much more to get shipments out, but since we  started using DASH Door-to-Door, we’ve saved a lot of money.”
Roadie  has more than 150,000 verified drivers nationwide and the largest local  same-day delivery footprint in the U.S. Delta and Roadie have worked together  since 2015 to expedite the delivery of delayed bags.
For specific information related to your  business needs, including pricing and locations, please reach a representative here .
