Dietary Approaches To Stop Hypertension: Beginner's Guide To The DASH Diet
Dietary Approaches To Stop Hypertension: Beginner's Guide To The DASH Diet
High blood pressure: DASH is a practical approach to control and prevent hypertension. To follow the DASH diet you need eat and avoid certain foods. Here are the basics of the DASH diet you need to know.
DASH Diet: Foods to control high blood pressure: Control sodium intake to fight hypertension
Hypertension or high blood pressure is also known as a silent killer as it does not show any significant symptom and puts you ta a higher risk of heart disease. High blood pressure is a common condition these days and many are not aware of the fact that they are suffering from this condition. High blood pressure can be controlled with healthy modifications in diet and lifestyle. Diet plays an important role in maintaining healthy blood sugar levels. DASH diet stands for dietary approaches to stop hypertension. It is a lifelong approach to eat healthy that is approached in such a way that can it can help treat and prevent hypertension.
If your doctor says you have high blood pressure, you need to get it under control. It's important for your health. So take it seriously. Prepare to make some changes in your lifestyle. Medications may help, too. Here are some things that will make a diff
Sodium is extremely harmful to those suffering from hypertension. It is advised to consume minimum salt to control high blood pressure numbers. You should avoid keeping salt shaker on the table and add less salt to your foods. Too much sodium can also increase the risk of osteoporosis and kidney diseases.
Fiber-rich foods are good for your blood pressure numbers. Studies have also highlighted that adding dietary fibre to your diet can result in reduced blood pressure. Some fibre rich foods that can be a part of your Dash diet may include- whole grains, vegetables, fruits and legumes.
Consumption of too much alcohol and caffeine is linked with high blood pressure. It is advised to drink in moderation and reduce caffeine intake. You can choose caffeine-free herbal teas over coffee.
You should take care of the portion size of the food consumed. Do not consume any foods in excess. Your dietician will recommend you the right food and serving to ensure better blood pressure numbers as well as nutrient intake.
