The NFL Combine is well underway and we know the Eagles will have had all eyes fixed on the wide receiver position. Some players left really strong impressions, while others left a lot to be desired. Here’s everything you need to know about the wideouts after yesterday’s drills and the names that Eagles fans have had circled for a while.
Courtesy of Sportingnews, here’s a complete Table documenting the 40-times set by this year’s class.
Ruggs stole the show as anticipated. While he didn’t demolish the previous 40-yard dash record set by John Ross, he came close. Adding in a 42-inch vertical jump and a 10’11 broad jump and it’s safe to say that Ruggs made a statement that his stock is only going to rise as the Draft draws closer.
He’s been discussed at pick 21 loosely, but expect there to be a lot of traction after this week. The 6’1, 202 lbs, wideout raised eyebrows with a 4.43 40-yard dash time (faster than Jeudy) and set himself apart from some of the other slot receivers in this class. He had a solid body of work to build on, but that kind of showing will only boost his stock.
There’s a lot to love about Denzel Mims and I think a lot of people expected big things at the combine because the man is just an athletic freak with future WR1 written all over him. The issue is the technical intricacies that will need to be coached at the next level. However, Mims only pushed himself higher up the pecking order by really turning heads at the combine.
At 6’3″ and 207 pounds, he ran a 4.38-second 40-yard dash. Four. Point. Three. Eight. Hello, draft cush.
Notre Dame’s finest showed up to Indy at 6’4, 238 lbs. The natural assumption was a shift inside to TE or maybe a big-slot ceiling. But running a 4.42 40-yard dash and leaping to a 40’5 on the vertical silenced those ideas. Claypool is here to play and he’s here to do it on the outside.
The Michigan product has started to gain some traction in recent weeks because the film never lies. His production wasn’t incredible at College, but what you see on tape at least presents reason for encouragement.
Then, the 6’2, 212 lbs, wideout achieved a 4.48 40-yard dash, leaped up 44.5 inches in the vertical and flew 11-foot-7 in the broad jump. Time to really dig deep here, DPJ could be a steal in the heart of the Draft.
There was so much hype surrounding Jalen Reagor coming into the NFL Combine but he just seemed…off? Reagor bulked up prior to the combine and it may well have hurt his 40-time. Sure, his 42″ vertical was exactly what the Doctor ordered, but when it came to the three-cone drill (7.31) and the 40 (4.47), he didn’t look like the force we all expected him to be. With other receivers really making the most of this week, it really doesn’t help his stock to see him struggle.
A late-round sleeper who surged into prolificacy during Senior Bowl week with some eye-catching receptions, AGG entered the combine with a lot of eyes on him. A 4.60 40-yard dash time would’ve promptly moved them off again. There are bound to be question marks over Liberty’s strength of competition now, but AGG will have a shot at redemption at his Pro Day.
Another man linked at pick 21 has been Laviska Shenault, but running a dismal 4.59 at the 40-yard dash really, really doesn’t help his case. I think he’s capable of a lot more and if injuries are hampering him, maybe this will actually work in his favor in the long run, but it wasn’t the day he wanted at all.
In a day where wideout stocks were rising and falling more rapidly than a rollercoaster, Aiyuk just kind of…faded away a little bit. The projected second-rounder ran a 4.5-second 40-yard dash, reached 40 inches on the vertical, and 128 inches on the Broad jump. Meh.
Aiyuk looks like a blazer on tape and has all the makings of a tremendous slot receiver with speed and versatility on his side. But in terms of athletic testing, there were wideouts who did more with less.
Liam is a 24-year old sports journalist from the UK and founder of the Philly Sports Network. In just five years he turned a hobby into one of the fastest-growing Philadelphia sports sites in the world, amassing 7,000,000 views and writing over 3,000 articles. Drawing attention from the likes of CSN, NJ.Com and Bleacher Report in the process, Liam is set on changing the way Philadelphia sports teams are reported on forever.
You can contact him here: Phillysportsnetwork@gmail.com
