The Edmonton Police Service is planning to outfit all marked vehicles with dashboard cameras within 18 months.
During a report to the Edmonton Police Commission on Thursday, Chief Dale McFee said body cameras are not worth the expense and only tell what’s happening from one point of view.
We apologize, but this video has failed to load.
“That said, we are going to move forward with dash cams. Dash cams are a bit different. A lot of our critical incidents involve a vehicle going somewhere,” McFee said, adding dash cams record at a broader range, have a peripheral view and are equipped with a microphone.
He said the service is expediting their work that is already ongoing in relation to the dash cams.
“We’re trying to find out how quickly we can get there. Obviously there’s some potential vendors that we already have agreements with,” McFee said after the meeting. “We’re hoping we can have everything completed in the cars, start to finish, within 18 months.”
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
EPS spokeswoman Carolin Maran confirmed all marked vehicles will be equipped.
Looking at implementing dash cams was one of the items brought forward in a city council motion last week regarding policing practices. The motion prompted three days of public hearings on policing and racism.
During Thursday’s police commission meeting, McFee went over a number of initiatives the service has already put in place or plans to in order to redirect people away from the criminal justice system, focus on diversity and inclusivity, and address racism and marginalization.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
McFee said 46 out of 75 recommendations from the plan have been implemented since it kicked off in November 2019.
“The goal is to redirect people in need away from the criminal justice system … and towards agencies that can provide appropriate support,” McFee said.
He also touched on the community solutions accelerator which aims to come up with innovative ways to tackle issues such as crime, addictions, homelessness and mental health.
“It’s quite exciting (on) where this is going to go and potentially what can be done from outside the community (to) reduce the number of criminal activity in this environment,” McFee said. “We’ve got 30 projects we’re looking at through the accelerator, ways that we can do it quicker, ways that we can engage quicker and ways that we can reduce the demand in the justice system.”
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
He went over other initiatives including a new branch that assesses the value and impact of police resources and what they’re used for in the community, the Community Safety and Wellbeing Bureau that works with partner agencies to reduce the need for police demand as well as training focused on becoming more trauma informed and working with the community.
The commission also heard about EPS’ diversity and inclusion policy and work to address racism and marginalization.
As part of that work, EPS is currently working with an external consultant to conduct a systematic review of polices and practices to align with the recommendations from the Murdered and Missing Indigenous Women and Girls Inquiry Final Report and the Truth and Reconciliation Final Report.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
When asked after the meeting if officers would be pulled off work pending hearings over racial profiling or excessive force and how the role of the police union comes into play with those decisions, McFee said each case of officer discipline is looked at individually.
“Obviously racial profiling is something we take very serious. In relation to the (Edmonton Police Association), are they are barrier to that? Absolutely not. We have come at this from different roles. I think we both respect our roles and the reality is sometimes we’re going to differ,” he said.
“We’ve stated publicly, both us and the EPA, that if there is independent oversight available now that the Police Act is opening, we’re certainly welcome to that and a public complaints process as well.”
McFee told the commission he has heard from the community and knows they are frustrated with policing in general.
“Is there lots of work to do? You bet there is. Are we well on our way to potentially leading the country? You bet we are,” McFee said.
“But it’s important that we take the voices and some of the rational voices that are being heard here and we integrate them into our police service and even make it better because nobody’s perfect. But we have a path.”
