Eric Flowers: Body worn cameras to protect deputies, continue building trust in community
The four candidates running in the Republican primary for sheriff of Indian River County were asked: "What is your message to protesters in the wake of the deaths of Breonna Taylor, George Floyd, Rayshard Brooks and others? Are certain changes necessary? How would you respond as sheriff?"
As your sheriff, my message to the community is that I support your constitutional right to peaceful protest and I welcome an open and honest dialogue.
In Indian River County, we have seen several peaceful gatherings to address both local and national concerns about policing. I believe the reason these gatherings have been peaceful is because of the positive relationships the members of the Indian River County Sheriff’s Office have established with the community over the years.
In my conversations with community leaders, they have expressed their opposition to violence and looting that has occurred in other places. Indian River County is a very special place because of these tight-knit relationships.
While we have worked hard over the last decade to establish relationships with the community, I recognize that trust can be lost in a single incident as we have seen in Minneapolis and other parts of the country. My goal as sheriff is to build even stronger partnerships and trust with everyone in our diverse community. It is imperative that all citizens feel comfortable both during law enforcement encounters as well as when bringing concerns to Sheriff’s Office leadership.
One item that regularly surfaces in the trust discussion is body worn cameras. I am proud that our agency has been innovative with dash cameras in patrol cars since the 1990s. To this day, we still have neighboring law enforcement agencies without this technology.
As we have seen with recent events, transparency is vital. For example, the recent shooting at Walmart was captured on a deputy’s dash camera. Our agency released the video within 24 hours after careful consultation with the prosecutor.
Because our agency has been innovative and leveraged technology, we have been evaluating the use of body worn cameras for several years. As a fiscal conservative, I want to make sure that when we implement this new technology, we do so after other agencies have carried the financial burden of the problems associated with early adoption.
I do believe this technology has matured to a point where its use is imminent. During my first year as your sheriff, it is my intention to conduct a cost benefit analysis on which body worn camera system is best suited for the Indian River County Sheriff’s Office.
Our deputies recognize the value of their dash cameras and how they can protect their careers. I believe adding body worn cameras adds protection for both the community and our deputies as well as maintaining trust.
I believe that of the millions of law enforcement encounters that happen daily, the overwhelming majority are positive. Body worn cameras will only serve to confirm that our deputies are performing their jobs with the utmost professionalism. I am also confident that our deputies do this whether they are on camera or not.
Body worn cameras will provide additional protection for our deputies and continue to build trust with the community we serve.
Eric Flowers is a Republican candidate for Indian River County sheriff: flowersforsheriff.com
