Bitcoin futures volume rose significantly in 2019, as it raises leverage to 125x (CryptoSlate), Rated: A
Speaking to CryptoSlate in an exclusive interview, Binance Futures Director Aaron Gong said that the Bitcoin futures volume in 2019 increased significantly, expressing confidence in the long term trend of the market.
Earlier this week, on Oct. 18, Binance Futures increased the maximum leverage of BTC/USDT (Tether) to 125x, offering a leverage that is higher than all existing platforms in the cryptocurrency market in the likes of BitMEX and Deribit.
Ethereum (ETH) Could Recover To $ 180, Bitcoin Up 5% (NewsBTC), Rated: AAA
This past week, Ethereum tested the $168 and $170 support levels on two occasions against the US Dollar. However, the bears were not able to gain strength below $168. As a result, there was a short term upside correction above the $172 resistance. More importantly, bitcoin rallied more than 5% and climbed above the key $8,200 resistance area.
Ethereum Name Service Adds Multicoin Support (Coin Telegraph), Rated: A
Distributed naming system Ethereum Name Service (ENS) has announced the launch of multicoin support as 15 cryptocurrency wallets already plan to utilize the new feature.
According to an official Medium post published on Oct. 17, this will allow crypto enthusiasts to use one ENS name for all of their crypto wallets.
bitFlyer Makes Cryptocurrency Trading Even Easier with Launch of bitFlyer App (BusinessWire), Rated: A
Today, leading cryptocurrency exchange bitFlyer has announced the launch of the bitFlyer app across Europe and the USA . The app, available for free on both iOS and Android , will allow users to buy and sell Bitcoin (BTC), Ethereum (ETH), Litecoin (LTC), Bitcoin Cash (BCH), Ethereum Classic (ETC), Monacoin (MONA) and Lisk (LSK).
The University of Malta’s Masters Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technology began its inaugural semester this October, with around 35 students enrolled in the island nation’s only DLT-specific masters program – one of the few such programs around the world.
NEXO Tokens Now Trading on Binance DEX (Business Wire), Rated: AAA
Nexo is pleased to announce that it is further enhancing its collaboration with the world’s largest cryptocurrency exchange Binance. As a direct result, the trading of NEXO on Binance DEX starts today, October 18, 2019:
The NEXO Token Holders can now enjoy all the benefits which have turned Binance into the industry’s favorite cryptocurrency exchange – liquidity, cutting-edge trading solutions, dedicated focus on security and decentralization.
In line with the community-led approaches of Nexo and Binance, the Binance DEX listing brings a number of benefits for the crypto ecosystem. It establishes a direct connection between NEXO and BNB holders, providing them with an efficient exchange mechanism and giving additional utility to both assets.
Thousands of BNB holders consistently borrow against their tokens in the most tax-efficient manner , as more and more people understand Nexo’s unique proposition of accessing the value of their crypto holdings without having to sell any on them.
‘No-Deal Brexit Huge Positive for UK Cryptocurrency’ – How Brexit Could Affect the Industry (Bitcoin.com), Rated: A
In the event of no-deal being reached by Oct. 31, Thomas said, “there will be substantial uncertainty within British and EU financial institutions.” However, in terms of whether it will create demand for bitcoin and cryptocurrency in general, “I am not so certain,” he admitted, elaborating:
I would expect to see some upward movement on BTC /GBP markets shortly after the deadline, but since the British pound is a small portion of global crypto volume it may not have a large overall effect on price as some have predicted.
“It will, however, have a positive impact within the British market, but the degree of which this will affect the global cryptocurrency markets is speculative at this time,” he opined.
Chinese Students Want Crypto Jobs, 8% Own Cryptocurrencies (Bitcoin.com), Rated: AAA
Unlike authorities, however, the Chinese people have been embracing decentralized currencies with much less hesitation and for obvious reasons – not only the utility they bring but also their censorship resistance. The poll confirms that the young and tech savvy have predominantly positive expectations about the future of the crypto space and are the most eager adopters. Over 8% of Chinese students currently own some cryptocurrency, while another 9% had previously invested in digital assets.
It’s worth noting that almost 27% of the students in the survey indicated they would seek employment in the growing blockchain industry in the future. Media remains the main source of information about the crypto space and nearly 40% of the students describe media reports as influential.
HTC reveals €219 Exodus 1s cryptocurrency phone with… Android Oreo (Android Police), Rated: A
There hasn’t been much news from HTC about new phones this year, besides some budget models . The company did confirm earlier this year that it would develop a new version of its ‘Exodus’ blockchain phone , which was itself a slightly-modified U12+. That new device is finally real, and it’s… something.
