For two of SMU’s most accomplished seniors, an important spring awaits for their football futures
Rodney Clemons and Demerick Gary were four-year starters at SMU, but neither of them are surefire NFL draft prospects.
FILE - SMU defensive tackle Demerick Gary (10) runs onto the field before a game against TCU on Saturday, Sept. 21, 2019, at Amon G. Carter Stadium in Fort Worth. (Ashley Landis/The Dallas Morning News)
UNIVERSITY PARK — Two of SMU’s most distinguished players went home for the holidays this week knowing what they wanted for their futures — but uncertain of if and how it will happen.
Rodney Clemons and Demerick Gary — four-year starters for the Mustangs — are two of the most accomplished players in recent Mustangs history. But neither is a sure-fire NFL prospect. Both, however, plan to attack the next few months with one goal in mind.
“My biggest thing,” Gary said, “is I just need an opportunity to show, whether it’s drafted, undrafted, camp invite, whatever it is, I just need an opportunity to show myself.”
Gary still has to finish several classes at SMU in the second semester to graduate, so he’ll be training simultaneously with his preparation. Clemons will put pursuit of his master’s degree on hold.
Both will participate in SMU’s pro day, scheduled for late March. So far, neither has accepted an invitation to a senior showcase game. Neither has hired an agent.
“I talked to some agents. They said I have a chance,” Clemons said. “I want to pursue that. Other than that, if football doesn’t work, then I’ll try to go into marketing or something.”
Clemons said the biggest hindrance to making it at the next level would be his speed. He’d like to get his 40-yard dash time down to 4.4 seconds.
Currently, draftscout.com lists Clemons as the No. 9 free safety in the class. Yahoo Sports said Clemons would be an intriguing option on Day 3, and Clemons said scouts like his positional versatility.
TAMPA, FLA - SEPT. 28: SMU safety Rodney Clemons (#23) intercepts a pass during a game against South Florida at Raymond James Stadium on Sept. 28, 2019, in Tampa, Fla.(Mike Ehrmann / Getty Images)
Gary is listed as the No. 74 defensive tackle available, and will need a big spring to put himself in position to earn the coveted opportunity he desires.
“My whole life has just been based on just give me an opportunity,” Gary said. “Give me a chance, and I’m going to come to work. Hard work doesn’t go unnoticed, especially in this business.”
SMU went through this entire season with several NFL-capable talents, but no one who is a certain prospect. James Proche is at the top, but even he wasn’t playing at the Senior Bowl — the top showcase game.
Linebacker Patrick Nelson will get a look. Defensive lineman Delontae Scott will get a look. Maybe some will get drafted, and maybe a couple will make rosters. But right now, none of those things are a given.
For Clemons, the chance to be here is surprising. He didn’t play high school football until his senior year. Now, four years later, he has a legitimate shot to play at the sport’s highest level.
“I look back at it now, and it’s crazy. Getting to [a D-I school] in the first place, was a big surprise to me,” Clemons said. “I’m here today, and I’m just keeping my head down and working, and whatever God puts in front of me, I’m happy with whatever it is.”
There are no guarantees for players like Gary or Clemons. Even if they were to get drafted, a camp invitation certainly doesn’t translate to a 53-man roster spot.
Gary finished the year with 5.5 sacks — but more importantly was among the prominent leaders in SMU’s best season in 35 years. Clemons forced five turnovers and had three sacks — but more importantly was a captain wearing the No. 23 in honor of Jerry LeVias, the first black scholarship athlete in the Southwest Conference.
Their marks on SMU are indelible and unforgettable. But none of that will matter in making the NFL. Now they need to prove they are worth an opportunity.
“In my whole life, I’ve been the underdog,” Gary said. “All I can do is take the things I’ve learned at SMU and apply it to whatever organization where I get an opportunity.”
Sam Blum , Staff Writer. Sam covers SMU athletics and the Texas Rangers for The Dallas Morning News, and previously covered Auburn University athletics for AL.com. He's also covered University of Virginia athletics for The Daily Progress in Charlottesville. He graduated from Syracuse University.
