Posted by Justin Szilard | Oct 7, 2019 | News |
This post is also available in:
Gentarium, a masternode, mining, and loan management platform has integrated Dash support for masternode hosting as well as for masternode shares.
Friends, we are glad to announce that we are offering free hosting for all @Dashpay MNs on our platform https://t.co/a8oWs8pUvl till the 3rd of November. After this date free period can be extended pic.twitter.com/OIgLjAfPjm
— Gentarium (@GTM_Gentarium) October 3, 2019
The platform claims to host 6,297 total masternodes across several chains, amounting to $1.9 million USD, and offers both masternode hosting as well as pooled masternode shares. Regular fees for masternodes are $0.15 USD daily, $3.99 monthly payment, or a $10.47 monthly payment with a 5% discount for 10 nodes, 10% for 20 nodes, 15% for 30 nodes, and 20% for 50 nodes. For shared masternodes the services charges a varying rate of $2.5 USD to $4 USD per month depending on proportional ownership. Additionally, Gentarium has a lending service, but currently only offer loans in BTC.
As a promotion celebrating the integration, Gentarium are offering free Dash masternode hosting until November 3rd. Additionally, the services classify the different masternode coins that they offer on a scale from Grade A, B, E, and F and have Dash listed as Grade A meaning that it “represent[s] working product or innovative technology in blockchain”. Currently, they have Dash listed as having a ROI of 7% with yearly income amounting to 71.34 DASH. Gentarium also offers Dash as a part of their shared masternode hosting service, but do not yet have any active shared Dash masternodes because the 1,000 Dash threshold has not been reached.
The Gentarium integration adds to the growing number of platforms that offer Dash shared masternodes. One of the earliest shared masternode hosting services was CrowdNode , which now hosts 28 shared Dash masternodes and even enables its proportional owners to have proportional votes in the Dash network. Others Dash masternode hosting services include the publicly traded Neptune Dash , Cobo Wallet with over 30 pooled Dash masternodes, Snode , and AllNodes .
While shared Dash masternodes better enable accessibility to those that might not be able to afford a whole node, more hosting services for full masternodes not only increase competition and put downward pressure on hosting prices, but also distribute masternodes across different platforms. This better helps make the Dash network more robust in the event of a specific hosting service going down. Data from BlockChair shows that over 50% of Dash masternodes are located in European countries and 25% are in North America compared to over 75% of Bitcoin’s hashpower being located in China.
