Daintre whipped up two holiday appetizers: an artichoke, spinach and white bean dip and bacon-wrapped dates.
1 (15-ounce) can organic white beans, rinsed and drained
1 (14-ounce) can baby artichoke hearts, drained and quartered (If you can’t find baby artichoke hearts, use quartered artichoke hearts and chop them.)
1 (9-ounce) package frozen chopped spinach, thawed, drained, and squeezed dry Cooking spray
Place Romano cheese, 1/4 cup mayonnaise, 1 teaspoon lemon juice, salt, black pepper, red pepper, minced garlic and white beans in a food processor, and process until smooth. Spoon into a medium bowl.
Stir in the artichokes and spinach.
Spoon the mixture into a 1-quart glass or ceramic baking dish coated with cooking spray.
Sprinkle with a mix of cheddar and mozza on top.
Bake at 350°F for 20 minutes or until bubbly and brown.
Daintre Christensen artichoke, spinach and white bean dip.
Slice the dates lengthwise and take out the pit.
Stuff each date with a piece of manchego cheese.
Slice the bacon in half so you have 16 pieces.
Take a bacon half and wrap it around the date, securing with two toothpicks.
Let cool for five minutes and enjoy.
Daintre Christensen’s two holiday appetizers: an artichoke, spinach and white bean dip and bacon-wrapped, cheese-filled dates.
If a recipe is a family classic, it’s worth making twice! Kent’s grandma used to bring her special sweet and sour sausages over on Christmas morning for brunch after gift opening.
The recipe calls for a can of peaches and a lot of ketchup.
“She’s gone now, but every year the sausages still appear at brunch,” Kent said. He has also made the dish on the weekend show as well !
Kent’s mom opts for fresh onion in lieu of flakes, and adds a dash of curry powder.
1 tablespoon/15 ml onion flakes or fresh, diced onion
Brown sausages — not necessarily cook through — in a frying pan. Cut into bite-sized pieces (or use cocktail sausages.)
Place in a 1-1/2-quart casserole dish and add remaining ingredients. Stir together.
Bake uncovered in a 350°F oven for 30 minutes. Stir, and continue to bake for 15 to 20 minutes until sausages and well done.
© 2019 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc.
