If you’ve decided to self-quarantine because of the coronavirus pandemic, you’ll need to stock up on at least 14 days of supplies. That means wisely stocking your pantry and refrigerator.
How many of us have two weeks’ worth of food, water and medical supplies in our homes? The coronavirus pandemic is forcing Americans to consider what they have in the cupboards and medicine cabinets to ride out a potential quarantine.
Clearly, many in Houston have already begun to stockpile, as evidenced by empty shelves at the supermarket and long lines to get into neighborhood grocery stores. COVID-19 has not only altered our lives, it has forced us to think about how we shop and the foods and supplies we buy.
Fourteen days of food and water is what the Department of Homeland security recommends before a pandemic. Now that we’re in one, it is essential to know how to best prepare your family.
Now more than ever people need to be aware of COVID-19 symptoms and the proper way to treat the illness. Take a look at how to differentiate coronavirus vs. allergies, and hear a few words of advice from Dr. Peter Hotez with the Baylor College of Medicine.
Let’s take a look at food first.
Canned food: Beans, tuna, canned vegetables and soups, canned broth and jarred tomato sauce are obvious choices. Don’t forget jam, jelly, peanut butter and nut butters, as well as evaporated milk and shelf-stable milk.
Dry goods: Pasta and rice, cereal, instant oatmeal, instant potatoes, crackers, dry beans are wise choices.
Snacks: Nuts and dried fruit, pretzels, popcorn, jerky, protein bars, trail mix and chips can get you through binge-watching Netflix.
Don’t forget: Bryan Roof, executive food editor for Cook’s Country magazine from America’s Test Kitchen, said if you’re shopping for two week’s worth of provisions, do not forget things like fats to cook with: butter, olive oil, vegetable oil and lard. Spices, soy sauce, fish sauce, hot sauce, salsa and ketchup should also be considered.
Convenience mixes, like pancake and brownie mix, might find themselves on your shopping list, especially if you have children, he said. “These things come together with little more than water and oil, sometimes an egg, and they also keep your kids occupied,” he said. He added that flour, cornmeal, yeast and chemical leaveners should be considered: “When you run through your last loaf of bread, there’s only one option left: become a baker.”
Refrigerator: Milk and milk alternatives, eggs, butter, cheese are probably already on your list.
Freezer: Meats and fish, frozen vegetables, and frozen prepared meals are essential. But also consider frozen fruit, pizza, juice concentrates, ice cream and popsicles.
Vegetables: Apples, potatoes, onions and carrots are obvious refrigerator choices. Roof also recommends hard winter vegetables, such as squash, as well as sweet potatoes and cabbage: “These last a long time and take well to lots of flavor and cooking variations.”
Crowded places are to be avoided, but if you do have to get groceries, go shopping when it’s less busy or when foot traffic is light, according to Consumer Reports, which also recommends taking germicides with you, using before and after shopping. Use credit or debit cards so you don’t have to hand over bills or receive change.
When you get home, be sure to wash nonporous containers (plastic, glass, metal) using soap and water, Consumer Reports advises. Wash hands and counter surfaces after you’ve put away groceries.
Delivery services such as Instacart, FreshDirect and Peapod are booming, as more people avoid crowded places. However, because most employ independent contractors, according to Consumer Reports, you can’t be sure if the delivery person practices hygiene measures. You can avoid direct contact by arranging to have the items delivered to your doorstep or a place nearby, Consumer Reports said, adding that you can also tip via the app instead of handing money to the delivery person.
