How Often Are Top Privacy Coins and Mixers Actually Used? - A Look at XMR, DASH, and ZEC
As Bitcoin and crypto help everyday individuals to regain control over their money, and make trusting third parties unnecessary, it’s not surprising that privacy advocates have flocked to the space. While bitcoin’s ledger is openly viewable, privacy coins and privacy enhancing protocols are popular ways for value holders to ensure their sensitive financial info stays secure. Though a bit of a tricky subject thanks to the nature of privacy itself, this post aims to examine just how popular leading “privacy coins” such as Monero and Zcash, and obfuscation protocols like coin mixers, really are.
There are a few ways users of crypto can aim for maximum privacy in transactions, and the most popular include cryptos built specifically for privacy, often called privacy coins, and mixing or coinjoin services which obfuscate transaction data, making it difficult for chain analysis to accurately determine the senders and receivers of the crypto. There are also private marketplaces and trading platforms like local.Bitcoin.com that make peer-to-peer transactions possible.
Popular privacy coins often have elements baked right into their codebases that enable obfuscation. Mixing, shuffling, and coin joining services and products like Wasabi Wallet, Samurai Wallet, Cash Shuffle, and the newly developed Cash Fusion help users even of more standard cryptos like BTC and BCH , gain an extra level of security in the form of privacy.
For obvious reasons, garnering stats on these coins and protocols can be tricky, but there are yet metrics that are useful in analyzing just how popular the various coins and services actually are in the market today.
A quick trip to messari.io’s database shows stats for one of the most popular privacy coins, monero ( XMR ), which came about in 2014 as a fork of the bytecoin codebase. Monero is also the leader of the privacy pack by market capitalization, enjoying a near $1.5 billion valuation at press time.
Messari’s data shows that in the past 24 hours there have been 6,772 XMR transactions and the “real volume” for the same time period is $20,856,173.59. What we can’t see, however, is the number of active addresses for monero thanks to the obfuscation built into the code. Looking at a non-privacy focused network like BTC for contrast, there are 865,396 active addresses noted, and of course transaction volumes are much higher. Daily transaction volume nonetheless can help to establish the extent to which XMR is being used.
Though BTC transaction volume dwarfs that of XMR , monero has seen relatively steady usage since its inception. https://bitinfocharts.com
Another coin born in 2014 is DASH , which straddles the fence between being a privacy coin and a “mainstream” crypto thanks to its Privatesend capability. According to Messari, DASH has seen 21,696 transactions in the same 24 hour period as XMR ’s 6,772, but of course these are not all private, so the comparison is difficult to make.
Where zcash is concerned, there (ZEC) is an attributed 12,703 active addresses and 3,329 transactions in 24 hours, about half of what Messari lists for XMR . However, ZEC’s 24 hour transaction volume is notable, with Messari listing the raw volume at $336,337,429.24, and the adjusted volume at $16,980,375.93. Zcash is another privacy coin that boasts a large market cap, weighing in at over $600 million.
Advocates of various privacy coins like monero sometimes make bold claims about widespread usage difficult to verify. Still, even though BTC seems the clear leader in darknet exchange , XMR does remain a staple and exercises notable prevalence compared to other coins. Possibly attesting to this prevalence, are numbers released from last summer’s hack of DNM marketplace Nightmare, in which the alleged “inside job” hacker released financial information listing the site’s various crypto balances:
Popular privacy-focused Wasabi Wallet bills itself as “an open-source, non-custodial, privacy-focused Bitcoin wallet for Desktop, that implements trustless coin shuffling with mathematically provable anonymity – Chaumian CoinJoin.” The popular wallet has been downloaded over 117,000 times as of December 28, 2019. The Samourai mobile wallet for Android is also popular in hardcore privacy circles, and uses a slightly different coinjoin system called “Whirlpool,” but has enjoyed a more narrow user base than Wasabi, possibly owing to the fact that it is a mobile app and currently unavailable on iOS.
Wasabi has been downloaded over 100 000 times!
— Wasabi Wallet (@wasabiwallet) December 23, 2019
Cashshuffle is a popular coin mixing protocol for bitcoin cash users, and since March 27, 2019 to present users have shuffled 209,360 BCH (~$92.8 million at current market prices). The same developers have also created a protocol called Cashfusion which seeks to give bitcoin cash transactions levels of privacy approaching those of coins like monero. Wasabi Wallet developer @nopara73 even commented in December on the project saying, “Cashfusion gives me goosebumps. It reminds me of the Knapsack paper.”
CashFusion gives me goosebumps. It reminds me of the Knapsack paper. Kudos for @MarkLundeberg @naomibrockwell for the great interview! https://t.co/8sHlvPhC1L
— nopara73 (@nopara73) December 19, 2019
As crypto and bitcoin become more and more mainstream, the roots of privacy dig deeper into the ground in proportion to efforts by regulators and centralized exchanges to KYC the scene into standardized, custodial oblivion. Though data on the subject can be murky and speculation about issues such as user base, market demand, and fluctuating hashrate abounds, crypto users can rest assured that Satoshi’s vision for a money not relying on third parties and nosy banks or regulators is alive and well, judging by the current climate and active use of privacy-focused options.
What do you think about the use of privacy coins and coin mixers? Are they really as popular as users say they are? Let us know what you think in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Did you know you can buy and sell BCH privately using our noncustodial, peer-to-peer Local Bitcoin Cash trading platform? The local.Bitcoin.com marketplace has thousands of participants from all around the world trading BCH right now. And if you need a bitcoin wallet to securely store your coins, you can download one from us here .
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Only 3.5 Million Bitcoin Is Traded Worldwide; Majority of BTC Held Long-Term as Digital Gold
Only 3.5 million bitcoin or 19% of total circulating supply is actively traded throughout the world, while the rest is being held long-term by investors, according to a new report by crypto analytics company Chainalysis. Per the report, nearly 18.6 ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
Jim Rogers, who cofounded the Quantum Fund with billionaire investor George Soros, has shared his view on bitcoin, its use as money, and governments' response to the growing use of cryptocurrency. He predicts that central banks will not let uncontrolled ... read more.
This week digital currency enthusiasts have been discussing network fees, specifically transaction fees associated with the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains. Last Sunday on June 21, one Ethereum proponent noted that during the last 16 days, Ethereum users have paid more ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
Australian residents can now pay for bitcoin at more than 3,500 national post offices. The new service launched by Bitcoin.com.au is aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies to mainstream audiences, alongside established businesses and organizations. On June 24, 2020, the firm Bitcoin.com.au ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Popular Analyst Reveals New Bitcoin Pricing Model: Prediction Suggests 'Bullish Run a Month Away'
The popular bitcoin analyst Willy Woo told his 132,000 Twitter followers that he’s working on a new pricing model that suggests a bull run is imminent. In fact, Woo says the model suggests bitcoin is close to “another bullish run” ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
