Like Bitcoin, Dash coin is a tradable security that investors can buy and sell on cryptocurrency markets and through brokers. Dash coin uses a similar blockchain that Bitcoin uses to complete transactions and ensure that every trade goes through without the risk of tampering. Dash’s developers offer a number of improvements on the tech behind Bitcoin’s blockchain, which makes Dash faster and more secure than Bitcoin.
The name “Dash” comes from a mix of “digital” and “cash,” and sets the tone for the developers’ eventual vision for the coin — a secure, online cash alternative.
. Masternodes are special servers that act as governance for the Dash transaction network. Anyone can own and operate a
as long as they have at least 1,000 Dash to complete transactions.
Masternodes are responsible for a number of different tasks, including private transactions (PrivateSend) and instant transactions (InstantSend). Private transactions and instant transactions are only possible with the
structure — and they’re the two features that set Dash apart from Bitcoin.
One of the largest problems with Bitcoin is that all Bitcoin transactions are public. When you send any kind of Bitcoin, your transaction gets recorded on a public ledger called the blockchain. The blockchain includes information on your wallet address, the amount of Bitcoin you sent, and to whom you sent the coins.
Dash gives you the option to use a PrivateSend transaction and masks your wallet address. PrivateSend transactions involve pass-throughs from multiple masternodes, which masks your wallet address. When you use PrivateSend, it’s impossible to trace the amount of money you send because the item recorded on the blockchain uses a masked wallet address.
Dash also offers another major improvement on Bitcoin’s technology, which is InstantSend transactions. One of the largest problems with using Bitcoin as a fiat currency alternative is the amount of time each transaction takes to finalize. The currency needs to pass through multiple miners before it gets recorded on the blockchain. Miners are more expensive to run, so there are less of them to complete transactions. The average Bitcoin transaction takes about 10 minutes to complete, which makes Bitcoin an unreliable solution for everyday usage.
Dash solves this problem through masternode technology. There are many more masternodes than miners on the Dash network so transactions are fulfilled faster. The average InstaSend transaction takes about 1 second to complete. You pay a bit more in fees for an instant transaction but the average standard Dash transaction still only takes about 2.5 minutes — an improvement over Bitcoin.
Dash investors believe that this mix of enhanced security and nearly instant transactions will push Dash to be the next great fiat currency alternative. Over 150 exchanges and brokers now support Dash purchases with over 4,800 merchants and services.
Ready to invest in Dash? Buying Dash is pretty easy, even for beginners. Just follow these steps.
The easiest way to buy Dash is to work through a broker who supports fiat to Dash conversions. A large number of brokers now carry Dash — but all brokers aren’t equal. Here are a few features you should look at when you compare brokers.
Security: It can be very difficult to get your coins back if your account is hacked or compromised, due to the anonymous nature of cryptocurrency transactions. Look for a broker that offers enhanced security features, like 2-factor authentication and multi-layer encryption.
Ease of use and access: Just getting started learning about crypto portfolio trackers and exchanges? Focus on finding a broker that offers an order process that you understand. Watch a few YouTube tutorials before you commit to opening an account with any broker to make sure that you understand how to operate the platform, place orders and move your coins.
Availability in your area: The legality of cryptocurrencies is a hotly debated topic. Not every broker or exchange platform operates in every country. Even within the U.S., every broker isn’t allowed to offer service in every state. Make sure you live in an area that your broker is able to service before you commit to opening an account.
Coin offerings: There are thousands of cryptocurrencies on the market, and no individual broker offers access to all of them. Know which coins you want to trade before you open an account and double-check that your broker offers your preferred coins. Most brokerages and exchanges have a convenient “supported coins” section on their website.
Mobile trading: Do you like to trade on the go? If so, look for a broker that offers a mobile trading app. Check and make sure the app offers full trading capabilities and real-time data before you download, as cryptocurrency prices can change at a second’s notice.
Once you choose a broker that supports Dash and has the features you’re looking for, open an account. The specific process you’ll use to create your account can vary from broker to broker. You may need to upload some personal information before your broker can open your account, depending on where you’re located. Be prepared to enter your Social Security Number, photo ID and full address before you can start trading.
Most brokerages have a short waiting period from when you create an account to when you can begin trading. This waiting period is so the broker can record and verify your personal information. Waiting periods vary by broker but you can usually expect to see your account fully operational within a few business days.
You can start buying and selling Dash once your verification is complete. First, you’ll need to link some kind of payment method to fund your transactions. You may also be able to buy cryptocurrencies with a wire transfer, bank account deposit, credit or debit card. Most brokers charge an additional fee when you buy crypto with a credit card.
Link your payment method using your broker’s instructions. There may be an additional waiting or verification period, depending on the type of payment method you choose.
You can finally buy Dash when you link and verify your payment method. It might be tempting to dive right in after multiple waiting periods but it’s a good idea to be smart about when to buy. Take some time and watch how the market moves. Take a look at a few candlestick charts and use your crypto platform or crypto app to track how Dash moves over time. This will help you get more Dash for your money and sell more profitably later on.
Place an order through your broker once you think the price of Dash is low and it’s a good time to buy. You can usually place two different types of orders:
A market order buys Dash at the current price on the market. It’s likely that a market order will result in a higher price point than what you originally request if you order a large amount of Dash. Market orders are more likely to get filled because the price is flexible.
A limit order tells your broker that you want to buy a certain amount of Dash, but only at a specific price point. When you place a limit order, you input the number of Dash coins you want and the price you’re willing to pay for each coin. For example, if you place a limit order for 50 Dash at $80 each, your broker will continue to buy Dash for you but only if the price is equal to or less than $80. If the price goes above $80, the broker will not buy any more Dash until the price drops. Limit orders are a safer financial bet but are less likely to be completely filled.
You can track the status of your order through your broker’s platform. It may take a few minutes for your Dash to be successfully transferred to your account after you fund the transaction. You’ll see your Dash in your brokerage account once your transaction closes.
Cryptocurrency can be a fun and exciting market. There’s a large potential for profit with large daily swings — even when you only have a small amount of capital in your brokerage account. It’s important to remember that you can lose money quickly when you trade cryptocurrency. Focus on finding a trading strategy that works for you, do your homework on a coin before you decide to invest and never invest more money than you can afford to lose.
