For most investors in their 40s, this downturn could be their first real test. You probably feel like taking action to protect yourself, but before you do, read this.
The recent bear market has impacted virtually every investor. It’s had a very different impact on investors in their 40s.
How to Handle Coronavirus Market Meltdown: Advice from the Pros
There are approximately 40 million U.S. residents between ages 40 and 49. They were much younger during the Great Recession of 2008-2009 and likely had much smaller investment portfolios. During the past decade, many have invested methodically and seen their nest eggs swell. So, make no mistake, this current downturn stings. It’s likely their first real bear market experience.
I recently spoke with a client in her early 40s who has built an impressive amount of wealth in the past decade. Here’s what she said: “I know this volatility is short-term, and it doesn’t affect my long-term plan. So, I should stay invested ... right?”
Her statement reflects the concerns of many people. They are successful, financially savvy and have a good sense of the actions they need to take — or not take — during these troubled times. But knowing the right thing to do doesn’t make it easy. For the first time ever, a large amount of their investments is at risk. They need to be reassured that sticking to the plan truly is what they need to be doing right now.
For investors in their 40s — climbing toward the peak of their corporate careers or business — I realize there is much more at stake now than a decade ago. Here are three pieces of advice that will help remind you about the importance of staying the course for your long-term financial plan.
If you have a six- or seven-figure investment portfolio, it’s easy to think about selling at least part of your holdings and dumping them into cash. Why not save at least part of your hard-earned investments, right?
Wrong. Remember, successful long-term investors want to buy low and sell high. If you sell investments now, you are very likely selling at prices much lower than we’ll see in the future. One of the greatest mistakes you can make is to cauterize temporary investment losses as permanent by selling at a loss.
Consider this exercise: If you find yourself tempted to act quickly despite knowing it’s not in your long-term best interest, wait one 24-hour news cycle before selling. It's amazing how much our perspectives, and the stock market, can change in such a short period of time.
If you have a strong working relationship with a financial adviser, speak with them about your investment portfolio before you make any changes. If you don’t have an adviser, speak with one now before pulling the plug.
At the very least, it often helps to run your ideas by someone your trust — a friend, parent or colleague. Sometimes, when we hear ourselves voice our concerns out loud, it helps re-center our mind on what we know to be true.
