Insulet’s Omnipod DASH™ System Voted 2020 Product of the Year in Health Systems Category by 40,000 U.S. Consumers
Insulet Corporation (NASDAQ: PODD) (Insulet or the Company), the global leader in tubeless insulin pump technology with its Omnipod® DASH Insulin Management System (Omnipod DASH™ System), announced today that the Company’s Omnipod DASH™ System has been named the 2020 Product of the Year in the Health Systems category. Product of the Year is the largest consumer-voted award for product innovation with 40,000 U.S. consumers surveyed.
"We are always listening to our consumers and as a result, we offer a product that meets our users where they are in life. Everything we do is with the end-user in mind and our Omnipod DASH System was designed to be intuitively simple and easy to use," said Bret Christensen, Chief Commercial Officer. "We are honored to have been selected for this award. We have been recognized in the past for our technology and talent, however this award is powerful because it comes directly from consumers, many of whom are living with or touched by diabetes in some way. We are determined to continue advancing the space with our innovative consumer-centric solutions that make diabetes a smaller part of people’s lives."
Insulet’s Omnipod DASH System provides users with a simple and effective solution that fits easily into their daily lives by eliminating the burden of syringes, pens and tubes and 97%1 of users would recommend it to others.
The Omnipod System is the first and only tubeless device that can provide up to three days of non-stop insulin delivery.
Its unique design consists of a tubeless, waterproof* Pod controlled by a touch-screen Bluetooth® enabled controller, minimizing the number of components to carry.
The Pod can be worn anywhere an injection would be administered.
Mobile Apps allow consumers even more discretion and provide caregivers remote care of their loved ones, making diabetes a smaller part of life.
"For Product of the Year it’s always been about innovation; yesterday, today and tomorrow. It’s what we love, and likewise, we are laser-focused on championing and highlighting superior products," said Mike Nolan, Global Chief Executive Officer, Product of the Year. "Our unique process of polling 40,000 independent voters means shoppers, retailers and manufacturers continue to genuinely trust the seal."
The survey is conducted by Kantar , a global leader in consumer research, and evaluates product appeal, satisfaction, advocacy, purchase interest, uniqueness, relevance and excitement. To learn more about the 2020 Product of the Year winners, please visit Woman’s Day or productoftheyearusa.com .
About the Omnipod DASH System:
Insulet’s Omnipod DASH System was designed to serve as the foundation for the Company’s future innovation. Designed with user discretion and convenience in mind, the Omnipod DASH System is a continuous insulin delivery system consisting of two simple components: a tubeless, waterproof*, Bluetooth wireless technology Pod that holds up to 200 units of U-100 insulin and a modern, color touch-screen Personal Diabetes Manager (PDM) that controls the Pod. The Omnipod DASH System has a suite of optional mobile apps for users, caregivers and HCPs to help simplify diabetes management. The Omnipod DASH System, which received FDA clearance in June 2018, is the only DTSec and ISO 27001 certified insulin pump for cyber and information security and safety.
Insulet Corporation (NASDAQ: PODD), headquartered in Massachusetts, is an innovative medical device company dedicated to making the lives of people with diabetes and other conditions easier through the use of its Omnipod product platform. The Omnipod Insulin Management System provides a unique alternative to traditional insulin delivery methods. With its simple, wearable design, the disposable Pod provides up to three days of non-stop insulin delivery, without the need to see or handle a needle. Insulet also leverages the unique design of its Pod by tailoring its Omnipod technology platform for the delivery of non-insulin subcutaneous drugs across other therapeutic areas. For more information, please visit: www.insulet.com and www.omnipod.com .
About Product of the Year:
Product of the Year is the largest consumer-voted award for product innovation. Established over 30 years ago, Product of the Year currently operates in over 45 countries with the same purpose: Guide consumers to the best products in their market and reward manufacturers for quality and innovation. Product of the Year winners are backed by the votes of 40,000 consumers in a national representative study conducted by research partner Kantar, a global leader in consumer research. For more information, visit productoftheyearusa.com .
This press release may contain forward-looking statements concerning Insulet's expectations, anticipations, intentions, beliefs or strategies regarding the future. These forward-looking statements are based on its current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects on Insulet. There can be no assurance that future developments affecting Insulet will be those that it has anticipated. These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond its control) or other assumptions that may cause actual results or performance to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements, and other risks and uncertainties described in its Annual Report on Form 10-K, which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in February 2020 in the section entitled "Risk Factors," and in its other filings from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should any of its assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary in material respects from those projected in these forward-looking statements. Insulet undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements.
1 Nov 2019 Customer Satisfaction Survey.
*The Pod has a waterproof IPX8 rating for up to 25 feet for 60 minutes. The PDM is not waterproof.
© 2020 Insulet Corporation. Omnipod and Omnipod DASH are trademarks or registered trademarks of Insulet Corporation in the United States of America and other various jurisdictions. All rights reserved. The Bluetooth® word mark is a registered trademark owned by the Bluetooth SIG, Inc. and any use of such marks by Insulet Corporation is under license.
View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20200305005044/en/
