Jackass penguin call shares traits of human speech, scientists say
The African penguin is also known as the jackass penguin because of its distinctive sound – like a braying donkey in distress.
The call of the jackass penguin, a wheezing bray that sounds like a donkey in distress, follows some of the same linguistic laws found in human languages, scientists have found.
Researchers say that, just like in our own speech, more frequently used sounds within the call tend to be shorter, while the longer the call, the shorter the sounds within it. It is the first time this pattern has been shown outside primates.
“We can probably find many other species that conform to these laws because this is probably a general principle, rather than something related to human language specifically,” said Dr Livio Favaro, a co-author of the research now at the University of Turin.
Prof Stuart Semple of the University of Roehampton, who was not involved in the work but has previously conducted similar research in non-human primates, said the new study adds weight to the idea that animals tend to convey information in the most efficient way. Such an approach is known as “compression” and is also seen in systems such as morse code where the most commonly used letters have the simplest and shortest sounds – either a dot or a dash.
“If you have compression in the communication system it is more efficient,” said Semple. “So it is the sort of thing that evolution will have acted on because animals that communicate efficiently are expending less energy.”
Writing in the journal Biology Letters , Favaro and colleagues describe how they analysed 590 vocalisations recorded from 28 adult African penguins – also known as jackass penguins because of their distinctive sound – that live in Italian zoos.
These vocalisations were so-called “ecstatic display songs” – calls, typically uttered by males, that communicate an individual’s identity, tell rivals that territory is taken, and help the birds bag a mate.
These songs are made up of sequences of three distinctive types of sound – or syllables.
The team say the findings suggests the penguins’ songs follow two laws seen across a wide range of human languages as well as some, but not all, non-human primates – Zipf’s law of brevity and the Menzerath-Altmann law.
The former states that the more often a sound is used the shorter it is – in English, for example, the most common words include “the”, “to” and “of” – while the latter says that the longer a unit of language the shorter the components within it: for example cumbersome words tend to contain shorter syllables than simple ones.
“One-syllable words can be very long, like ‘strength’, but many-syllable words tend to have short syllables, like ‘pa-ra-me-ter-ise’,” said Prof Chris Kello, an expert in modelling language patterns at the University of California, Merced who was not involved in the latest research.
While the new study has limitations – including that it only looked at one form of vocalisation among the penguins – Favaro said the study shows the linguistic laws are not about language per se, as they are not linked to semantics or syntax, but are rooted more in a fundamental principle of sharing information efficiently. What’s more, he added, the research reveals the interplay of different evolutionary pressures, such as the need to convey the size of the animal and its identity, all while communicating efficiently.
Kello welcomed the study. “Linguistic laws, like Zipf’s law of brevity and the Menzerath-Altmann law, were originally discovered in text,” he said, noting that meant it was initially thought that they arose from the symbolic nature of human language.
“This new study provides more evidence that the laws are physical and not symbolic, because even penguins show them. Instead, the laws seem to reflect something deeper and more general about communication and information.”
