The Body Coach Joe Wicks was kept in hospital and needing surgery overnight.
Get celebrity exclusives straight to your inbox!
When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
Joe Wicks has given concerned fans an update after waking up from surgery following his hospital dash.
The 33 year old revealed on Friday that he had been rushed to hospital and was being kept in overnight due to his hand injury becoming infected.
Fitness coach Joe has now returned to social media after his operation, joking that it looks like he has "a golf ball" under his bandage.
Joe, who has been giving free online PE lessons to children during the coronavirus lockdown, had minor surgery on his hand in March after falling off his bike.
Joe Wicks has given fans an update after waking up from surgery following his hospital dash (Image: Instagram/Joe Wicks)
But, documenting his most recent hospital dash, he explained he had been left in agony as his injury had become infected.
In a new upload, in which the father-of-two models a filter that shows him wearing neon glasses, he has given a new update.
Addressing his 3.6million Instagram followers, he wrote over the video: "Surgery complete. Wires all out. Infection cleaned up.
Joe joked he had a "golf ball" underneath his bandage (Image: Instagram/Joe Wicks)
"They gave me a general anaesthetic which was awesome so didn't feel a thing and was sparko," alongside a sleeping emoji.
He continued: "Thank you @kingstonhospitaluk," after previously heaping praise onto the NHS.
Speaking in the video, he said: "Just got out of surgery, they got me in there early doors. They've taken the wires out.
Joe revealed he had been admitted to hospital on Friday (Image: Joe Wicks/ Instagram)
"They've left a golf ball in there by the looks of things, but they've done a great job. Yeah, it's good."
On Friday, The Body Coach revealed that he had to stay overnight in hospital and was on a drip as he waited to go under the knife to remove the wires from his hand.
Sharing an X-ray, he explained: "Great news. Bones have healed. Wires haven't broke but the soft tissue is inflamed and possibly infected. They are operating today and removing the wires.
