The tension has become a backdrop for legislative negotiations.
Republicans, who have the Senate majority, are moving several bills that would direct Walz to take steps toward reopening and to assert more authority over how coronavirus response spending is done.
After Monday, Walz won’t have the power to direct spending from a COVID-19 fund. The Democratic House is primed to give him more time, but it could be a bargaining chip.
Walz said he’s well aware it’s a two-way street.
“I would just hope they can find a compromise by Monday to continue that on,” he said.
As of Sunday, $65 million of an initial $200 million in a COVID-19 response fund had yet to be designated, but Minnesota Management and Budget Commissioner Myron Frans has said several requests were pending.
“We are working on a pandemic. We are working on saving lives. Buying PPE (personal protective equipment). Setting up alternative care sites. Buying storage facilities for deceased remains,” Frans said. “ So this is not an opportunity anyone would ever take undue license with.”
Lawmakers are expected to put more money into the fund, some of which can be offset with federal aid.
Rep. Pat Garofalo, R-Farmington, said there’s bipartisan agreement on that.
“We’re going to appropriate more money into this fund. This is not a battle, it’s a war,” he said. “So additional money will be going into this fund. It’s just a necessity.”
The duration of an extension is part of the discussion. Democrats are ready to stretch the deadline for spending from the fund to June 2021; Republicans want it to be limited to weeks or months so Walz would have to keep them in the mix on key decisions.
The looming $2.4 billion budget deficit is another big factor. Bills that aren’t related to the coronavirus fight have been pushed to the side if they involve new spending.
One lingering flashpoint is a set of state employee contracts that await legislative ratification.
The House could vote Monday to endorse them, but Senate leaders say they should be reopened to peel back raises due to be awarded in July.
MPR News is dedicated to bringing you clarity in coverage from our reporters across the state, stories that connect us, and conversations that provide perspectives when we need it most. We rely on your help to do this. Your donation has the power to keep MPR News strong and accessible to all during this crisis and beyond.
