Photo: Tolulope Komolafe moved to the U.S. from Lagos, Nigeria just over a year ago after working at software training startup Andela. Photo credit: Rotimi Okungbaye via Andela.
After Tolulope Komolafe was laid off from her job at startup Everplans in March, the software developer sent out a tweet to summon the internet’s help. She needed to find a new job in 60 days or her work visa would expire, essentially forcing her to return to Nigeria. Her ask went viral. After interviews with dozens of companies, in early May she accepted an offer in software development at equity management startup Carta.
“It was totally overwhelming,” she said of getting laid off and the subsequent rush to find a new job.
Two thousand miles away in Salt Lake City, Bharat Soin is planning to leave the U.S. by the end of the month if he doesn’t find a new job that will allow him to retain his work visa. Carta, the same firm that made an offer to Komolafe, laid off the 30-year-old Indian finance professional in April. Since losing his job, Soin has been reaching out to hundreds of companies, including Amazon and Morgan Stanley. “Honestly, it’s been really hard,” he said. “You’re competing against people from Uber, Lyft, Boeing.”
Read deeply reported stories from the largest newsroom in tech.
Uber CEO Wants to Shift More Engineering Jobs to India, Sparking Internal Debate
By Amir Efrati · July 2, 2020  7:01 AM PDT
Since Dara Khosrowshahi became CEO of Uber in 2017, he has been steadily pushing his engineering team to move jobs to India as a way of saving money. Despite some resistance from his top technology executive, Khosrowshahi made progress: about 15% of Uber’s engineering team, or about 600 people, is now in India. That’s up from 80 engineers in 2017.
By Martin Peers · July 2, 2020
By Laura Mandaro · July 1, 2020
By Nick Bastone · July 1, 2020
Receive a summary of the day's top tech news—distilled into one email.
View stories on our mobile app and tune into our weekly podcast.
Deep-dive into topics like startups and autonomous vehicles with our top reporters and other executives.
Read without any banner ads.
