This partnership saw Liquid integrates Dash InstantSend on its platform.
Some aspects of this collaboration unannounced but the firms aim to unveil them with time.
New users that sign up for Liquid will benefit from zero withdrawal fees for a limited period.
Liquid, a leading, Japan-headquartered crypto exchange has joined hands with Dash to help improve user experience for crypto adopters across the globe. Dash unveiled this news via a press release on June 23, noting that this Liquid had incorporated Dash InstantSend on its platform. In so doing, the two firms will provide crypto enthusiasts with near-instant deposit, withdrawal, trade, and arbitrage opportunities.
According to the press release , this partnership will see Liquid users enjoy an enhanced user experience for Dash on its platform. At the moment, the exchange offers one trading pair for Dash, DASH/BTC. However, the exchange will reportedly add a DASH/USDT trading pair in the coming week. While the exchange already has one of the best user experiences in the crypto space regarding service levels and security, it still aims to make it better, a goal that Dash shares.
Commenting on this strategic collaboration, Ryan Taylor, Dash Core Group CEO said,
“Liquid is emerging as one of the leading trading platforms in the industry. They understand the value of providing the best possible experience for users and maintaining a robust API for programmers. It’s no surprise that their team immediately appreciated the features of Dash and what they can provide to Liquid’s users. We look forward to exploring numerous opportunities to expand services for both Dash and Liquid users that we think the market will love.”
Per the publication, this partnership focuses on increasing awareness and delivering a seamless user experience. However, many details of this collaboration remain unannounced. However, as this relationship continues flourishing, the firm will allegedly make additional announcements that are set to excite both communities. These features that are yet to be announced will reportedly culminate in strategic global growth for both companies and crypto adopters at large.
Elated about this partnership, Liquid’s head of partner solutions, Marissa McKnight said,
“We are excited to partner with Dash Core Group to enable InstantSend and invite the Dash community to start trading on Liquid to experience the best possible UX and speed. Working with Dash also aligns with Liquid’s mission of making financial services accessible to all and making cryptocurrency part of everyday life with payments.”
To help attract more users on Liquid, the two firms are offering zero withdrawal fees. Additionally, they are offering a 10% discount on transaction fees when using Dash on the platform. To enjoy these benefits, users only have to sign up using a provided referral link . However, this promotion will only last for a limited period. On top of this, the two firms are hosting a Fast Deposit Campaign, wherein the first depositors for a specific round will stand a chance to win a prize.
Do you think Liquid’s and Dash’s goal off improving user experience will help increase the number of users on the exchange? Share your thoughts in the comment section below.
