Australia's decision to purchase longer range anti-ship missiles, part of a revised 10-year defence strategy , has caused few ripples throughout south-east Asia.
In fact the upgrade in Australia's strike capacity is likely to be quietly welcomed by our allies in the region. They are under no illusions about how much the security environment has changed as China has grown into a great economic power with an expanding military presence in the region, and the United States has become a less reliable security partner.
Shares concerns about regional stability: Indonesian Defence Minister Prabowo Subianto, centre, shares a light moment with Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi, left, and State Secretary Pratikno after his swearing-in ceremony last year.
As former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull observed recently, there is nothing that nation can do - short of war - to demilitarise the islands China has claimed in the South China Sea.
It is in that context that Australia has decided to bolster its strike capabilities to defend itself and its allies in the region.
The reaction from Jakarta is instructive. Responding to the announcement, the Indonesian government said it shared Australia's concern about growing instability in the region and stressed the need for peace, rather than military conflict, in the South China Sea.
Indonesia's Defence Minister Prabowo Subianto, right, greets Foreign Minsiter Marise Payne and Defence Minister Linda Reynolds, left.
"Indonesia has been working hard [to ensure] that no military conflict is present in the South China Sea. And it hopes that all parties including China and the US [show] restraint and countries in the region jointly prevent military conflict".
The Philippines and Malaysia have made low-key statements about the acquisition too, reflecting ASEAN nations' aversion to conflict and interference in the affairs of other nations.
Ristian Atriandi Supriyanto, an Indonesian PhD scholar at the Australian National University's Strategic and Defence Studies Centre, says Australia's strategy will allow it to keep pace with China, Vietnam and Indonesia, all whom have some form of long-range missile systems.
A US Air Force plane releases a Long Range Anti-Ship Missile (LRASM) during a test event. Australia is planning to buy 200 missiles to arm its air force.
"It’s an action-reaction cycle going on here and Australia is just jumping on the bandwagon and trying to keep pace with regional developments," he said.
"The question will be where they [the Super Hornet planes that carry the missiles] are based – in Australia, or in Malaysia and Singapore too? And in what scenarios will these missile systems be deployed? These are the pertinent questions, rather than the possession of the missiles themselves."
The head of the ANU's National Security College, Rory Medcalf, said the "modest extension of the range" of strategic strike abilities allowed Australia to keep pace with a rapidly evolving strategic environment and was unlikely to upset neighbouring countries.
"Other middle powers like Indonesia, Vietnam and Singapore are likely to welcome Australia being a more credible security partner and that's what this capability gives us, just as we would welcome them building up their capabilities."
Indonesia is not a claimant state to islands in the South China Sea but China claims part of Indonesia's North Natuna Sea , which overlaps with the South China Sea as part of its so-called nine-dash line claim to about 80 per cent of the waters.
In recent months, Chinese Coast Guard vessels and fishing fleets have provocatively ventured into Indonesian waters, harassed a Malaysian oil exploration vessel and sunk a Vietnamese fishing boat in the South China Sea.
Indonesia - like other countries in the region - is heavily dependent on trade with China.
So no nation is going to shout from the rooftops that they welcome Australia's increased military capabilities — a whispered "thank you" is more likely — lest they anger their key trading partner.
That's because for all the attempts by United States defence establishment to project reliability and continuity in uncertain times, it hasn't escaped any country's notice that under the mercurial President Donald Trump, policy setting can flip 180 degrees in the time it takes to tap out a 280-character tweet.
Between an unreliable US and an increasingly bellicose China, the middle powers of south-east Asia increasingly confront the reality that they must band more tightly together to have any chance of shaping the region.
