Mekhi Becton, heaviest player at the NFL Combine, dazzles in 40-yard dash
By						Sports Desk February 28, 2020
A day after Henry Ruggs III lit up the 40-yard dash track at the NFL Scouting Combine, an athlete of vastly different proportions sent shockwaves through Lucas Oil Stadium.
While speedy wide receiver Ruggs' time of 4.27 seconds was widely anticipated, few expected what Louisville offensive tackle Mekhi Becton delivered in Indianapolis.
Despite weighing in as the heaviest prospect at the combine at 364 pounds, Becton surged down the track in 5.10 seconds.
Becton ran the first 10 yards, offering seen as a more useful gauge of an offensive lineman's athleticism, in 1.8 secs.
He paid the price for his efforts, though, as he was later seen with an ice pack strapped to his thigh, preventing him from doing any on-field drills.
However, already viewed as a likely first-round pick, Becton should have made enough of an impression to ensure he will hear his name called early come April 23.
Kirk Cousins believes Cam Newton is in an ideal place to relaunch his career after agreeing to join the New England Patriots.
Newton has expressed his excitement after negotiating a one-year, $7.5million contract with Bill Belichick's team, who saw six-time Super Bowl champion Tom Brady leave in free agency.
Former NFL MVP Newton was released by the Carolina Panthers in March after nine seasons with the franchise, the end of his stay having been impacted by shoulder and foot injuries.
The 31-year-old quarterback faced an uncertain future as he remained unsigned through the start of free agency and the draft period until striking a deal with the Patriots this week.
Cousins is intrigued to see how the move plays out and thinks Belichick may surprise people with his plans for Newton and a QB room which also includes Jarrett Stidham and Brian Hoyer.
"It was going to be fascinating regardless of who is there because of Tom leaving," Minnesota Vikings QB Cousins said to Inside the Huddle.
"But I'm excited to see how it works out with Cam or Brian Hoyer or whoever they play and how they mix them in.
"I know coach Belichick will have a plan and it may not be what everyone thinks.
"It will be interesting when you look at what coach Belichick has done bringing in players in a unique situation for many years.
"It's always seemed to work out. He rarely has a player who comes in who had success elsewhere and then comes in and struggles in New England so I would think it's a good situation for Cam.
"To go to an organisation that really has a plan, has a way to win and they can plug him in.
"And it's only a one-year contract so if it works out really well and they have a lot of success, Cam will be in a great position to see where his next step can be."
Green Bay Packers rookie quarterback Jordan Love has signed his first NFL contract with the NFC North franchise.
According to a report from NFL Network's Mike Garafolo, Love has agreed terms on a four-year, fully guaranteed $12.38million deal with a $6.56million signing bonus.
The Packers pulled off a shock back in April's NFL Draft when they traded up four spots to acquire Utah State's Love.
Two-time MVP Aaron Rodgers led Green Bay to the NFC Championship Game last season and remains under contract for the next four years.
However, by selecting Love, the Packers showed they are looking to the future, even if the rookie is unlikely to start for the next couple of seasons, barring an injury to 36-year-old Rodgers.
As well as getting Rodgers under contract, Green Bay also agreed to terms with running back AJ Dillon, their second-round pick in this year's draft.
Julian Edelman is ready for a new era in New England following the signing of Cam Newton, but Patriots legend Tom Brady was quick to remind him of their storied partnership.
Newton, the NFL MVP in 2015, could soon be the starting quarterback for the Patriots after reportedly inking a one-year deal with New England following his release by the Carolina Panthers in March.
Having battled shoulder and foot issues in his final two seasons with the Panthers, there is doubt as to whether he can recapture his best.
However, if healthy, Newton will be regarded as the favourite to take the reins of the offense from Brady following his departure for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers after 20 seasons and six Super Bowl titles, with 2019 fourth-round pick Jarrett Stidham having previously been seen as the presumptive 2020 starter.
Brady's rapport with wide receiver Edelman was crucial to three of New England's six championships, with the latter named MVP of their Super Bowl LIII win over the Los Angeles Rams at the end of the 2018 season.
In an Instagram post featuring a mocked-up image of Edelman celebrating with Newton in Patriots uniforms, the wideout expressed excitement at the former Panther's arrival.
Given the success the two enjoyed together, Brady's claim may be correct, but he could soon have some competition if Newton returns to peak form in Foxborough.
