ClarksvilleNOW / Local / Business / Old Glory Distilling Co. Shares Bourbon Release & New Cocktail Bar Details
By Old Glory Distilling Co. November 14, 2019 7:46 am
Clarksville NowOld Glory Distilling Co.
CLARKSVILLE, Tenn. (CLARKSVILLENOW) – Old Glory Distilling Co. has added another reason to celebrate during this Holiday season! In the middle of Halloween candy, Thanksgiving turkey, and Christmas presents is Old Glory Distilling Co.’s Small Batch Bourbon Release this Saturday, November 16, 2019 at 9am.
Small Batch is a term that’s used loosely in the bourbon world, so here’s the scoop on what Small Batch means from Old Glory. For starters, every drop of whiskey was mashed, fermented, distilled, barreled, and aged on-site in Clarksville, TN. A sample was pulled from each and every barrel of bourbon in the batch, and each sample was individually analyzed for its aroma, taste on the palate, and its finish. Each barrel sample that made the cut was blended to find the perfect balance of character between the small 25 gallon and standard 53 gallon barrels in this batch. The result is a truly unique Small Batch blend that Old Glory is proud to share.
The 2019 Small Batch Bourbon release from Old Glory has spent between 28 and 36 months in barrels soaking up the creamy vanilla and brown sugar flavors from the oak. Using locally sourced grains, the mash bill, or recipe, is 73% corn, 19% rye, and 8% malted barley. The higher rye percentage is one of the factors that sets Old Glory apart, lending a variety of spices including clove and nutmeg to the profile.
So where can you get it? Old Glory Small Batch Bourbon Whiskey will be available in limited supply beginning at 9am on Saturday, November 16 only in the distillery bottle shop at 451 Alfred Thun Rd.
In addition to the Small Batch Bourbon release, Old Glory is officially launching their late-night Craft Cocktail Bar this Saturday. This casual-meets-upscale bar experience has a warm and rustic atmosphere showcasing views into the production distillery. The new bar will boast an ever-changing menu dedicated to unique but approachable seasonal craft cocktails and food that includes charcuterie boards, olive martinis, caramel popcorn, and more.
The new Bottle Shop & Craft Cocktail Bar hours are:
