And Biyani is now struggling to find investors. According to reports , Biyani has given the mandate to Ambit – the investment bank, to find buyers for Future Supply Chain.
Future Consumer is currently looking to raise ₹300 crore through a rights issue.
Reports also say that Biyani is looking to sell a major stake in Future Retail to Amazon and Blackstone. In January 2020, Amazon had already signed a long-term business agreement with Kishore Biyani’s Future Group. As per the deal, Amazon will become Future Retail’s authorized online sales channel.
Future Retail’s share price has also been battered.
For over two months now, malls are shut in India owing to the coronavirus lockdown. Credit rating agency CARE ratings has given the retail sector in India a ‘Negative’ outlook. “The impact on demand, which is expected to remain muted at least for the next three or four quarters, will be more in case of players with presence in non-essential items and luxury segments,” said the ratings agency in its report.
Big Bazaar, which finds its outlets in malls too, has taken a big hit. The chain of stores don’t just sell grocery but a major source of its revenue comes from its apparel section which saw no sales for the lockdown period. ““Future Retail is only able to sell its lower-margin essential items, which has led to monthly sales declining by around 75% in March and April 2020 from normal levels, and continues to limit Future Retail’s ability to generate cash to meet working capital requirements,” Fitch reportedly said citing ‘substantial risk’ to its rating.
And even after stores open, the precautions for coronavirus won’t come cheap at retail stores. “Operating costs will go up by 30-35% easily for small stores, larger stores will see costs going up by 10-15%,” Rakesh Biyani , Future Retail’s Managing Director, said in an interview. He also spoke about how maintaining social distancing at physical stores will also inch up costs.
Even before the Covid-19 pandemic struck, the brick and mortar retail major has been under the throes of an economic slowdown last year, which has affected consumption and also taken a toll on consumer confidence, which slipped to a six-year low.
