First I must go a bit deeper into the overall construction of the G Pen. It resembles a high quality German camera, a Leica M if you follow cameras. This unit is made with solid construction and handsome, smooth, expensive looking lines. The magnificent device fits right into your hand or palm. It doesn’t shout with bright kiddy-looking colors. The case is polished soft black and authoritative, but not flashy. This small device is smooth and elegant to the touch. The shape is no bigger than the key fob on your G-Wagon.
Turning the device on and off is as easy as clicking the well-placed button on the face of the device five times, or five times to turn it off. They call it a home button. Press it another three times (when on) to cycle between the heating levels. I found that the mid level is a good place to start with the medical cannabis I have at my disposal. It’s not advisable to burn your combustible materials, you want to take it slowly and be patient.
Using a vaporizer of this quality is not like smoking a vape pen, nor lighting a joint. It is another method of inhaling cannabis without burning your throat.
The Sour Saunders gentics are smooth across the palate, hints of dark stone fruits expand the mouth-feel, offering gobs of crushed pine needles, sea smoke and sweet caramelized nuts. The experience of the terroir or taste of the place is always apparent with this high quality device, which costs fewer than seventy-five dollars. Yes, you read that right. And I’ll bet you can get it for much less. Mine was about seventy.
Given the range and experience of cannabis vaporizers that I’ve tested as of late, this is by far the easiest to learn how to use. The learning curve is nonexistent. It’s virtually plug and play. Open the box, charge for about an hour or less (in my case, much less)... Grind your favorite herbs. Note to the consumer: no tobacco, nor concentrates, nor hash must ever enter the chamber. It will ruin your Dash, post haste! So don’t do it!
Grind your cannabis to a rough grind and stuff it into the chamber. You don’t have to add too much, it’s very efficient and you will smoke much less. The experience of smoking the G Pen Dash is akin to smoking vaporizers costing two hundred dollars more, why? They got my vote.
Sour Saunders got my vote too. I’ve been focusing on California, Colorado and Oregon so much lately. My eyes (and heart) are opened, yet again to the quest for the very best cannabis in the world. Have I found it?
Not yet because the research continues. Thank you. WB
Warren Bobrow, the Cocktail Whisperer, is the multi-published author of six books. Apothecary Cocktails: Restorative Drinks from Yesterday and Today, Whiskey Cocktails:
Warren Bobrow, the Cocktail Whisperer, is the multi-published author of six books. Apothecary Cocktails: Restorative Drinks from Yesterday and Today, Whiskey Cocktails: Rediscovered Classics and Contemporary Craft Drinks, Bitters and Shrub Syrup Cocktails: Restorative Vintage Cocktails, Mocktails & Elixirs, Cannabis Cocktails, Mocktails & Tonics: The Art of Spirited Drinks & Buzz-Worthy Libations and his celebrated, 2017 release, The Craft Cocktail Compendium. He also has an edition of Apothecary Cocktails translated into French for the European market. Bobrow led a panel on Cannabis Cocktails for Park Street University at the Berlin Bar Convent in Germany. Bobrow attended the B2B event named:Hall of Flowers in Santa Rosa, California in 2019. He currently makes his living in the Cannabis Industry having in prior years supported craft spirits focusing on craft Bourbon and unmanipulated rum. Warren has been a rum judge for the Rum XP and the Ministry of Rum having first tasted rum off of Anegada in the BVI- in the early 1980's.
Warren appeared on Viceland Live on February 27, 2019. He presented at 2018’s SXSW: Disrupting the Cannabis Kitchen and Cannabis Cocktails. He was the Mercedes-Benz Me Conference Mystery Speaker on Wellness for SXSW 2018. Bobrow has written articles for Saveur magazine, Voda magazine, Whole Foods-Dark Rye, Distiller, Beverage Media, DrinkupNY and many other national and global periodicals. He has written for SoFAB Magazine at the Southern Food and Beverage Museum in New Orleans and has in the past, written restaurant reviews for New Jersey Monthly. He has also contributed to the Sage Encyclopedia of Food Issues and the Oxford Encyclopedia edition: Savoring Gotham: A Food Lover's Companion to New York City. Warren judged the 2016 Asheville, NC, Cocktail Week. Warren was nominated for a Tales of the Cocktail Spirited Award in 2013. Warren appeared in the Saveur Magazine's "100" in 2010. He taught a Master Class on un-manipulated rum during the Moscow Bar Show in 2015 and a class on Mocktails and Acidulated Beverages, AKA: Shrubs at Stonewall Kitchen in York Harbor, Maine. His books consistently lead in overall sales during Tales of the Cocktail held yearly in New Orleans.
