Belfast study finds pine martens don’t venture into urban areas, where invasive grey squirrels thrive
A pine marten in Lochaber, in the Scottish Highlands. While red squirrels have adapted over hundreds of years to avoid them, greys have not.
Hopes that the resurgent predatory pine marten might “biologically control” grey squirrels and benefit the UK’s native red squirrels have been dashed by a new study, which found pine martens avoided urban areas.
Researchers from Queen’s University, Belfast, suggested that even if greys were driven out of rural areas, their populations would be constantly replenished from cities, where they thrived.
The lead author of the research, Joshua Twining, of Queen’s University Belfast, said: “As the pine marten does not occupy urban areas anywhere within its European range, it is not likely to be the sole solution to the invasive grey squirrel . If action is not taken to support the pine marten in the long run, we may see a reversal of their current success and doom our native red squirrels.”
The UK’s native red squirrel has been driven close to extinction by invasive greys. Photograph: Morgan Stephenson Wild Life/Alamy
Earlier studies in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland discovered that the pine marten created “a landscape of fear” for the grey squirrel, and dr ove away populations . Although pine martens, which almost became extinct during the 20th century, will also kill red squirrels, the smaller native squirrel has evolved and adapted to survive alongside the marten for thousands of years.
Grey squirrels were introduced into Britain and then Ireland in the 19th century from North America. The larger, heavier animals outcompete reds but also carry and spread squirrelpox , which does not affect greys but is rapidly fatal to reds.
The Belfast study used camera traps operated by citizen scientists at 332 sites across Northern Ireland in both urban and rural areas to measure pine martens and red and grey squirrels. Models were then used to predict the future distribution of the three species.
The results revealed that pine martens were deciduous woodland specialists, less numerous in non-native coniferous plantations, and displayed a strong aversion to busy urban areas. The study, published in the Journal of Applied Ecology , expected grey squirrels to persist in parkland areas of towns and cities.
Twining said: “The ability of the pine marten to control the grey squirrel and help red squirrel recovery in Ireland and Britain is limited by three things: its ongoing recovery, the lack of forest cover on the islands and the presence of urban refugia.”
