Springer Spaniel Dash has worked a specialist drugs dog for the force for over 11 years Credit: John Llewellyn
One of Dyfed Powys Police's most loyal and hardworking employees has retired, after more than a decade of service.
PD Dash, a Springer Spaniel, has worked as a drugs, cash and firearms search dog for eleven and a half years, recovering hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of drugs over the years.
His handler, PC John Llewellyn said he couldn't have asked for a better companion.
Throughout his career in West Wales, PD Dash has assisted with county lines drugs operations, and worked with the force's ports unit. He even assisted with searches during the London 2012 Olympics.
His handler John says it was a transition, but Dash now loves relaxing and putting his feet up Credit: John Llewellyn
Now he's handing over his responsibilities to younger dog Billy, who also lives with handler John as well as PD Cassie, a general purpose dog.
John took on his newest recruit on when he was just ten weeks old, but his older colleague Dash was ready to show him the ropes.
Billy has now passed his training and assessments to become a fully fledged police dog Credit: John Llewellyn
After spending his whole life living outside as a working dog, handler PC Llewellyn says Dash has taken a while to transition - he still loves sleeping in the police van - but he's firmly found his comfortable spot in front of the family's log burner.
His hard work and service to the force is due to be recognised next week, when he'll receive a medal and certificate from the Chief Constable.
Police Dogs are invaluable in helping the force protect their communities and safeguard vulnerable people, and Dash as helped protect his for over a decade - now he deserves all the pampering he can get.
Dash in his new favourite place, in front of the fire Credit: John Llewellyn
He'll enjoy the rest of his days at home with John and his family.
Retired Dash lives with PD Cassie - a general purpose dog, and PD Billy who's also a search dog Credit: John Llewellyn
