Microsoft Closing Its Stores For One Reason: They Are Bad
Grubhub said this month that first-quarter revenue rose 12%, to $363 million, as the number of active diners rose 24%, to 23.9 million, and gross food sales increased 8%, to $1.6 billion. Matt Maloney, Grubhub’s founder and CEO, said it plans to use “nearly all” of its second-quarter profit to generate additional orders for its restaurant partners under stress.
For Uber, first-quarter rides globally declined 3% as consumers stayed at home and shunned ride sharing, but Uber Eats saw a 54% surge in gross bookings, to $4.7 billion. That more than doubled the unit’s net revenue and helped narrow its adjusted loss. Uber Eats said it’s also seeing strong demand for grocery and convenience items as it has inked partnerships with supermarkets and convenience stores, allowing them to sell some staples and grocery items via its restaurant platform.
“Consolidation makes sense as scale and reduced competition can help ease cost pressures,” Cowen’s Charles said in a report Tuesday, adding that cities capping restaurant delivery fees at anywhere between 5% and 15% could also hurt these apps’ bottom line.
Grubhub is particularly under pressure as many small restaurants in New York, its top market, face a “long road to recovery” with the city struggling to combat the coronavirus. Deliveries to white-collar office workers in the city have also been hurt by remote working, he said.
For Uber Eats, a tie-up with Grubhub would give it a decided lead over DoorDash in the food delivery space in the U.S. Uber said this month that Uber Eats will exit eight unprofitable markets from Ukraine to Egypt, with CEO Dara Khosrowshahi saying Uber will “invest aggressively” only in markets where it’s confident it can establish or defend a No. 1 or No. 2 position. “This move will allow us to redouble our efforts in markets with larger long-term potential and higher returns like the U.S.,” he said.
There’s no consensus on just how big a share of U.S. food delivery Uber Eats holds, but all of the data indicates that Uber Eats with Grubhub would become the clear No. 1 in the U.S.
A survey released Tuesday by Consumer Intelligence Research Partners showed that among consumers who have used restaurant delivery in the past 90 days, Uber Eats was used most recently by 34% of consumers, followed by DoorDash (33%), Grubhub (21%) and Postmates (12%).
On the other hand, a study of over 190,000 transactions by Edison Trends, also released Tuesday, found that DoorDash had a 47% share of U.S. food delivery pie in April, followed by Uber Eats at 26% and Grubhub with 23%.
Yet another set of data from Second Measure showed DoorDash had an industry-leading 42% share of the market in March, followed by Grubhub at 28% and Uber Eats at 20%.
“We see an eventual migration to two players,” KeyBanc analyst Edward Yruma wrote Tuesday, adding that there are two large national players with Uber Eats and DoorDash and that the rest are more regional. “This market dynamic has driven unsustainable promotional levels. … A (Grubhub) deal would be a strong positive to Uber’s Eats business. … Eats has strong penetration in large national accounts but remains underrepresented in (small and medium businesses).”
