This week, gold fell from $1,590 to $1,455 before recovering around $1,500. The fall is approximately 8.4 in percentage terms, which is very high compared to average weekly movements. The coronavirus has increased volatility in all asset classes with the equity class’s daily movement of 6 per cent being common nowadays. Precious metals too have seen massive intraday movements and virus-related panic have forced investors to raise cash by selling gold and silver.
Investors should look at the history of 2008 crash where the same situation was playing out. In the mad dash to raise cash, sometimes even the safest of safe-haven assets get liquidated. During a heightened crisis of 2008 credit crunch, gold was getting liquidated along with S&P 500 but in Oct-Nov, gold prices started bottoming out in spite of S&P 500 still declining. Once the worst part of panic subsided, gold commenced a new bull market which eventually led prices to all time high. Same situation is playing out right now where in spite of safe haven status, gold is subject to selling pressure in a mad dash to raise cash.
The initial weakness is likely to last for the short term and gold prices will stabilize quickly once there is a suitable response from governments world over to contain the virus. There is panic going on as investors are continuously barraged by the worst possible news from the media. Now many of the governments have realized the destructive potential of the virus and have stepped up efforts to contain it. From writing blank cheques to initiating lockdown, governments are using every possible means to slow the spreading of the virus. US Fed and ECB have done their part by lowering the interest rate to near zero and unveiling a massive stimulus package.
Gold has taken support around $1450 and made a double bottom and if it breaches that level, we may see gold crashing till $1380. On the upside, the next resistance comes at $1570. After the gold has confirmed that a bottom is in place, its intermediate-term (3-6 month) direction should be pointed upward as investors will likely be worried about the lingering global economic impact of the virus for months to come.
(Disclaimer: The opinions expressed in this column are that of the writer. The facts and opinions expressed here do not reflect the views of www.economictimes.com .)
