Trading app Quantfury has added Dash, enabling holders to trade a wide variety of currencies and commodities.
Based in the British Virgin Islands, Quantfury allows users to deposit cryptocurrencies, now including Dash, and trade between a number of different assets. Supported cryptocurrencies in addition to Dash include Bitcoin, Ethereum, EOS, Litecoin, IOTA, NEO, Monero, XRP, Ethereum Classic, and Zcash, as well as a variety of fiat currencies including USD, EUR, GBP, CAD, JPY, AUD, NZD, and CHF. Additionally, trading 612 stocks is supported, as well as several major commodities.
Gregory Kim, CEO of Quantfury, sees the addition of Dash as useful due to its transaction speed, particularly for those in Latin America seeking to trade:
“In the world of trading and investing, speed and timing of deploying your assets is critical. The addition of Dash with its rapid transaction speed is a great advantage for  Quantfurians, especially those in Latin America countries such as Venezuela.”
At time of writing, Quantfury is not currently available to residents of Canada or the United States due to regulatory reasons.
According to Dash Core’s Business Development Manager LatAm Ernesto Contreras, Dash’s addition to Quantfury is key due to its quality user experience compared to other major cryptocurrencies, expanding its viability as a tool for entering the investment world:
“We are excited to begin a partnership with Quantfury as they are an innovative team that is aiming to change the way people interact with traditional financial markets. Dash is a user experience centric coin, and now Quantfury’s users will be able to benefit from faster transactions and access to these markets all over the world.”
Quantfury resembles Robinhood, a similar investment app targeted at younger generations seeking to easily invest and trade, and has been directly recommended by Quantfury for US customers seeking a similar service. Robinhood integrated Dash in January of last year.
Platforms like Quantfury join the ranks of an ever-growing list of services offering cryptocurrencies alongside traditional investments as the two asset worlds draw closer. In late April it was reported that E*Trade and TD Ameritrade were reportedly joining the cryptocurrecy markets in a limited capacity, while Bloomberg reported that Fidelity would likely soon follow suit .
The cryptocurrency market as a whole rests near the $229 billion mark at time of writing, up from its December low of just over $100 billion to where it had crashed after its all-time high of over $830 billion from the year before. Dash , for its part, is now up over double its bear market low of about $58 from mid-December to about $133 at time of writing.
