Racing returned to Shady Bowl Speedway on Saturday for the first time this season after the coronavirus delayed the start.
Fans had to adhere to rules set forth by local health officials and they were to maintain the six-foot buffer zones between groups of fans. Concession stands were closed as well.
There was a local winner in the street stock division as Quincy’s Josh Smith dominated the field in his Jamie Hunt Racing Camaro. Smith set the fast time and won the 25-lap main.
Quincy’s Josh Smith poses after claiming the street stock feature Saturday at Shady Bowl Speedway. (SUBMITTED PHOTO)
Terry Purtee came out of retirement to lead the first 20 laps before Smith sped by. Purtee had been out of the racing seat for 22 seasons. Jacob Heckman, Rob Schaeff and Phil Gussler Jr. rounded out the top five. Gussler took the dash, with Terry Purtee winning the heat.
The thunder cars were also on hand. Brad Blue set the quick time during time trials. The feature belonged to rookie driver Hunter Hicks of Piqua. Hicks led all the way to win his first ever feature in his Monte Carlo sponsored by J and J Enterprises. Dylan Pippin was second and was followed by Patrick Woods and Landen Jones.
For the modified division, Chris Parker of Bellefontaine set the pace in qualifying. He then dominated the field in the feature for the win. Brad Yelton, Daniel McPherson, Logan McPherson and Gregg Jackson filled out the top five. Jackson scored a win in the dash, with Buddy Townsend and Brian Brandyberry taking heat wins.
Bellefontaine’s Chris Parker poses after his first win in the modified feature Saturday at Shady Bowl Speedway. (SUBMITTED PHOTO)
The compacts feature turned out to be a wild affair. The 30-lap main was a crash fest with 27 cars taking the green flag. When the dust had cleared Nick Barrett was in victory lane. The Kettering resident won his second feature in his Barrett Tool and Technology ride.
Austin Eaton battled back from a crash to finish second. Jimmy McElfresh was third, with Cory Plunkett fourth and Alec Young fifth. Paul Levering and McElfresh took heat wins. Young was the dash winner.
The 100-lap Enduro saw Dayton’s Bobby Terry getting the win in his Southtown Heating and Cooling backed ride. The win was far from easy as he and Gary Williams battled nearly the full race. It became a race to be decided by who could work thru traffic. Williams could only watch as Terry took the checkered flag. It was the second win for Terry. Zack Beaty-Lakins was third. Nick Barrett and Don Mahaffey Jr. filled out the top five.
Racing will resume this Saturday night under the same format now in place. Fans will be allowed to sit in the grandstands as long as they maintain the six-feet buffer zone. There will be no concession stands open. Fans are advised to take their own beverages and food (no glass bottles allowed).
The late models, street stocks, compacts and thunder cars will be in action. Pits open at 2 p.m. with hot laps at 3:30 p.m. Cars will qualify at 5 p.m. with racing at 7 p.m. Spectator gates open at 4 p.m.
