PUBLISHED: 16:47 19 October 2019 | UPDATED: 16:47 19 October 2019
Thea Jackson from Hainford with the winnings from her Lego trolley dash at Jarrold in Norwich. Picture: Neil Didsbury
Christmas has come early for a six-year-old who struck lucky in a department store competition to wheel home a trolley-load of Lego.
To send a link to this page you must be logged in.
Thea Jackson from Hainford with the winnings from her Lego trolley dash at Jarrold in Norwich. With dad and mum Rob and Felicity Jackson and sister Elsa, eight. Picture: Neil Didsbury
Thea Jackson from Hainford won a competition with Jarrold over the summer holidays to take part in a "trolley dash" in the Norwich store's Lego department.
She was one of more than 600 children who entered the competition, open to those up to the age of 14, which would give the winner a minute to sweep the shelves and pick up as many Lego sets as possible.
Following a reconnaissance visit to the toy department the previous weekend, Thea came to the store on Saturday with mum and dad Felicity and Rob Jackson and sister Elsa, eight, to complete her dash.
Thea Jackson from Hainford with the winnings from her Lego trolley dash at Jarrold in Norwich. With Jarrold staff members Jim and Lynn. Picture: Neil Didsbury
In whirlwind minute rushing around the shelves, the light-footed Lego fan managed to grab 18 boxes - including plenty of her current favourite range, Harry Potter.
Mrs Jackson, 35, said she and her husband were surprised but excited when they found out their daughter had won the competition.
"Both the girls really enjoy playing with Lego. We were in Jarrold over the summer and saw the competition - I thought there wasn't much of a chance we would win but it was worth a try," she said.
Thea Jackson from Hainford ready for her Lego trolley dash at Jarrold in Norwich. Picture: Neil Didsbury
"Thea wasn't really sure what it meant so we watched some YouTube clips of trolley dashes and came to see where the Lego was so she could see what sort of things she might want to choose.
"She has been very excited, especially this week, saying there's only so many more sleeps before trolley dash. This morning she was eager to get up, saying 'it's my trolley dash today'.
"She is really into Harry Potter - she is reading the first book at the moment so she was desperate to get some more Harry Potter Lego. We went to Legoland last summer holiday and she chose the dragon set while we were there, so this has added to her collection."
Thea Jackson from Hainford with the winnings from her Lego trolley dash at Jarrold in Norwich. Picture: Neil Didsbury
Jim Stevenson, interim toy buyer at Jarrold, said Lego remained an eternal favourite with shoppers and was a big seller for the store.
"We struggle to keep Lego in stock. It probably accounts for a third of what we sell up here. Lego never goes away," he said.
If you value what this story gives you, please consider supporting the Eastern Daily Press. Click the link in the orange box below for details.
This newspaper has been a central part of community life for many years, through good times and bad, serving as your advocate and trusted source of local information. Our industry is facing testing times, which is why I’m asking for your support. Every single contribution will help us continue to produce award-winning local journalism that makes a measurable difference to our community.
To send a link to this page you must be logged in.
