Reopening NJ can feel slap-dash and confusing. Transparency could change that | Editorial
This week, we've reported at length about the gradual reopening now under way in the Garden State. As businesses of all kinds reopen — or plan to in the days and weeks ahead — we assessed the leadership and performance of Gov. Phil Murphy, who has been the face of the state's management of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Murphy has presided over daily briefings that were, in the dark days of April and early May, moments of stability and candor. Now, as the reopening begins, the briefings have become will-he-or-won't-he shows wherein the governor, smiling — even when peeved at probing questions from the press corps — doles out tidbits of news about what can reopen and when. The announcements too often come with little detail and rarely with any glimpse of how such policies was developed or what facts were drawn on to create them.
"For all his talk about data and science driving his decision to reopen the state, it's the gut check of New Jersey's chief executive that counts the most," columnist Charles Stile wrote. "Despite the aura of transparency created by his daily coronavirus briefings, the Goldman Sachs-groomed governor has managed the pandemic much like a close-to-the-vest CEO, hashing out decisions in the privacy of his executive suite with trusted advisers."
Questions: Reopening NJ: With vague guidance from state, we asked communities how they plan to safely reopen
The result has been frustrating, especially for weary New Jersey residents in grief as more than 12,000 of their friends, neighbors and loved ones have died from coronavirus. Keeping track of whatever stage we're collectively trying to navigate is a feat even the best schedulers couldn't attempt.
"Data will determine dates," Murphy has said repeatedly.
Yes, we know the rates of COVID-19 infection, hospitalizations and deaths are on decline. But how do those translate into decisions about reopening?
How are the successes of New Jersey's reopening stages being measured? Who's measuring them?
These lingering questions are eating away at  the political capital Murphy spent building with his strong leadership at the height of the crisis. That's a shame. The clarity and organization of the early days of the state's response are gone.
In their stead, we have what feels like a slap-dash approach that doesn't inspire confidence.
We've heard from leaders across the state — both public officials and business people — that they have wished that Murphy had continued his embrace of the style of Gov. Andrew Cuomo who has outlined seven benchmarks required for phased reopening in regions across New York. Each region of New York must report 15 or fewer new confirmed COVID-19 cases or five or fewer new deaths on a rolling, three-day average before entering the first phase of reopening.
Those kinds of benchmarks are a tangible way the public can understand and embrace reopening.
Even now, we believe New Jersey would welcome transparency on how Murphy and his administration are making their decisions on reopening.
We hope the governor can help us see more clearly in the days to come.
