A multi-sport athlete before becoming the NBA's greatest player of all-time, Michael Jordan could do a little bit of everything at an elite level. North Carolina coach Roy Williams , who assisted on Dean Smith's staff during Jordan's time with the Tar Heels, remembers witnessing greatness every day while watching the future six-time NBA Finals champion and his talent wasn't limited to the basketball floor.
During Monday's appearance on Colin Cowherd's show, The Herd , Williams said Jordan ran a 4.39 during his sophomore year in Chapel Hill. To put that blazing fast number in perspective, Jordan's time would've been tied for the 10th-fastest overall at this year's NFL Combine , joining the likes of first-round picks Isaiah Simmons and C.J. Henderson.
Williams said he'd never seen a player at his age as gifted as Jordan, who later played a couple years of professional baseball, and knew the sky was the limit for a kid out of Wilmington, North Carolina whose work ethic and will to win was unmatched.
"On Sunday afternoon of the first week that Michael was in camp, I was opening up Carmichael Arena at that time and kids were coming down to play pickup (games), and the counselor would bring over about 30 kids at a time," Williams told Cowherd. "Then they'd go and another one would show up, so you had them for about 20 minutes, because not every kid was going to get to play in Carmichael, and that was our home arena at the time. We were trying to let the little kids get a chance to play in there as well. (Michael) came over and I thought 'wow' -- I told him 'I want you to stay with the next group' and I told his counselor to take that group back and then Michael stayed for a second 20-minute period then he went back to the dorm ... then all of a sudden two groups later, he shows up again. He says "Nah, I just love to play."
"So we kept him down there, and -- I'm not joking whatsoever -- I told Eddie that night "I think I've just seen the best 6-foot-4 high school player I've ever seen." And I gave him a ride back to the dorm. I didn't make him walk back in the summer heat ... He was the most driven person I've ever known, most focused I've ever known and the greatest competitor I've ever known."
Jordan averaged 13.5 points as a freshman, 20 points as a sophomore and 19.6 points as a junior at North Carolina before leaving early for the NBA.
ESPN is currently airing 'The Last Dance' -- a docuseries following Jordan final season championship run with the 1997–98 Chicago Bulls -- on Sunday nights. Thus far, the never-before-seen footage has been a smash hit.
247Sports analyst Dean Straka contributed to this story.
