SAAC Art Dash this week June 4, 2020 at 2:57 p.m.
It’s the Cinco de Junio Art Dash!
The South Arkansas Arts Center’s annual 5x5 Art Dash, usually held on May 5, had to be postponed; however, the event has been rescheduled for Friday, June 5, at 5 p.m. the date is not the only “new” thing for 2020.
SAAC dropped the price to $50 per ticket - and due to current social distancing, the arts center has a plan for a different way to conduct the dash. Every ticket holder will be assigned a random number. Those who hold more than one ticket will be assigned one random number per ticket. Everyone will be able to view all of the artwork on the SAAC Facebook page in advance.
During a Facebook Live event, ticket holders will get to see all of the 5x5’s live and and ask questions if they want - just don’t ask who the artist is! One doesn’t need a Facebook account to participate in this event. The South Arkansas Arts Center’s Facebook page is public, so anyone can access it from any web-browser to watch the action.
Kelly Campbell, who organizes the event each year, said, “I love so many of the events we have here at SAAC - but I must confess - this is my favorite. It’s always so much fun! Bruce Coffey from East Camden and Highland Railroad has sponsored this event from the very beginning, and I can’t say ‘thank you’ enough to Mr. Coffey. And the artists! At this point, we have so many wonderful artists who are willing to donate the artwork to us that we’ve started alternating the years that most of them contribute.”
One must be present - on your phone, computer or iPad - in order to select their painting. Anyone who does not respond will be allowed to select a piece after the live event has ended. SAAC will email specific instructions the week of the event. Keep an eye on Saac’s Facebook page to see photos of the 5x5’s as they come in, and watch for a special “share” of our margarita punch recipe!
Call SAAC at 870-862-5474 or email Kelly Campbell at kelly@saac-arts.org for more information.
Artists included in this year’s Art Dash are: Laura Barrow, Claire Beard, Sandy Bennett, Angela Blann, Clay Callaway, Joan Coffey, Margaret Combs, Susan DeLone, Melinda Dodson, Houston Dunn, Jennifer Dwight, Treasa Evans, Henry Frisby, Annaleigh Harper, Katie Harwell, April Hoover, Beth Hubbert, Janice Hughes, Tena Hughes, Missy Inman, Pat Johnson, Gaby Juarez, Brenda Keech, John Keech, Helene Lambert, Ty Lewis, Tony Lewis, Pat Lowrey, Becki Lusk, Amy Machen, Mike Means, Lauren Meredith, Sarah Merkle, Selene Mondragon, Mary Ethel Morgan, Heidi Morgan, Chrystal Osborn, Ann Palculict, Spencer Purinton, Aleta Reed, Darrin Riley, Bobbi Shepherd. Christine Street, Marla Tomlinson, Ann Trimble, Dinah VanHook, Pam Vernon, Jorge Villegas, Maria Villegas, Hayden White, Ann Wilson, Betty Wilson, Ramona Wood
