Julie Hinojosa, Customer Specialist for The Rose Boutique, uses her years of community volunteering and helping others to connect with people.
Julie Hinojosa belongs to the army of volunteers whose good deeds take place out of the limelight.
Some days she rides with fellow church women, delivering Meals on Wheels dinners to the homebound and isolated. She volunteers as treasurer of the booster club at her daughter’s school Young Women’s Leadership Academy. And for several hours a month she volunteers as a commissioner for the building and planning board, and zoning board in Kirby.
In November, Hinojosa began working part time at a flower shop near Woodlawn Lake. In a room filled with flowers and fauna, its a chance to learn the florist business and help people celebrate joy or soothe pain.
She credits her humanitarianism to St. Gregory’s parochial school, where teachers drove home the importance of a life of service to others.
Hinojosa is living her “dash” — a reference to the poem by Linda Ellis called “The Dash,” about the difference you make in the world between your birth date and your death date.
“I want to lend a hand,” Hinojosa, 53, said. “We’re only here for a short time.”
A longtime employee at Port San Antonio and a Realtor at San Antonio Finest Realty, Hinojosa shares her altruistic nature with her husband, Daniel, sons Zachry, 28, Isaac, 26, and daughter Zoë, 17.
A 22-year veteran of the Air Force, Vincent T. Davis embarked on a second career as a journalist and found his calling. Observing and listening across San Antonio, he finds intriguing tales to tell about everyday people. He shares his stories with Express-News subscribers every Monday morning .
She met Daniel when they both worked at North Star Mall. He worked at the Thom McAn Shoe store; she worked at the Toy Box.
One day she visited his store to try on a pair of shoes. Their bond was sealed in a Cinderella moment when he slipped a shoe on her foot.
They learned they believed in a lot of the same things, such as fair play and placing the needs of others ahead of their own.
There was a sense of symbolism in her wedding. With her mother, Mary Helen Bolton, and family members looking on, Hinojosa’s biological father, Homero Salmon, walked her halfway down the aisle, then her stepfather, Ellis Bolton, escorted her the rest of the way to her waiting groom.
“I wanted it to be very symbolic,” she said. “They needed to know they played a big part in my life.”
Self employed, she’s able to manage time to help her friend Chris Alderete at The Rose Boutique, which Alderete owns.
Hinojosa’s focus is learning the language and ways of the floral shop. Among shelves stuffed with glass vases, green foam blocks and spools of ribbon, Hinojosa receives tips from floral designers with more than four decades of experience.
It’s becoming routine to switch from tables scattered with colorful blooms to the computer desk to input orders.
Yet it’s still difficult sometimes to rein in her emotions when she takes an order for the tragic passing of a customer’s loved one. While taking phone orders, she’s learned to respect a grieving caller’s pause mid- conversation, filling in with reassuring words as needed or texting a photo of a suggested flower arrangement.
“We’re giving them that sense of peace that we will take care of them,” she said. “It’s the last way to honor that person.”
Each day she follows her co-workers’ lead, becoming more aware of staying in the moment and in tune to her new clients’ needs.
“Julie is really sharp,” manager Joseph Leal said. “She’s doing an excellent job catching on.”
Hinojosa credits her ability to juggle her multitude of responsibilities to keeping a well-organized calendar and showing up when she says she will.
In the end, her deeds aren’t for social media likes, website clicks or re-posts.
For Hinojosa it’s very simple: it’s all about filling her dash.
Vincent T. Davis is a reporter in the Greater San Antonio and Bexar County area. Read him on our free site , mySA.com, and on our subscriber site , ExpressNews.com. | vtdavis@express-news.net | Twitter: @vincentdavis
Vincent T. Davis started at the San Antonio Express-News in 1999 as a part-time City Desk Editorial Assistant working nights and weekends while attending San Antonio College and working on the staff of the campus newspaper, The Ranger. He completed a 3-month fellowship from the Freedom Forum Diversity Institute at Vanderbilt University in 2003 and earned his bachelors degree in communication design from Texas State University in 2006.
Past Articles from this Author:
