Her thoughtful message resonated with many of her 260,000 followers, with a number taking to the comments to share their response.
One wrote: 'Exactly my thoughts ...I said a few months back that Mother Nature was tired ...... and something was in the air, a strange feeling.'
Sarah Ferguson, 60, took to Instagram to share the message, along with a spring-themed photo of a tree in blossom
Writing on Instagram last night, Sarah mused: 'Mother Nature has sent us to our rooms.. like the spoilt children we are'
Appreciating her photo, another commented: 'Went outside for the first time in 12 days after being ill, cut the lawn and marvelled at the bees, frogs and all of their spawn and a couple of butterflies. Spring has sprung!!!'
And another remarked: 'Wise reflection, and at the same time a great photo full of hope. Thank you Sarah, at these times looking at your pics and reading your posts is so comforting!'
Earlier today it emerged the duchess, along with daughter Princess Eugenie and son-in-law Jack Brooksbank, made a secret mercy dash to deliver supplies to frontline NHS staff.
Keen to do their bit during this crisis, the family delivered care packages, containing essentials such as food, toiletries and cleaning products, to Hammersmith Hospital in West London on Wednesday and then again on Saturday.
Sarah's thoughtful message resonated with many of her 260,000 followers, with a number taking to the comments to share their response
Further drop-offs are planned at other hospitals, including the Chelsea and Westminster and Upton Hospital in Slough.
The couple were asked to help out by a hospital consultant friend, and the packages included toothpaste, soap, shower gel, hand wash, anti-bacterial wipes, dried pasta, pasta sauces, rice, cereal bars and tinned fruit.
The Duchess is also working with British chocolate brand Love Cocoa, which is donating treats to hospitals for every product bought.
Earlier today it emerged Sarah, along with daughter Princess Eugenie (right) and son-in-law Jack Brooksbank, made a secret mercy dash to deliver supplies to frontline NHS staff
'I am deeply grateful for the speed and kindness of Joel Cadbury, who called his cousin James Cadbury of Love Cocoa,' the Duchess told the Daily Mail's Sebastian Shakespeare.
'Immediately, the Cadbury duo went into overdrive and agreed they would donate chocolate to the NHS staff in hospitals and ICU units.
'For a small company to be so generous and kind is such an example of leading through goodness. They already support cocoa by planting trees in Cameroon.'
Meanwhile Sarah's other daughter Princess Beatrice's wedding has been put on hold as a result of the coronavirus outbreak.
Share or comment on this article:
