Each time you get into a vehicle, whether you’re driving or just along for the ride, you’re taking a serious risk. Around 20 to 50 million people are injured in automobile accidents each year.
If you’re ever in an accident, that’s just the beginning. During the months that follow you’ll find yourself fighting with insurance companies, arguing over who’s responsible when it comes to covering damages or the cost of medical treatments. At that point, you’ll wish there was an easy way to prove who was at fault.
That’s why it’s so important to have a dash cam in your vehicle. Now, a new website is making it easier than ever to share dash cam footage with police.
If you’ve ever been in a car accident, you know what a nightmare it can be. It’s not just the damage to your vehicle or the potential injuries that you sustain causing the problem.
Many times the other driver is at fault but they completely lie to police about how the accident occurred. If there are no eye witnesses around, it’s your word against theirs. Which could mean you’re stuck paying your own bills, even when it’s not your fault.
Having a dash cam in your vehicle can stop all the nonsense. With the incident being recorded you will have undeniable documentation backing up your story and putting the blame on the rightful person. Even if you’re not the one involved in the accident, footage that you capture could help solve the case.
This process is now even easier than before. There’s a new website based in the U.K. that lets people upload videos before submitting them to police. The site also directly links visitors with the proper police to submit their footage.
The site is Nextbase and is a feature of the National Dash Cam Safety Portal (NDSP). It was created as a response to the increasing submissions of video and photographic evidence from members of the public in relation to witnessing driving offenses and accidents. The site is intended to help reduce the number of accidents and make roads safer.
Currently the site is available in the U.K. only. It’s a good bet though that something like this will soon make its way to the U.S. Let’s face it, with so many cars on the road and numerous accidents every day we need something like this here too.
It’s not just freak accidents that we need to be worried about. The number of road rage incidents in the U.S. is out of control. With a dash cam, you are able to capture all incidents with 100 percent accuracy.
Dash cams are great resources for documenting everything happening around you. If you get into an accident or are a victim of road rage, a dash cam will let the facts speak for themselves.
The Dash Cam Pro with Night Vision by Komando® will help you capture all the moments you have driving that you wish you had on video. Police have dash cams, you should too.
With crystal clear 1080p video you can provide high-quality images and video when you need it. It also promotes safe driving with a Lane Departure Warning system. Pick one up today from the Komando shop. You’ll be glad that you did.
