Racial Justice Ghislaine Maxwell Royals Where Are They Now?
Sofia Richie is opening up about her relationship with Scott Disick, her new friendship with his ex, Kourtney Kardashian, and more.
By Alyssa Morin Mar 03, 2020 12:07 AMTags
The 21-year-old star is a force to be reckoned with, and her latest accomplishment couldn't be more proof. Gracing the cover of Cosmopolitan for its April issue, the Los Angeles native is stepping into her own spotlight after being in her famous father's shadow for far too long.
"When things were first starting, I was discouraged because everything I did was 'Lionel Richie's daughter,'" she expressed, while also appreciating her upbringing and family's legacy. "But it's hard branching out into my own person when I have such a powerful artist as a father."
She added, "My dad was always like, 'Once you find your thing, you'll move away from that,' and I feel like over the past couple of years, I found my lane in life to go the direction I want to go."
It's clear Sofia has found her own path, especially with the upcoming launch of her first-ever fashion line. Moreover, she's close with one of the most famous families in pop culture: the Kardashian-Jenners.
Aside from the fact that Sofia has been dating Scott Disick for over two years, she's become friends with his ex, Kourtney Kardashian, whom he shares three kids with—Mason Dash Disick, Penelope Scotland Disick and Reign Aston Disick.
Because the 21-year-old model has taken center stage in the spotlight, so has her personal life. That means she's constantly reading comments about her relationship, however, spoken like a true boss, she doesn't pay too much attention to all that negative energy.
"[It] doesn't bother me because I'm very happy," she told the publication about people who criticize her romance with Scott, who is 15 years older than her. "Why would I let someone from the middle of nowhere ruin that for me?"
"I just don't care what people think," she reiterated.
In fact, Sofia is focused on following the beat to her own drum and has even become close with Kourtney—how many people do you know who are close with their boo's ex? Last season of Keeping Up With the Kardashians showed the 21-year-old star vacationing with her beau and the Poosh founder in Finland.
