Stacey Dash Breaks Her Silence, And Changes Her Story, Following Domestic Violence Arrest
The "Clueless" star released a new statement.
Stacey Dash is speaking out for the first time since her arrest for domestic violence, which resulted from a fight with her husband at their Florida home. The Clueless actress is claiming the incident was "blown out of proportion" by the media.
As previously reported , Dash was arrested last Sunday for assaulting her husband, Jeffrey Marty, at their home after an argument.
According to TMZ , sources claimed the actress pushed and slapped her husband. They added that when officers responded to a 911 call about the incident, they saw scratches on his arm and proceeded to arrest her.
The case was quickly dropped just days later when Marty paid her $500 bail and dropped the pursuit of any further charges. Dash has since released a statement addressing the melee, claiming that her arrest was just a "formality."
"Like normal married couples my husband and I had a marital dispute that escalated," she tweeted, along with a link to her full statement. "Thank you for your support and love. Please give him the same."
Like normal married couples my husband and I had a marital dispute that escalated. Thank you for your support and love. Please give him th same. https://t.co/e3JQOX4eH9
— Stacey DASH (@staceydash) October 6, 2019
Dash's husband, Jeffrey Marty, shared his thoughts on Twitter as well, thanking the State Attorney for not pursuing charges against his wife.
"She was arrested over my objection at the time, but due to the pending investigation, I waited to comment until now," he said. "We both look forward to getting this behind us."
Today, the State Attorney made the right call by declining to file charges against my wife, @staceydash .
She was arrested over my objection at the time, but due to the pending investigation, I waited to comment until now.
We both look forward to getting this behind us.
— Jeffrey Marty (@Jeffrey_Marty) October 3, 2019
In the 911 call, which was released to the public, Dash accused her husband and his children of banding together to have her arrested and further claimed that he coached them with statements to report to the police. She even accused Marty of faking his injuries on the call.
In her recently released statement , she changed her tune, claiming the "events of the evening were misinterpreted."
