Stacey Dash has filed for divorce from her husband of two years, Jeffrey Marty.
The actress filed for divorce in Florida on Monday, according to legal documents obtained by The Blast . The filing comes nine months after she was arrested after an alleged domestic violence incident involving Marty.
Get push notifications with news, features and more.
You'll get the latest updates on this topic in your browser notifications.
Dash filed for divorce in Pasco County, Florida, where the two live, listing the date of separation as October 1, 2019 — just one day after the two were involved in an alleged altercation, the outlet reported.
Dash and Marty, a lawyer, tied the knot in a secret ceremony on April 6, 2018 — just 10 days after meeting one another, Page Six reported at the time.
In April, the Clueless star announced she was separating from her husband on Instagram, writing, "Hello Everyone, My husband and I have made the hard decision of ending our marriage."
"After much prayer, I feel this is the right path for both of us. I wish him nothing but the best," she continued. "Thank you everyone for your support and respecting our privacy during this difficult time."
In a statement previously obtained by PEOPLE at the time of the alleged incident, Dash said she and Marty "had a marital dispute in their Tampa, FL suburb" and that police did arrive at their home on September 29.
"No charges were pressed by her husband, however, Deputies arrested Ms. Dash peacefully, as a formality," the statement read. "Ms. Dash’s husband appeared in court today, September 30th, on her behalf and Ms. Dash was released from the Land O’ Lakes detention facility. No further legal action is pending."
"The marital dispute, while personal and unfortunate, has since been blown out of proportion. An earlier report on TMZ.com said her manager told TMZ that she was attacked by her husband — both the sources relationship to Ms. Dash and the events of the evening were misrepresented," the statement continued.
RELATED: Stacey Dash Arrested in Alleged Domestic Violence Incident, Claims Self Defense: Report
"Ms. Dash is a domestic abuse survivor from a previous relationship and has championed for other abuse victims to speak up. The untruthfulness being reported saddens Ms. Dash and her family — no further comments will be made and we ask that Ms. Dash and her family’s privacy will be respected."
In an arrest report obtained by the Tampa Bay Times at the time, police said they responded to a 911 call after Dash had gotten into a verbal argument with Marty, 44, during which she allegedly "pushed him and slapped his face," which ultimately left him with "red scratch marks" on his left arm.
According to Pasco County court records , Dash’s husband paid $500 to free the Getting Played actress from the Land O’ Lakes detention facility.
In October 2019, shortly following the incident, Dash tweeted, "Like normal married couples my husband and I had a marital dispute that escalated . Thank you for your support and love. Please give him the same."
Dash has been married four times. Her ex-husbands include producer Brian Lovell, British executive James Maby and actor Emmanuel Xuereb.
