Market reacts to 2 things - Surprise and Shock, says Anil Singhvi on corona vaccine triggers; reveals pharma stock outlook
It was yet another interesting and candid chat session of #StarsOnZeeBusiness as Zee Business Managing Editor Anil Singhvi went LIVE with popular TV actor Karanvir Bohra. The two famous personalities spoke on a number of topics ranging from various aspects of lockdown to the road ahead for businesses.
Karanvir Bohra praised Anil Singhvi for his leadership at Zee Business during these trying times of coronavirus lockdown. Thanking Bohra, Singhvi said, "My team has shown an amazing work-from-home performance during coronavirus crisis."
When asked how he is spending time in this lockdown period, Bohra told Singhvi, "I am getting a lot of time to spend with my kids...also, I am focussing on yoga...did Surya Namaskar 100 times a day."
[2011]Dil se dia hua Dil Se Di Dua.. Saubhagyavati Bhava -Viraj
Also, Bohra has received various awards including best actor, and best TV personality.
In the previous interactions on the Stars on Zee Business show, it was nothing less than a big gift for viewers when they got to witness some unique conversations. Among them was a thrilling combination of singing sensation Kailash Kher and Anil Singhvi. The session between the two stalwarts of their fields focussed on various aspects of coronavirus lockdown period as well as Kher's sensational career.
The singing sensation revealed many things about his amazing career to Anil Singhvi during the LIVE chat. Kailash Kher also paid rich tributes to Rishi Kapoor and Irrfan Khan over their sudden demise.  On Anil Singhvi's request, Kailash Kher's sang some of his top chartbusters, ranging from 'Chaand sifarish' to 'Yoon hi chala chal raahi' to 'Teri deewani' and 'Bam lehri'.
Also, Kailash Kher congratulated Anil Singhvi and the entire Zee Business team as the channel has become the undisputed No 1 business channel in India.
#StarsOnZeeBusiness is a very interesting and insightful series wherein Zee Business Managing Editor and renowned stock market guru Anil Singhvi speaks to celebrities in a LIVE session on various topics. Anil Singhvi also gives them good investment tips as the market guru is known for his valuable financial insights and suggestions.
The other high profile stars who have graced this show include Celina Jaitly, Meet Brothers and Mika Singh.
Get Latest Business News , Stock Market Updates and Videos ; Check your tax outgo through Income Tax Calculator and save money through our Personal Finance coverage. Check Business Breaking News Live on Zee Business Twitter and Facebook . Subscribe on YouTube .
