Tax on buybacks levels playing field for companies, investors
Until now, investors tendering shares in a buyback were subject to capital gains tax.
The total buybacks increased from Rs 1,834 crore in FY16 to Rs 55,587 crore in FY19.
Mumbai: The central government has proposed to introduce 20 per cent tax on buybacks by listed companies . Until now, such provisions were applicable only to unlisted companies. The measure has been introduced by the government to curb the misuse of the buyback route by listed entities to avoid taxes.
In the past few years, corporates have been using buybacks to return money to shareholders instead of dividends since dividends attracted distribution tax. With the introduction of the buyback tax, this tax arbitrage will end, said experts.
Until now, investors tendering shares in a buyback were subject to capital gains tax. The tax applicable was in the range of 10-15 per cent for both domestic and foreign investors, provided the buyback happens through stock exchanges. Going forward, investors will not have to pay any capital gains tax on the shares tendered in a buyback. Instead, the company will deduct the 20 per cent distribution tax from the total buyback corpus and pay the balance amount to investors. The development could impact the premium that companies offer during buybacks, said experts.
“Buybacks will become relatively expensive for listed companies after the introduction of the buyback tax,” said Amit Singhania, partner, Shardul Amarchand Mangaldas. “It will also take away the flexibility of investors to set off the losses using capital gains accrued by tendering shares in a buyback.”
Buybacks typically happen at a premium to market price so that shareholders have some incentive to tender their shares. Due to higher tax outgo, companies could reduce either the buyback size or the price.
Currently, tax on buybacks comes under capital gains, which can be used by investors to offset capital losses they make in other investments and save taxes. Such a provision will no longer be available.
The move will bring parity in buyback taxes payable by various classes of investors, said experts. For instance, domestic investors are subject to 10 per cent tax while offshore investors are subject to 15 per cent tax in buybacks through a stock exchange platform. Now, all investors will be subject to a single tax slab of 20 per cent.
The government had introduced tax on dividends in 2007 and increased the levy in 2016 when it introduced additional dividend tax (ADT), which was applicable on investors who received dividends over Rs 10 lakh. This prompted several companies to reduce their dividend payouts and instead go for share repurchases. The total buybacks increased from Rs 1,834 crore in FY16 to Rs 55,587 crore in FY19, Prime Database showed.
