Installation is as easy as setting the device on your vehicle’s dash and plugging it in. That said, it is another device that you’ll have to keep track of. Many people, myself included, have “device fatigue”, which means that adding another screen to the mix is not the most desirable course of action. If your vehicle’s 12-volt outlet is located in an inconvenient place, such as in the center console or under the armrest, you’ll have to contend with a wire hanging down over the center console while you drive.
The Lanmodo Vast’s price tag of $500 may seem steep, but that’s a drop in the bucket when compared to dedicated night vision systems that are not only costly to buy but complicated to install. Even when the optional rearview camera is added in, the cost only climbs to $600. The extra camera system brings a 170-degree wide-angle lens and 720p image capture.
You’ll still need to actually look at the road and not just a tiny screen on your dash, but the Lanmodo Vast can help improve visibility in more than just dark conditions. If it’s foggy or rainy out, the display shows a clear view of the road ahead and minimizes visual obstructions like water droplets. The camera’s ability to track motion smoothly makes it easy to glance down at the screen to get a better view of the road and quickly return your eyes to the scene ahead.
Don’t see the words “dash cam” and assume that you’ll be capturing footage or images from the camera as you drive. The Lanmodo Vast is just a night vision camera system and does not store data as you’re moving. That will be a turnoff for anyone wanting the added peace of mind that a recording can bring, but the night vision system is a worthy cause on its own.
I’ll shout this warning once more for good measure: This type of camera should be used as a supplement to your ability to view the road ahead, not in place of a view ahead. If you’re completely out of your element on dark roads or super foggy weather, it’s best to find a safe place to stop than to stare at a small screen instead of looking out at the road ahead.
After working in the technology and software industry for several years, I began writing as a way to help people outside of that world understand the sometimes very
After working in the technology and software industry for several years, I began writing as a way to help people outside of that world understand the sometimes very technical work that goes on behind the scenes. With a lifelong love of all things automotive, I turned my attention to writing new vehicle reviews, detailing industry trends, and breaking news. Along the way, I earned an MBA with a focus on data analysis that has helped me gain a strong understanding of why the auto industry’s biggest companies make the decisions they do. My experience and education has helped me thrive in digging into the details and finding the real stories behind the numbers. I focus on drawing out the most important facts a consumer needs to know to make the best buying choices for their families and themselves, and I aim to do that in a way that is straightforward and easy to understand.
