news, latest-news, The Nature School Primary, Dash Thompson, head shave, Mid North Coast Cancer Institute, cancer fundraiser
Nine-year-old Dash Thompson dreams of a world without cancer or other illnesses. Now the Nature School Primary student has stepped up to help people battling cancer. Dash lost his locks on Monday, June 22 when his aunt Sandie Bennett shaved his head as the school community looked on. It was all in the name of Dash's fundraiser for the Mid North Coast Cancer Institute. The head shave comes after Dash's aunt Sandie got the all-clear from breast cancer, while Jess Fussell, who is a mother of a student at the school, is in remission from breast cancer. Dash said he was pretty nervous before the head shave, but afterwards, described his new look as pretty good. The Year 4 student's fundraiser has topped $1500. "It's a lot, even though I don't think it's enough, it's as good as I can do," Dash said. His message to others is to try to stay healthy and live a good life. Dash's mum Julie-Anne Thompson is proud of her son. "It [a cancer journey] is a big thing for a family and extended family to go through and I think this [fundraiser] was his way of trying to help," she said. Sandie Bennett said her nephew's fundraising effort was so thoughtful. "The cancer institute here is so worthy of the money," she said. "It does such a good job of supporting people through their cancer journey." Mrs Fussell agrees, saying the Mid North Coast Cancer Institute is an amazing support. She said, in reference to Dash's fundraiser, it was just so beautiful that this amazing little soul could be so giving. Mid North Coast Cancer Institute breast and gynaecology cancer nurse Joanne Woodlands said it was a really big deal for a nine-year-old to shave his head to raise money. She said it was an example of community at a time when 2020 had been stilted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Nature School head of primary Catherine Oehlman said you didn't have to be an adult to make a difference. People can donate to Dash's fundraiser through crowdfunding platform GoFundMe. What else is making news, sport? Thank you for valuing local journalism with your subscription. While you're with us, you can also receive updates straight to your inbox from the Port Macquarie News. To make sure you're up to date with all the news, sign up here.
