The Good Doctor season 3 episode 17 aired on ABC on Monday.
Fans noticed some romantic tension between Dr. Neil Melendez and Dr. Claire Browne (a couple that fans have long "shipped") during the episode.
Later, actor Hill Harper, who plays Dr. Marcus Andrews, responded to a Melendaire fan post and sent fans into a frenzy.
Many longtime fans of The Good Doctor have been shipping Dr. Neil Melendez and St. Bonaventure resident Dr. Claire Browne as a romantic item since the show's first season. (Remember when Shaun called Claire out for flirting with Melendez all the way back in season 1 episode 9?) But season 3 has fed the growing flames of "Melendaire" supporters even more than seasons past — and that includes episode 17 , which aired Monday on ABC.
It all started when at the beginning of the episode, Dash, the husband of an old, now-deceased patient, came back to visit Claire at the hospital. Claire seemed excited to see him, but as they start to catch up, the camera focuses on Melendez walking away — and fans couldn't help but notice that his facial expression seemed to be one of protectiveness, or maybe even jealousy.
Later, Melendaire shippers (as the potential couple's biggest supporters are called online) took to social media to share their thoughts on all the best Claire-and-Melendez moments from the episode. And among the discussion was one stand-out response from a very important player in the conversation: The Good Doctor star Hill Harper.
Hill plays Dr. Marcus Andrews on the show, and as a member of The Good Doctor cast , his opinion on Melendaire is of great interest to fans. So when he commented a series of fire emojis on a Melendaire fan account's Instagram post about the episode, fans couldn't help but notice. One fan even went so far as to screenshot the comment and ask Hill on Twitter if he was "laughing at" fans or "cheering with" them — and he responded by letting fans know it was most definitely the latter.
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
— Hill Harper (@hillharper) March 3, 2020
You hear that, Melendaire shippers? Even The Good Doctor cast is rooting for your favorite "Will they or won't they?" couple! (Or as one fan put it in a response on Twitter , Hill can now be "officially designated the Captain of this Ship." Ha!)
This content is imported from {embed-name}. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
While Hill's support doesn't necessarily mean anything for the romantic future of Claire and Melendez, it does offer fans a ray of hope amid the unclear signs from The Good Doctor writers. We'll just have to watch the remaining three episodes of season 3 (and of course, season 4 , when the show comes back in the fall!) to find out what's next for these two.
