Local restaurateur Dave Andrea is excited to announce the official opening of The Dash Inn Tribute Room , an iteration of his iconic Mexican restaurant and bar that closed in 1994 after serving Tempe for 27 years.
“I took over the Dash Inn during its final few years and it has remained one of my favorite concepts to own and operate throughout my career,” Andrea said. “Although having been closed for more than two decades, the concept’s influence remained strong with a Facebook fan page of three thousand followers and counting.”
The Dash Inn opened in 1967 and stood proud at 731 E. Apache Blvd, a property owned by Arizona State University. Original owners Hash and Dee Nelson created the famed concept by combining each of their first names and subsequently launched a popular spot that was known for its laidback vibe and quality cuisine.
“The Dash Inn was a hip joint, and you could see that just by walking in,” said former employee Tom Cole. “Management never gave long-haired waiters a hard time when they applied for work, which gave the personnel and restaurant a look that attracted the counter-culture while its traditional Mexican feel attracted everyone else.”
Andrea chose to recreate the concept on his current property that also includes local beer garden and sausage emporium, The Brat Haus, located in the heart of Old Town Scottsdale. Since most Brat Haus visitors enjoy the outdoor patio environment, Andrea decided to use the additional dining space to bring back the nostalgia and charms of The Dash.
“Luckily, I had kept all of the old recipes and plenty of pictures to help replicate the details of design, smallware and furniture,” Andrea said. “The Dash played an important role in thousands of people’s happy memories of a simpler time and college life in the ‘70s and ‘80s. It’s been so much fun listening to all their stories as we bring it back.”
The new location features the top 500 MTV music videos on its rear-projection TV, a limited menu of Mexican favorites from the original concept alongside the famed secret recipe margarita. Andrea’s team has made every effort to stay true to the original restaurant’s roots by maintaining the same operating philosophy that stands the test of time: not fancy, just good.
The Dash Inn Tribute Room is located at 3622 N. Scottsdale Road and is open Wednesday through Friday from 4 p.m. to close and Saturday through Sunday from 11 a.m. to close. The space is available for private parties on Mondays and Tuesdays. For more information and updates, please follow the restaurant on Facebook .
