The real estate website always seems to display consistently rising profits and operating margins around 76 per cent.
It managed to grab a huge share of the property portal market by getting in early and thrives on keeping costs down while selling higher-value packages with more services.
Refinitiv was the subject of a takeover bid from the LSE Group, who themselves came close to being purchased by the Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing.
Both bids made shares at the LSE Group soar in 2019. The LSE Group's attraction stems from having a diversified portfolio through which it can earn income from multiple revenue streams.
Kitchen supplier Howden Joinery uses cheaply-rented depots that enables it to maintain high stock levels, unlike high street showrooms which have more expensive overheads.
Its depots see average sales regularly increase while profits have nearly tripled in ten years to almost £240million.
Halma, which describes itself as a 'global group of life-saving technology companies' such as medical diagnostics equipment had a 950 per cent return.
Beazley (up 918 per cent) and Intermediate Capital Group (up 836 per cent) were the other two financial companies to enter the top ten, while tech firm Computacenter ended up 843 per cent higher.
Controversial housebuilder Persimmon rose 869 per cent over ten years. The company has faced criticism for prioritising building as many homes as possible rather than quality homes and for its giant executive pay packets.
Nonetheless, Help to Buy has helped push its profits to over £1billion.
And the worst performing ten...
Just last weekend, Mothercare shut its doors after years of falling sales. Unlucky investors would have lost 95.8 per cent of their investment if they put money in as the start of 2010, though not as much as Carpetright, which fell more than 99 per cent, and basic materials firm Petropavlovsk (down 96.1 per cent).
Carpetright is still operating, but its life is hanging by a thread. They have complained that rival Tapi is taking away a lot of its business, but it has also been struck by weakening consumer spending and a poor housing market reducing demand for flooring.
Bad auditing was a major factor that did for outsourcer Carillion (down 92.7 per cent), who came fifth on the list. A parliamentary report in 2018 said its business model relied on 'a relentless dash for cash, driven by acquisitions, rising debt, expansion into new markets and exploitation of suppliers.'
Indebtedness has also badly afflicted Premier Foods (down 83.8 per cent), although they have worked hard to reduce arrears. Brexit stockpiling has slowed its rate of debt reduction though.
A parliamentary report said Carillion's business model relied on 'a relentless dash for cash, driven by acquisitions, rising debt, expansion into new markets and exploitation of suppliers'
Declining oil prices and the rising popularity of renewable energy harmed the fossil fuel sector. Two oil and gas firms, Tullow Oil (down 93.8 per cent) and JKX Oil and Gas (down 91.1 per cent) were in the bottom ten. Tullow Oil recently announced a £1.2billion writedown, partly due to overestimating oil reserves at some of its sites.
Real estate investment firm Intu Properties (down 85.5 per cent) was damaged by declining footfall in its shopping centres.
The FTSE 250 saw CAGR rates of 12 per cent during the decade, bettering the FTSE 100
The Arndale Centre owners recently had its shares plunge by over a third after a consortium that included the Peel Group pulled out of a £2.8billion bid for the firm citing economic uncertainty and market volatility.
Kier Group (down 81.7 per cent) and De La Rue Ordinary (down 76.8 per cent) round out the bottom ten.
The FTSE 250 saw CAGR rates of 12 per cent during the decade, while the more prestigious FTSE 100 had more satisfactory growth of 7.4 per cent.
