The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 323.65 points, or 1.2%, to 28,004.89 this past week, while the S&P 500 index gained 0.9% to 3120.46 and the Nasdaq Composite advanced 0.8% to 8540.83. All three closed at record highs.
But for a while there, it felt like nothing would happen, despite plenty of potential market-moving events on the calendar. After President Donald Trump spoke at the Economic Club of New York on Tuesday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average finished the day unchanged for the first time since 2014 . On Wednesday, when Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell testified before Congress , the Dow dipped 1.6 points, or 0.01%, even though Powell said that he finds the current economic situation “sustainable.”
In fact, the Dow averaged a daily percentage change of just 0.08% over the five days ended Nov. 14, the smallest since April 2017. But as the Dow demonstrated this past Friday, when it gained 0.8%, boring doesn’t have to be bad. In fact, the Dow has often performed quite well during periods where observing the market felt like watching paint dry.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
For instance, the Dow averaged a 0.069% daily move over the five days ended April 11, 2017—only to return 19.9% over the following 12 months. That kind of move is typical. During the past 10 years, buying the Dow after the five periods with the smallest average daily returns would have resulted in gains four out of five times over the following 12 months. We’ll take those odds.
We can already hear the voices complaining that periods of quiet lead to more volatility. After all, the Cboe Volatility Index ,
      or VIX, closed at 12.05 on Friday, its lowest since April. A low VIX is often regarded as a sign of investor complacency —and a sign that a blowup is just around the corner.
There is some truth to that statement—periods of high volatility always follow periods of low volatility. Spikes in volatility tend to follow unexpected events, observes Hubert de Barochez, markets economist at Capital Economics, who pointed to episodes like the Asian debt crisis and the implosion of Long Term Capital Management .
Now the focus is on the election , trade, the Fed, and the U.S. economy as possible sources of unpleasant surprises. “Of course, an unwelcome and surprising development might lie around the corner,” de Barochez writes. “[But] when it comes to the US economy, continued sluggish growth still looks more likely to us.”
At least for now. Yes, the Fed has cut interest rates, and the U.S. and Germany could enact some sort of fiscal stimulus, says Carmel Wellso, director of research at Janus Henderson Investors. But that’s simply bought time. “We could have two years left,” she says. “But we’re at the end of the cycle and one day closer to a recession.”
Let’s enjoy the rally while it lasts.
The stock market made something out of practically nothing—and managed to finish the week at new all-time highs.
