It's digital but it's there. That arrow is on most modern cars and tells you which side the fuel filler is on.
A hapless woman over in America is a good reminder as to why there's an arrow hiding on your dash.
Posted to Twitter a couple of days ago, this video of a woman not being able to figure out how to position her minivan correctly for refuelling has attracted more than 22 million views.
For two minutes, she does laps of a petrol station, unable to put her fuel filler next to the pump. It's pretty painful to watch, albeit quite funny.
But you might be surprised at how many people pull up to a station in only to frantically ask which side the filler is on or try and get a glimpse of the flap in a wing mirror.
Most modern cars actually have the answer hidden in plain sight. The petrol pump icon on the fuel gauge will often have an arrow pointing to one side. This arrow is telling you what side of the car the fuel filler is located.
Finding the fuel filler can be a bit of a task in a new car. Thankfully, most modern cars have the answer hiding in plain sight.
Obviously, this advice is coming a bit late to the woman in the video but hopefully it helps someone not make the same mistake in front of people. Everything ends up on the internet these days...
We're at the point now where there really should be some global rule saying the fuel fuller has to be on one side so that this sort of confusion doesn't happen again but that is yet to happen.
Back in 2017, before Ford decimated its passenger car line-up, five out of six of the cars Ford sold in North America had fuel caps on the driver's side, the Focus was an exception, probably because it was a European design. All Ford trucks have the filler on the driver's side too.
Manufacturers change which side the filler is on depending on where the fuel tank is located in the car. It's most often off to one side and which side that is depends on the vehicle's design.
And for those wondering, yes, the woman did eventually figure out how to fill up her car. Reminds us a bit of this woman trying to fill her Tesla up with petrol...
