News is serious business. Business news can get even worse with the numbers, charts, and dense analysis thrown at us. But Business Insider is not just for the corporate hotshots ⁠— suited up and ready for deal any time of the day ⁠— it is also for the Instagram junkies, twitter trolls, and those relentlessly forwarding memes on WhatsApp.
Insider InJest ⁠— news of the day delivered with a smile and sarcasm ⁠— was a special initiative started by Business Insider India in 2019 to catch the attention of those who have enough stake in the events that are unfolding around them but stay away from the news ecosystem for various reasons.
These are some of the top toons of 2019 and the news that triggered it.
The year started with ‘Kisan Jam’. Ahead of the impending elections, political parties woke up to the rural distress that unravelling for many months before that. It was time for promises ⁠— offers that voters couldn’t refuse .
The incumbent Modi government led by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) was the strongest outfit, even after five years in power. The party projected Prime Minister Narendra Modi as an invincible candidate with solutions for the millions of problems that plague India’s economy and society, much like Thanos in the blockbuster Hollywood franchise, ‘The Avengers’ .
The party projected Prime Minister Narendra Modi as an invincible candidate with solutions for the millions of problems that plague India’s economy and society, much like Thanos in the blockbuster Hollywood franchise, ‘The Avengers’.
On the other hand, unlike the two-party structure in the US, there was a motley crew of political parties with equally big egos but very diverse ideologies, and varying degrees of charisma. At the end, the grand anti-Modi coalition ⁠— in India they call it ‘Mahagathbandhan’ ⁠— failed miserably .
However, it is important to mention that in the run up to the elections that government shelved a report that showed that unemployment had a 40-year high.
The denials from the government died after the elections and the report, which showed that unemployment in India had hit the worst in over forty years, was released.
Meanwhile, as political parties slugged it out, Hotstar, the Indian streaming site owned by Disney, minted money with three of the hottest spectacles in its kitty this year ⁠— the final season of Game of Thrones, the Indian Premier League, and top of the rung, the cricket World Cup of 2019. The semi-final between India and New Zealand got so close, Hotstar added millions of viewers in the final minutes of the match and set a new record.
Hotstar, an Indian streaming site that competes with the likes of Netflix and Amazon Prime Video, set a new record in viewership thanks to three spectacular grabs - the IPL, the cricket World Cup, and the final season of Game of Thrones.
But just as the World Cup fever was catching on, an Indian state was running out of beer .
The ongoing election for the Lok Sabha, the lower house of India's Parliament, has had an unintended consequence. The country's most populous state, Uttar Pradesh, is fast running out of beer. Ironically, Uttar Pradesh has the highest number of alcohol drinkers in the country.
The officials of the Uttar Pradesh excise department were busy with election duties delaying approvals on new labels . So, if you walked into a bar or a wine shop anywhere in Uttar Pradesh in May 2019, very few brands are available, and most of them strong beers.
While Indians were getting high on cricket and the political drama unfolding in many parts of the country, the economy was hitting new lows. The national income, popularly known as the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), fell steadily and hit a six-year low. The slowdown was so sharp even experts couldn't keep up with it .
The slowdown was visible in everything from car sales to home sales to even biscuits and underwear . But the government couldn't see it.
The newly appointed Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman kept insisting that this was a cyclical slowdown and that the economy will recover in no time. In reality, unemployment soared and the ill-effects of it spread across the country.
As the new government was planning its year ahead, it did seem like there wasn’t going to be enough tax revenue due to a steadily slowing economy. So, Sitharaman announced a higher tax on the super rich and that didn’t go down too well with the country’s wealthy.
The government announced an additional tax on the super rich and foreign portfolio investors got caught in the crossfire leading to a huge sell-off in the stock market.
While a part of it rolled back eventually, India's stock market investors had already lost ₹15 lakh crore (trillion) in the sell-off. Ironically, the expected revenue from the added tax was only ₹14 billion.
The billionaires were fuming but the dissent was either misdirected or under the breath. Out in the open, the country’s top corporates continued to flatter the politicians.
Addressing the gathering at the convocation ceremony of Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University in Gandhinagar, Ambani said, "Amit bhai, you are a true karmyogi, you are truly Iron Man of our country. Gujarat, and now India, is blessed to have a leader like you."
By December, it was clear that the economy’s ‘animal spirits’ had to be awakened. The government was already spending too much on keeping the economic engine running, and it couldn’t do anymore. The pressure fell on the Reserve Bank of India to reduce lending rates. The new governor Shaktikanta Das delivered six rate cuts this year but no cigar!
The RBI even offered its reserves to the Central Government despite heavy criticism from many quarters. The growth continued to decline.
The transfer of ₹1.76 lakh crore from the RBI to the government exchequer was expected to fill in the shortfall in GST collections, according to analysts at the time.
The crisis in the Indian economy is that of confidence, not money. Investors hoarded the safe blue-chip stocks, and even invested in promising startups. The risk appetite was missing, especially after the domino effect of the colossal failure of infrastructure lending giant IL&FS played out in 2019.
It is not clear whether this is a liquidity crisis or solvency crisis, and one can lead to the other, market veteran Vallabh Bhanshali told Business Insider in June 2019. There have 3 more rate cuts since then but the economy is barely showing any signs of recovery.
Private enterprise had to incentivised to loosen its purse strings and invest more in business. Boom! The unexpected tax cuts of July 2019.
Markets celebrated Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman's corporate tax cuts like a carnival but fresh investments also need credit and that wasn't available. Between rising bad loans and the clean-up, banks were holding on to the cash than give it to anyone with less than the best credit rating.
The country's businessmen, many of whom are based out of the financial capital Mumbai could have celebrated the tax cuts better but the city was dealing with its curse⁠— the civic body that was once again grossly under-prepared for the annual deluge that comes with the monsoon.
Mumbai has the country's richest civic body, whose apathy has made people struggle during the rains every year. Ironically, the party that ran the civic body for the last many years has now been voted to power.
Nearly all of the cities roads were dug up for most of the year for metro rail projects making the traffic worse. But people held on to their nerves hoping for a better tomorrow.
Then came the state assembly elections, which was followed by an unprecedented political drama at the end of which Shiv Sena broke away from its winning coalition with BJP and joined hands with rivals -- both ideological and political -- Congress and the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) to form the government and Uddhav Thackeray was sworn in the Chief Minister. The process of this government formation was a lot more dramatic.
As political parties figured out a convenient partnership to share power, it brought the administration in one of the biggest and economically significant state in India to a standstill for over a month. It was a mockery of the voters' mandate.
Meanwhile, the economy worsened. People were spending less and less. However, even though the number of frequent fliers had reduced earlier in the year, the airfares remained sky high for much of the year⁠— thanks to the demise of Jet Airways, India’s oldest private airline.
One less airline meant lesser competition, which the likes of IndiGo, GoAir, and SpiceJet made the most of.
2019 was another year when the Air India couldn’t be sold. By the end of December, a government official was quoted as saying that the national carrier may have to be shut down if it is not sold within the next 18 months.
The government even sweetened the deal but there was just no appetite for an airline that was bloated with debt in a slowing economy.
But it wasn’t just the Maharaja who was getting crushed under debt. India’s top telecom operators like Airtel and Vodafone-Idea were already full up to the brim with loans while trying to fend off the aggressive competition from Mukesh Ambani-owned Reliance Jio.
Then, came the knockout blow from the Supreme Court of India that took the wind out of the sector. The consequence was an unintended advantage for Jio.
By the end of the year, the government had decided to merge the state-run BSNL and MTNL, and to extract its pound of flesh from the telecom operators in unpaid dues. Jio emerged stronger while Vodafone-Idea was fighting to stay alive.
While Mukesh Ambani got richer and stronger ⁠— and spent more money on another extravagant wedding , this time for his son, a ceremony attended by global luminaries like Google CEO Sundar Pichai and former US Presidential candidate Hillary Clinton ⁠— his younger sibling, Anil Ambani, kept courting trouble. Reliance Communications, the telecom services company owned by the younger Ambani, even went into bankruptcy .
The Anil Ambani group's Reliance Communication had unpaid dues of ₹46,000 crore (over $6 billion) and Reliance Naval had debt that was over 100 times its net worth at one point this year.
The new bankruptcy law has opened a new avenue for lenders to recover their money and honest entrepreneurs to revive their company from misfortune. It also opened up a new career option for a new breed of insolvency professionals.
With rising bankruptcies, India's insolvency professionals could make more money than chartered accountants, MBAs and any other professional in the finance industry, MS Sahoo, the Chairman of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India told Business Insider.
Another person who grew a lot wealthier in 2019 was Ritesh Agarwal, the founder and CEO of the hotel chain OYO . Agarwal bought back some of the shares at a higher price and increased the company’s value at a time when the losses peaked, the brand took a hit because of increasing complaints of dues aside from an anti-trust investigation.
Yahoo pulled out of its joint venture with OYO’s apartment rental business in Japan⁠— just 8 months after the JV was formed.
OYO was not the only startup to court controversy this year. Zomato locked horns with restaurant owners leading to a brief boycott.
The National Restaurants' Association of India went up in arms calling for a boycott of aggregators and delivery service startups like Zomato and Swiggy saying that their deep discounts were throttling the business.
Meanwhile, Flipkart, which was bought over by Walmart last year, tried hard to remind people that the company was born in India ⁠— which is expected to be the world’s third largest e-commerce market soon. This was essential for the brand that was constantly under attack from a large lobby of physical retailers seeking the government to crackdown on e-tailers for deep discounts and predatory pricing.
Even the government seemed to take the side of the physical retailers while condemning the discounts offered by the likes of Flipkart and Amazon. Both companies are on the edge as the government is still working out an e-commerce policy that is likely to be finalised in 2020.
Flipkart-owned PhonePe app had a good year like many of its peers in fintech but an embarrassing end although due to no fault of its own. Nearly 50,0000 fans of the Irish rock band U2 were left fuming at the Mumbai concert after a server crash made it difficult for them to buy food and beverages at the concert.
The organisers had decided that only digital payments will be allowed at the event and they handed a special card with every ticket that had to be loaded and activated to buy food and beverages at the venue. But in the absence of a plan-B, there was confusion and chaos when the servers of payments app PhonePe crashed, and fans were unable to buy even drinking water.
In the closing months of the year, India witnessed some usual and some unusual upheavals.
A combination of factors including industrial and vehicular pollution, as well as stubble burning by farmers in the peripheries of India's national capital, led to an 'emergency' situation as New Delhi air quality dropped significantly.
The unexpected upheaval came in the form of rampant protests against the Modi government’s amendment to the Citizenship law . The government with its comfortable majority in the Parliament, and inefficient opposition parties, continues to stand its ground on a law that led to many violent protests in the country.
Things got out of hand so bad that people did not turn up for Dabangg 3 , the latest serving from a super-hit franchise starring one of the country's most popular stars, Salman Khan. It is another matter that people who went for the movie wishing they hadn't risked their lives for it.
The movie starring Salman Khan lost 15% of its opening weekend business as people stayed indoors fearing the protests on the street against the new Citizenship Amendment Act.
By the end of the year, there were three big spikes in India⁠— internet shutdowns, mobile tariffs, and the biggest of them all, onion prices.
The spike in onion prices is rather frequent phenomenon in India but the real threat to the average consumer was the warning about a further rise in food prices in the first half 2020, from none other than the RBI governor Shaktikanta Das.
