Written by Michelle Pugle on January 4, 2020
Experts say the Mediterranean and DASH diets are flexible and easy to adapt to family members. Getty Images
The Mediterranean and DASH diets are ranked as the two best overall diets by U.S. News & World Report.
Experts say the diets are the easiest to follow and have the most flexibility.
The diets center on whole foods and heart-healthy fats.
Want your diet plan to actually succeed this year?
Nutrition experts say the Mediterranean and DASH diets might be the best bets to help you meet your health and weight loss resolutions for 2020.
In fact, U.S. News & World Report ranked the Mediterranean diet as the easiest diet to follow as well as the healthiest.
The DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) diet ranked second as the best overall diet.
“Both diets have been associated with a reduction of heart disease, reduction in multiple chronic conditions, and improvements in mental health,” Kristin Kirkpatrick , MS, RDN, author of “ Skinny Liver ,” told Healthline.
The diets are based on choosing whole foods and heart-healthy fats over processed products.
The menu plans are also considered flexible and adaptable for picky eaters.
“The Mediterranean diet is essentially the midway point between the average American diet and a vegan diet,” Andy De Santis , RD, MPH, a weight loss specialist from Toronto, Canada, told Healthline.
“It does not tell you what not to eat as many other diets do,” said De Santis. “It just asks you to reconsider the patterns with which you choose your foods. This is one of the obvious reasons why it ranks so highly in the eyes of both the press and health professionals.”
“One of the biggest messages I convey as a health professional to my clients is to emphasize plant and fish-based proteins over meat,” said De Santis. “This is inherent within the Mediterranean style of eating.”
Kirkpatrick says red meat, processed meat, refined grains, and sweets are limited on both diet plans as well.
Refined grains and sweets can include cereal bars, pastries, and crackers.
“In place of these foods are an abundance of colorful fruits and vegetables, legumes and lentils, as well as healthy fats from nuts, seeds, and wild fatty fish,” Kirkpatrick said. “In addition, moderate consumption of red wine is also allotted in the Mediterranean diet.”
