Grocery stores' latest weapon in the fight against coronavirus is plexiglass.
Stores are scrambling to keep employees safe during the pandemic, with workers exposed to thousands of customers per day.
Wegmans, Tops Markets, Lexington Cooperative Market and Dash's Market will install plexiglass shields at their cash registers.
"Where plexiglass cannot be affixed because of equipment limitations, associates will be provided with protective face shields, which will also be used by Tops associates working in our pharmacy department and at our customer service desk," the company said in a statement.
The face shields consist of a sheet of firm plastic that hovers over the entire face, held in place with a headband.
Wegmans has started installing the shields, and Tops said it will begin as early as Thursday. The project is expected to take a few weeks to complete. The plexiglass is mounted on both sides of the cash register, and ends next to the customer keypad.
"It’s quite an undertaking, as we have a few thousand registers throughout our 101 stores," said Michele Mehaffy, a Wegmans spokesperson.
Dash's Markets tested the plexiglass setup Wednesday and ordered supplies Thursday to retrofit all stores.
The Lexington Co-op has installed plexiglass at the registers at its Elmwood Avenue and will install it at the Hertel Avenue store as soon as parts are delivered.
"The health and safety of our customers and staff is our top priority right now," said Tim Bartlett, the store's general manager.
Tops has designated a worker to clean registers, check stands, conveyor belts, keypads, customer service desks, cash registers and other often-touched surfaces continually throughout the day. Wegmans and Dash's have cashiers sanitize their stations throughout the day. Wegmans associates sanitize conveyor belts between each customers. All four stores have increased store cleaning and sanitizing, especially of "high-touch" areas, they said.
All four stores have installed signs urging customers to keep social distance and have made gloves available to workers. Dash's has made face masks available to employees.
Lexington co-op has eliminated several types of services "that increase customer and cashier physical interaction," Bartlett said, including cash back on debit cards, product returns, and coupons.
"We still allow customers to bring reusable bags, but ask that these customers bag their own groceries," he said.
Tops, Wegmans and Lexington Co-op have instituted "comfort zone" areas at front-end registers to keep social distance between customers and workers. Dash's said it experimented with comfort zones, but decided against them.
"We have small areas behind our front ends and felt we would just force the customers to stand on top of each other," said Mark Mahoney, Dash's director of operations.
