Trenton Thunder welcome new bat dog, Dash, into family business
Dash (R) will join current Thunder Bat Dog Rookie at some games this season. (Michael Mancuso | NJ Advance Media for NJ.com)
Bat dogs have been synonymous with the Trenton Thunder for nearly two decades.
Monday, the fourth generation of Thunder Bat Dogs was introduced to the media, as the 27th season of Double A baseball at Arm & Hammer Park gets ready to open in just over a month.
Dash, full name Dash to Home Plate-That Golden Thunder, will start training to join the family in the coming weeks. It is expected Dash will be ready to join the Thunder sometime in the 2021 season.
Dash is the first Bat Dog that will not be a direct relative. Chase That Golden Thunder (Chase) started with the the Thunder in 2002, while his son Home Run Derby (Derby) joined the team in 2010. The duo worked side by side until 2013. Rookie, who is the current Bat Dog and son of Derby, joined the team in 2016. Dash is the cousin of Rookie.
The fans were involved in the naming of Dash through social media. With over 5,000 votes cast, Dash beat out Scout, Bronx, Dug, and Ace.
Trenton Thunder General Manager/COO Jeff Hurley spoke Monday about the newest addition to the team.
“It is not a father and son like Chase, Derby and Rookie,” Hurley said. "They are going to do the obedience training as a puppy, to make sure he is able to do all the normal stuff. It is a lot.
“It will take awhile, as we have seen with Rookie. When Rookie went out the first time, it didn’t really work out. So it took a little bit longer. It is going to take quite a bit of time, so that is why we will shoot for 2021 for him retrieving bats.
“We are really excited to have him, and we are really excited for our fans to meet him in 2020."
Dash, who was born December 22, 2019, will be at Arm & Hammer Park for select games this year. But for the majority of the time, he will be at Shelly’s School for Dogs at the Green Leaf Pet Resort in Millstone, NJ, learning to do what so many of his extended family have done before him.
“We will introduce him to the crowd opening night, and do something similar to when Derby and Rookie were introduced,” Hurley said. “We are going to have him at the field as much as possible. Obviously, the fans enjoy the dogs, as do the staff and the team. So we will have him on the field pregame, and available for meet and greets.”
Trenton begins its title defense Thursday, April 9 at 7:00 p.m., as the Thunder host the Harrisburg Senators (Washington Nationals), in a battle of the Eastern League champions against the organization that won the 2019 World Series. The three-game opening series will be followed by a day off for Easter, then a three-game home series with New Hampshire before the Thunder head out on the road to Portland and New Hampshire.
Along with the new Bat Dog, there will be some other improvements around the stadium. The playing surface, which was pretty beat up at the end of the 2019 season, has been completely redone.
Also, there is a new section behind the Thunder dugout, called the White Claw Riverview Dugout Seats, which will wait service and all you can eat food for two hours.
“We went through, with the help of Mercer County, our landlord and a great partner of ours, we redid the infield,” Hurley said. "So it is going to be a brand new playing surface on the infield.
"The White Claw Riverview seats have been pretty popular. We are excited for those. It is one of the best seats in the house, right on the Thunder dugout. We have never had the waiter/waitress service here at the ballpark, so we are excited to introduce that and see how it goes.
“As these seats sell, and people enjoy themselves there, maybe it is something that we can expand upon in terms of the waiter/waitress service, just to give fans more convenience when coming to a game.”
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
