President Donald Trump almost certainly won't get his "big bang" reopening of the frozen economy.
His hopes for a sharp rebound in the summer of his reelection year are likely to be dashed by the science of a virus that is highly contagious, for which there is no vaccine and no proven therapies.
Furthermore, many state governors and big city mayors — who so far retain more public trust over their management of the crisis than Trump — are nervous about a premature end to stay-at-home orders. Trump can't simply force them to open up.
And the administration itself appears far short of the readiness required to reopen the country safely. Mass testing capabilities needed to underwrite a staged return to normal life before the pandemic is contained are nowhere near needed levels.
There is also no sign of a government plan for how vital functions like air and surface transport can safely resume without triggering a new wave of mass infections.
Trump, however, appears increasingly keen to get everyone back to work, or at least is laying the groundwork to blame others if it can't happen, once again suggesting amid criticism of his leadership that states, and not Washington, should be in the lead.
"Governors, get your states testing programs & apparatus perfected. Be ready, big things are happening. No excuses! The Federal Government is there to help. We are testing. More than any country in the World. Also, gear up with Face Masks!" the President tweeted on Sunday evening.
One of the top US public health experts, Robert Redfield, who heads the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, appeared to endorse a gradual reopening.
"We're looking at the data very carefully, county by county by county, and we will be assessing that," Redfield said. He added that before the US can start to get back to normal there needed to be greater capacity to identify, isolate and trace coronavirus cases through testing.
Trump also stoked fresh speculation about the standing of top health experts in his administration when he retweeted a call Sunday evening to fire Dr. Anthony Fauci, the government's top infectious disease specialist, who has publicly aired criticism of Trump's initial handling of the crisis.
No one says Trump's looming decision is easy. And heated debates are already occurring inside the administration over the issue. All public office holders must balance the devastating consequences of the government shutdown that threatens to trigger an economic depression with the need to stop a resurgence of the virus when hotspot areas pass their peak of infections.
But the lack of specifics so far -- even as Trump's target date of May 1 approaches -- will spark concern over whether a President who was negligent in recognizing the initial threat from the virus is up to presiding over the next critical stage in the fight.
The debate on reopening is heating up after the US passed 22,000 Covid-19-related deaths and at least half a million known cases. Not every country is testing the same way -- and there have been questions about whether every nation has been truthful -- but when it comes to the raw numbers, the US is currently the worst afflicted country in the world.
But there is increasing optimism that the rate of increase of infections is flattening and the US will fall short of the 100,000 to 240,000 deaths previously cited in models by the White House. Hopes that the death toll could be kept to the lower, but still very tragic, 60,000 range rest on the assumption that social distancing will remain in place through May.
In the days ahead, the President could be pulled one way by the advice of his top health advisers and in an opposite direction by economic aides conscious that the longer the lockdown goes on, the more likely it will be that jobs will permanently disappear. There are strong calls from conservative commentators who influence Trump for the economy to be unleashed.
Fauci offered some qualified hope but also a warning on CNN's "State of the Union" on Sunday. He said it might be possible by the end of the month to judge whether some social-distancing measures could be eased.
"It's going to be depending where you are in the country, the nature of the outbreak that you have already experienced, and the threat of an outbreak that you may not have experienced," Fauci told Jake Tapper.
"It is not going to be a light switch that we say, OK, it is now June, July or whatever, click, the light switch goes back on," Fauci said.
Such a phased and limited initial opening appears likely to fall well short of the President's hopes for a swift economic rebound.
"It would be nice to be able to open with a big bang and open up our country, or certainly most of our country," Trump said last week. On Fox News on Saturday, he said the decision was the toughest of his life.
"There are a lot of things that go into a decision like that. It's going to be based on a lot of facts and a lot of instinct, also," the President said.
Trump's willingness to rely on instinct will trouble his critics, given his instinct to downplay the virus for weeks earlier this year.
