The end of one’s high school career is always a bit surreal. And the coronavirus crisis has made the sensation even more pronounced for the Class of 2020.
That’s why Le Roy Junior-Senior High School’s staff gathered Tuesday morning amid brilliant sunshine in the school’s parking lot. They welcomed the seniors who drove up to a series of stations set up in the bus loop.
The staffers — including teachers, administrators, school bus drivers and cafeteria workers — handed out treats, awards and lunch.
As for the name? They were calling it “Sash, Dash and Drive.”
“It’s a way to honor our seniors and to get the spotlight on them for a day when it’s been a tough time,” said High School Principal Tim McArdle. “They’re going through five steps. They’re turning in their school materials, they’re getting their locker and cap and gown — all those items that are theirs.”
The seniors also received their yearbook, a Le Roy doughnut, hot dogs and a Le Roy bus cookie along the way.
“This is the first time we’ve done this event,” McArdle said. “We’ve been doing little things like this for the past few months to do the best we can to celebrate this awesome class of 2020.”
It was also a way for everybody just to see each other, often for the first time in months. This year’s class has 93 students, and everybody involved missed each other.
“The relationships they build with these kids is so strong and it’s life-changing,” McArdle said. “So for them to be a part of this ... it’s just as important as them as it is for the kids.”
Some of the seniors drove themselves, while others were driven by parents. They passed by a Le Roy police vehicle and the fire department’s ladder truck on the way in.
Ally Flynn was able to chat for a few minutes after collecting her doughnut from McArdle.
“It’s really exciting,” she said. “It gives us something to do in this quarantine and say goodbye in a way.”
Has she missed her classmates and teachers? “Extremely,” she said. “It’s something I’ve never experienced, so to go through it, it’s just weird.”
She’ll be attending Roberts Wesleyan College to study nursing. The school bus drivers manned their station a short distance away — wearing masks, as people do in the era. They’ve missed the kids too, not having had the chance to say goodbye.
“Absolutely,” said driver Roger Stone. “It’s definitely different ... The interaction we had with them, taking them to sports. We definitely miss all that.”
Senior Richard Carpino drove though in a Jeep Wrangler. He’ll be studying biology at West Virginia University in the future.
It wasn’t the senior year he envisioned, but it also wasn’t the worst he could imagine. But it’s very nice — he hadn’t seen some of his teachers in months.
And graduation looms in a matter of days, as the Class of 2020’s high school experiences approaches an end.
“It’s a really crazy time,” he said. “It sort of feels like everybody’s forgot about you because everyone’s home, and you can’t go out in public, and you can’t really hang out with people, but it just goes to show in Le Roy they really do care about their students and especially their seniors. They always do try to do whatever they can for them.”
