Posted by Joël Valenzuela | Dec 8, 2019 | Opinion |
The cryptocurrency industry has a problem with fake news and poor journalism. There’s no getting around this reality, and it affects key perceptions with the space today, leaving lingering misconceptions and investors confused and uninformed about the realities going on in the space. After a recent piece by Bitcoinist spread harmful rumors without concrete evidence (then demanded concrete evidence in order to retract what they published without said evidence to begin with), igniting a firestorm of copycat publications repeating the same inaccurate information without verification, I think it’s time to have a real talk.
Instead of apologizing to the community for the fake headline news of the non-existent “police raid”, which damaged our reputation, and $btc price, theBlock now tries to argue if there was an office, if CZ had a meeting… who cares?
Own up & apologize for your mistake. https://t.co/PWjQ7FzEc6
— CZ Binance (@cz_binance) November 23, 2019
There is a certain unspoken rule in crypto along the lines of “don’t spoil my fun and I won’t spoil yours,” and in the struggling and nascent field of crypto journalism this holds doubly true as media members largely don’t call each other out for professional or ethical shortcomings. However, after years of abuse enough is enough. The tide is turning, and a few brave souls are coming forward and calling out the fake news that permeates throughout the space, and I would count myself a coward if I remained silent and let others take the heat for standing up for what’s right. From here on out I will take a stand against bad crypto journalism.
Why Is Crypto Journalism So Bad?
A good journalist needs to have two key competencies: professional skill in the actual field of journalism, and some level of knowledge and familiarity in the field of their focus. The crypto sector is both small and new enough that you will rarely find a combination of both attributes: cryptocurrency fans are rarely professional journalists, and professional journalists tend to have more career prospects and professional acclaim in covering other subjects while information on this new and emerging field is sparse and disorganized. This means that professional journalists report primarily on other subjects and largely do not know what they’re talking about when they do happen to cover the space, and dedicated crypto journalists are rarely professionals.
In particular, this means that most so-called crypto journalists tend to be hardcore fans with good communication skills that wish to work in the space, yet may have fewer higher-paying skills such coding or business and sales. This can lead to energized fans making a career out of talking about, and promoting, their passion, which can in turn lead to the narrative and flow of information landing in control of people with reason and means to promote their pet projects, while lacking the professional and ethical framework to ensure that the news is reported both accurately and fairly.
It’s no secret that journalism as a whole doesn’t pay top dollar, and that the profession is undergoing a crisis of sorts as the communication platforms shift from physical to digital, and citizen bloggers and other non-professionals can increasingly contribute to the sharing and formation of the news. This is only compounded in the crypto industry which lacks the size and establishment to fully support a vibrant journalism component. Additionally, in a radically decentralized and new space, fans are used to getting news through non-traditional means such as social media posts or obscure forum threads, resulting in no natural consumer base for quality news.
This has led to an incentive scheme where news platforms create clickbait headlines to generate the most quick views as possible in order to drive advertising revenue, while at the same time not feeling the effects of losing credibility, a commodity with little value in the space. If a writer publishes a story with a misleading but scandalous headline and poorly fact-checked content, the resulting repercussions will likely be light while the rewards from increased clicks will be high. Even worse, news sites can easily be funded by anonymous or invisible projects and sponsors, leading to a strong conflict of interest in favor of harming certain projects over others.
If you promote a guaranteed 12% per month & 5/10% referral program, you are shilling a pyramid scheme (at best!) Thank @AlexSaundersAU for bringing this #crypto crap to my attention
