Houston Dash forward Kealia Ohai was traded to Chicago on Monday.
The Houston Dash traded forward Kealia Ohai to the Chicago Red Stars for defender Katie Naughton and the 18th overall selection in the 2020 National Women's Soccer League Draft on Monday.
“It was a little bit out of the blue,” coach James Clarkson said. “When you evaluate and look at our stats from last year, we need to strengthen the squad and I think it’s difficult especially now that there was an expansion. We only had one draft pick as well.
“(Naughton) will be able to come in, help us in the backline, give us some extra strength and depth and really help try to push us forward.”
Ohai was the team’s first collegiate draft pick when it joined the league in 2014. After leading the club with 11 goals in 2016, Ohai tallied just nine in the last three seasons although an ACL injury ended her 2017 season after 10 games.
Naughton helped the Red Stars reach their first-ever NWSL championship where the team lost to the North Carolina Courage in October. Naughton started 19 games and played a role in five of Chicago’s eight clean sheets last season.
But after a promising start in 2019, the Dash missed the playoffs for a sixth-straight year and surrendered the second-most goals in the league.
“We conceded too many goals. Historically, that’s been an issue for the Dash,” Clarkson said. “There’s a longer-term plan to this where ideally over if not this season, the next season, we add some more pieces.
“We only have two center backs so we’re very thin there. Fortunately, Amber (Brooks) has played every minute and if she’d have gotten injured at any stage last year, we’d have been in a real mess.”
Clarkson described the trade as the biggest decision he’s been a part of since joining the club after the 2018 season. As a result, Houston will have the 12th and 18th overall selections in the draft on Jan. 16.
He expects the team to replace Ohai’s offensive production through several players returning from injuries this season.
“With Veronica Latsko’s injury and Nichelle Prince’s, they were massive losses for us last year,” Clarkson said. “With them coming back, being fully fit, we have depth, we have good players. It’s a huge opportunity for someone like Veronica to really come in and get real playing time and (establish) herself in the league so we have real confidence in those players and we feel that we’ve got some really good pieces going forward. We’ve just got to get stronger in the backline.”
