A paper published on Thursday in the scientific journal Nature by Benjamin Hmiel and colleagues shows that the proportion of methane emissions made by man is 25 to 40 per cent greater than previously estimated.
Methane gas flares at a refinery.
The gas industry, business and politicians need to take note. Far from being the “saviour” in our transition to a low and eventual net-zero emissions future, gas may just bring on and accelerate the rate of global warming.
drilled for, produced and marketed those hydrocarbons, I know how hard it is to contain them.
Oil spills you can easily see; gas leaks and fugitive emissions are much harder to detect.
Gas has been touted as the fuel needed in an orderly transition to a world free of fossil fuels emissions – including last week by Australia’s Chief Scientist, Alan Finkel.
However, let’s be clear. When the gas producers talk about transition, what they really mean is this: coal is on its way out; oil will eventually be in trouble; but gas will save our companies’ bacon. Let’s dash for gas. Let’s dash for cash.
The gas industry has touted itself as clean and green. The LNG industry has prided itself on having brought energy to the world that would have otherwise been produced from coal.
However, the reality is that in this decade, extra gas is more than likely displacing or at least slowing down the introduction of renewable energy.
For a long time, the fossil fuel industry has shied away from taking into account and measuring its historic and current fugitive emissions – mainly methane. Kicking and screaming, it has slowly but surely been forced to disclose those emissions.
The sum of the well-by well, facility-by-facility, pipeline-by-pipeline emissions have always been too low to account for the fossil fuel methane we see in the atmosphere. The industry has always said the emissions were from natural sources.
The new paper shatters those assertions. Over a 20-year period, methane has more than 80 times as much effect on global warming as does an equivalent amount of carbon dioxide.
The only silver lining is that now we know that a higher proportion of methane emissions come courtesy of humans, we have the opportunity to leverage that information to more rapidly reduce our emissions.
A dash for gas over the next 20 years, together with its inevitable fugitive emissions – in exploration, production, transportation and consumption – is a recipe for disaster.
Driving for gas as a transition fuel may just mean that our chances of reducing the worst effects of global warming and climate change are dashed. Conversely, targeting accelerated reductions in man-made methane emissions through reduced use of gas would be very beneficial.
Greg Bourne is a councillor with the Climate Council.
