The advantages of depth and pitching, and a potentially tougher schedule, increase the challenge.
If you are a fan excited to see how good the Rays would be this year coming off 2019′s success, g etting to play 60 games this pandemic-interrupted season is certainly better than none .
But — fully acknowledging the impact of the coronavirus — it’s not the best-case situation for the Rays.
Here are five thoughts on why:
A key to the Rays’ success is maximizing depth, which tends to pay off over the longer haul. In a 60-game sprint — not even 40 percent of the usual 162 games — that likely won’t have as much impact. Team officials talk internally how in comparing rosters other teams may have better players 1 through 10, but the Rays have the better 11-30 or 40, and that it pays off.
But with a shorter season, players (in theory) won’t need as many days off for rest, and backups won’t get called on as often. On the plus side, teams are likely to carry more than the planned 26 players, and with the extended layoff and shortened Spring 2.0 camp, there potentially could be more injuries. Talking Monday before commissioner Rob Manfred said he would set what is expected to be a 60-game season, Rays manager Kevin Cash said he is unsure how much the shortened season impacts his club.
“I think the (front office) guys have done an awesome job of building a lot of depth,” Cash said. “We went into it thinking we were a talented team and for us to be talented when our depth got tested, we felt good about that. I think there’s going to be a lot of unknowns. Will that depth be able to come into play over 45-60 games, whatever it is, I’m not really sure.”
The Rays' Ryan Yarbrough throws from the bullpen mound during a voluntary workout at Tropicana Field on Tuesday. [WILL VRAGOVIC  |  Tampa Bay Rays]
Similarly, the Rays build their pitching staff to be dominant from top to bottom. Whether using traditional starters or using the opener strategy, they strive to have a competitive option every day. But with a limited season, teams may opt to use their top starters more often, skipping the back end of the rotation spots on days off, which could negate some of that edge.
Wouldn’t the Yankees want Gerrit Cole to pitch every fifth day rather than using Jordan Montgomery if they could since they won’t be watching Cole’s inning count. (On the plus side for the Rays, Tyler Glasnow and Blake Snell were going to have inning limits this season based on the time missed last year, and those shouldn’t be as impactful.) The Rays also build their bullpen to have depth and options and, again, with teams not as concerned about overall workloads, that, too, could negate an edge.
The Rays earned the right with their performance last season to be considered among the favorites to make the playoffs this year and to go far. Most chatter going into spring training had the Yankees, Rays, Twins and Astros as the four best teams, with the Angels and Indians in the next tier. But that field is now more wide open. A team like the Blue Jays — who are clearly getting better but might not be quite good enough yet to compete over 162 games — could get off to a quick start, have the confidence and performance of their young players accelerate, and find themselves in the race.
The American League East usually is tough enough. But this season was setting up favorably for the Rays, with the Red Sox in somewhat of a transition, the Blue Jays still rising and the Orioles, well, still the Orioles. The Rays were supposed to play their interleague games against the National League Central, where the Cardinals seemed the favorites, and the Brewers and Reds of some threat.
But under what is believed to be the current plan, the Rays will still be grouped in the AL East, but play only those four and no other AL teams while also facing the NL East teams. That’s part of an effort to limit travel time by having teams compete geographically, but it increases the degree of difficulty, as the Rays now are facing the world champ Nationals and the contending Braves and Mets, along with a Phillies team under the new management of Joe Giradi.
Last year’s success began early for the Rays as they got off to a 14-4 start, turned that into a 26-15 mark by mid-May and were 37-23 at the 60-game mark as they went on to finish 96-66. In a 60-game season, there is no room for slow starts as there won’t be enough time to recover. And, before last year, the Rays had had a bunch of them.
Looking at their past 10 seasons (five under Cash), here are the Rays records through 60 games, and their final record (playoff seasons with an *):
