Will Ambarella's New Robotics Platform Widen Its Moat Against Intel?
The underdog chipmaker unites its computer vision chips with a new software platform.
Leo is a tech and consumer goods specialist who has covered the crossroads of Wall Street and Silicon Valley since 2012. His wheelhouse includes cloud, IoT, analytics, telecom, and gaming related businesses. Follow him on Twitter for more updates!
Ambarella ( NASDAQ:AMBA ) recently unveiled its new robotics platform at CES 2020 in Las Vegas. The platform, which serves as a unified software infrastructure for Ambarella's CVflow computer vision system on chips (SoCs), targets automated guided vehicles, industrial robots, and emerging smart factory applications.
Ambarella states that the platform provides "easy access and acceleration" for common robotics tasks, including stereo processing, keypoints extraction, neural network processing, and Open Source Computer Vision Library (OpenCV) functions. It claims that pairing those features with the native multi-camera support in its CV chips will enable "robotics designs that are both simpler and more powerful than traditional robotics architectures."
Ambarella generates most of its revenue from image processing SoCs for security cameras, dash cams, action cameras, drones, and other gadgets. GoPro was once Ambarella's top customer, but the action camera maker's declining sales forced the chipmaker to aggressively diversify its product portfolio and customer base.
That transition was rough. Ambarella initially pivoted toward the drone market with its top customer DJI Innovations, but drone sales weren't strong enough to offset sluggish sales of action cameras. It also prioritized SoCs for security cameras, but two of its top Chinese customers -- Hikvision and Dahua -- were added to the Trump Administration's trade blacklist last year.
To make matters worse, Intel expanded into Ambarella's backyard by buying the computer vision chipmakers Movidius and Mobileye in 2016 and 2017, respectively. Major Ambarella customers -- including DJI, Hikvision, and Dahua -- subsequently started installing Intel's Movidius chips in their devices.
The reason was simple: Movidius' visual processing units (VPUs) could process images and analyze them in a single package. Ambarella's image processing SoCs lacked those computer vision capabilities. In response, Ambarella developed its own CV line of computer vision chips with the technologies it acquired from VisLab in 2015.
However, Ambarella didn't unveil its first computer vision chip, the CV1, until late 2017. It subsequently launched new chipsets like the CV2, CV22, CV25, and S6LM, but those chips didn't meaningfully offset the softer sales of its basic image processing SoCs until last quarter :
