Sneha Nahata | July 1, 2020 | More on: ENB FTS PBA TRP CU ENB FTS PPL TRP
Investors seeking to generate reliable dividend income from their equity portfolio can consider these five TSX stocks. These TSX companies generate strong cash flows, which implies that investors can see an increase in payouts over time.
Speaking of dividend-paying stocks, Fortis (TSX:FTS) (NYSE:FTS) is the obvious choice. The company has increased its dividends for 46 years in a row. Moreover, it offers a decent yield of 3.7%, which is pretty safe.
Fortis’s rate-regulated assets help the company in generating predictable and growing cash flows, thereby supporting its payouts. Investors should note that the company expects its dividends to grow by 6% annually in the next five years, supported by healthy growth in its rate base. Economic downturns and large market swings barely have an impact on its business and stock. Thus, investors seeking reliable income should consider buying Fortis stock now.
When it comes to steady dividend income, TC Energy (TSX:TRP) (NYSE:TRP) is a reliable investment option. TC Energy has increased its dividends for 20 years straight. Besides, it remains well positioned to continue to grow it further in the coming years. Currently, its dividend yield stands at attractive 5.6%.
Despite these challenges, TC Energy’s asset utilization rate remains high , and the company could continue to produce steady EBITDA and earnings growth in the coming quarters. The company’s rate-regulated and contracted businesses account for the majority of its EBITDA, implying that volatility in the commodity prices and lower throughput volumes will not have much of an impact on its profitability.
The company expects to increase its dividends by 8-10% through 2021. Meanwhile, it projects 5-7% growth beyond 2021.
Canadian Utilities (TSX:CU) has increased its dividends for 48 straight years, which is commendable. The utility company’s dividend yield stands at 5.2%, which is high and safe. Moreover, investors can expect the company to increase dividends further in the coming years.
The company’s rate-regulated utility assets account for 95% of its earnings. Moreover, the remaining comes from contracted assets. The company’s stable earnings ensure that its payouts are covered. Meanwhile, steady rate base growth and cost efficiencies enable the company to increase its dividends consistently.
Enbridge (TSX:ENB) (NYSE:ENB) stock offers a high dividend yield of 7.8%, which is secure. While the low crude oil prices impacted the company’s mainline throughput and revenues, its diversified business supported by take-or-pay or cost of service arrangements ensure that its payouts are safe.
Enbridge has increased its dividends for 25 years in a row, with its dividends growing at a compound annual growth rate of 11% in the last 15 years. The company’s sustainable cash flows and low-risk business should continue to support its future payouts.
Similar to Enbridge, lower oil prices took a toll on Pembina Pipeline (TSX:PPL) (NYSE:PBA) stock. However, its forward yield of over 7.4% is too good to be ignored. While challenges persist, Pembina’s fee-based distributable cash flows are adequate to cover its payouts.
Pembina continues to benefit from long-term contracts. Besides, its diversified business and recent acquisitions have resulted in resilient cash flow streams. Investors should note that Pembina’s dividends are safe and could continue to increase in the future.
For more top stock picks, take a look at this report:
Renowned Canadian investor Iain Butler just named 10 stocks for Canadians to buy TODAY. So if you’re tired of reading about other people getting rich in the stock market, this might be a good day for you.
Because Motley Fool Canada is offering a full 65% off the list price of their top stock-picking service, plus a complete membership fee back guarantee on what you pay for the service. Simply click here to discover how you can take advantage of this.
Fool contributor Sneha Nahata has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool owns shares of and recommends Enbridge. The Motley Fool recommends FORTIS INC and PEMBINA PIPELINE CORPORATION.
Two New Stock Picks Every Month!
Not to alarm you, but you’re about to miss an important event.
Iain Butler and the Stock Advisor Canada team only publish their new “buy alerts” twice a month, and only to an exclusively small group.
This is your chance to get in early on what could prove to be very special investment advice.
Enter your email address below to get started now, and join the other thousands of Canadians who have already signed up for their chance to get the market-beating advice from Stock Advisor Canada.
I consent to receiving information from The Motley Fool via email, direct mail, and occasional special offer phone calls. I understand I can unsubscribe from these updates at any time. Please read the Privacy Statement and Terms of Service for more information.
