Most U.S. producers can’t operate wells profitably below $25 a barrel.
Hope for a quick rebound in oil prices has faded, and now some analysts are extending their forecasts for extremely low prices beyond 2021.
On Tuesday, Brent crude futures, the international benchmark, were up a penny to $22.77. West Texas Intermediate rose 2.2% to $20.53, after briefly falling below $20 on Monday . Stifel analyst Michael Scialla reduced his West Texas oil-price projection to $32 in 2020 and $34 in 2021, in line with the futures markets. And he thinks that the low prices could potentially last even longer.
Scialla found six oil producers he thinks can make it through this kind of environment , largely because they have managed their debt well and don’t have overwhelming maturities coming up. The stocks he recommends include Bonanza Creek (BCEI), EOG (EOG), Noble Energy (NBL), PDC Energy (PDCE), Parsley (PE), and Cimarex (XEC).
“All six of the stocks we are upgrading can withstand this environment, even if price weakness persists over the next four years,” Scialla wrote. “By our estimates, all of these companies will have sufficient liquidity to retire debt maturing between 2020-2023.”
Exclusive data, tables and charts from Barron's Market Lab.
Producers have already responded to the fast decline in oil prices—down more than 50% just this month—by cutting their budgets and beginning to shut down rigs. Most U.S. producers can’t operate wells profitably below $25 a barrel (and they can’t cover their overhead at the corporate level below $40). Scialla expects that rig counts will drop 40% between the first and second quarter, bringing total spending for the group down 37% in 2020 from 2019. Still, it will take some time before production falls. He thinks U.S. crude volumes will peak at 13 million in the second quarter, before falling to 12 million in the fourth quarter and 10.6 million at the end of 2021.
Scialla’s bullishness on these stocks doesn’t mean he thinks there will be a sudden reversal for the sector. But he does think current valuations discount particularly weak results, even for companies that have prepared.
“While [exploration-and-production] stocks will likely slide further if oil prices decline to levels that force wells to be shut-in, valuations reflect a dire outlook, in our view,” he wrote. “For example, PDC Energy and Bonanza Creek are valued below our proved reserve net asset value estimates.”
6 Stocks That Can Survive the Oil Shock, Even if It Lasts Years, According to One Analyst
Hope for a quick rebound in oil prices has faded, and now some analysts are extending their forecasts for extremely low prices beyond 2021.
