Consider this a eureka moment for the rest of the world, the biggest energy innovation of the decade.
Suddenly, they were able to release enormous amounts of oil in fields that big companies had given up on years before.
The so-called shale revolution has spawned boom towns in the Dakotas. That’s a lot of money. It’s life-changing money. It’s a dream.
We were able to do it in North Dakota, Texas, Colorado, Oklahoma, a few other places.
Thanks to fracking technology, the U.S. now producing about 9 1/2 million barrels a day, a 70 percent jump from just five years ago.
And it’s occurring because the price of oil was so high. That incentivized innovation.
And Cliff, what does fracking for oil mean for this still quite unfinished American dream of energy independence?
Well, it means that we actually, at least momentarily, seem to almost reach that independence. Because American oil production more than doubled in about five years.
Last year, we relied less on foreign oil than in any of the last 16 years.
It’s changed the whole world and the economy of the whole world. It’s changed our dependence on foreign oil. It’s changed our alliances in terms of their value to us.
The United States became an exporter of oil for the first time in many years. And last year, actually leapfrogged over Russia and Saudi Arabia as the biggest oil producer in the world.
So this seems like a pretty good problem to have, right? I mean, too much American oil for the first time, basically, in our history.
Economically speaking, no question about it. By 2014, we were bringing down gasoline prices for consumers. It was part of our recovery from the recession. And all of this American production puts the United States in a extremely powerful position economically, employing millions of people and producing revenues for state and local governments across much of the country. Also giving the United States the freedom to act in foreign policy in ways that would have been unheard-of years before, such as putting pressure on Iran without endangering our energy supply. It was basically the culmination of the dream from the 1970s. And it was hard to imagine, just a few months ago, what could happen that could undercut that dream.
Like a pandemic that would suddenly destroy the demand for oil and kneecap the American oil industry that had produced all of this oil in the first place.
So Cliff, when this third trauma arrives, the pandemic, the world at this point, and the United States, in particular, is awash in oil. And from what you’re saying, demand for that oil has instantly plunged. So what’s actually happening to all of this overproduced oil?
So the oil has no place to go. And it’s rapidly filling up tank farms, strategic reserves around the world. Refineries are running out of space to put the oil. And so the inventories are building to a point where there’ll be no physical space to put the oil. You now have tankers which, you know, used to ship oil from place to place, just storing the oil and sitting out off of the shores of Los Angeles, for instance, and other places. And these are the people who are making a lot of money. They’re getting paid to just hold the oil.
So this explains those negative oil prices, right? They’re producing so much oil that they have nowhere to store it. So they end up having to pay people to take it.
Cliff, maybe this is a bit of a stupid question, but why don’t oil producers, knowing that there’s just way too much oil, and that, if they keep producing it, they’re going to hurt their own ability to command meaningful prices, just stop pumping or fracking oil? Just leave it in the ground.
Well, that’s beginning to happen, but it’s a cumbersome, complex process. First of all, you have thousands of producers in the United States. We don’t have a national oil company which is taking orders from the government, such as in Saudi Arabia. And then there are complications that go along with shutting in wells. It’s an expensive process. You can actually damage the resource to the point where, when you restart the oil, you’ll actually pump less oil out. And then, you have all of these companies that, even when they’re losing money, they need cash flow. They need cash flow to meet their payroll, to meet their debt responsibilities. So what oil companies prefer to do, you let the well, basically, slowly decline.
So if we can’t easily turn off the pumps, and we can’t suddenly overnight create enough storage for all this oil, what can — and I guess what is — the U.S. doing about this glut of oil?
Well, there are a number of things that are being considered, such as stopping imports from coming in, particularly imports from Saudi Arabia that are on their way in tankers.
40 million barrels of Saudi oil is already on its way to the United States. Shipping —
But there are probably American refiners who have already paid for it.
President Trump is facing pressure to stop Saudi crude oil imports in an effort to save the American oil industry.
And so you would be hurting American refiners. That’s not something that the administration would like to do, I’m sure. So they don’t have a lot of options. But meanwhile, small oil producers are in dire straits and on the verge of bankruptcy. And that could be the future, especially if our demand is going to be depressed for a long time.
So Cliff, how is this new reality of the glut and the small producers struggling within that glut, how is that starting to look on the ground in America’s biggest oil towns, including, I’m sure, yours, which is in Texas?
Well, thousands of people are losing their jobs. Others are being furloughed. Probably, it’s only going to get worse. You have oil states that rely on what’s called severance taxes, which is dependent on the price of oil. So that will have an impact on state and local services. And it will have an impact on people who actually earn money because oil is coming out of fields on their private property. So there’s going to be a big macroeconomic impact in these oil-producing states.
Cliff there are going to be people who hear this and think, this is what happens when a country like the United States becomes overly focused in this discussion of energy and dependence on old line forms of energy, on oil, rather than on newer, greener forms of energy. And what do you say to that?
So there are definitely going to be a lot of people who will celebrate the demise of the American oil industry.
And there is a strong argument to be made that we need to diversify our energy supply. And we have done that successfully when it comes to power. We are now using wind and solar. But not for our cars. The electrical age, the electric cars, they’re coming. There’s no question about it. But it’s going to take decades. Because the average car today is on the road for 10 years. So it takes a long time to change the transportation fleet. And our transportation fleet is overwhelmingly dependent on gasoline and diesel.
Cliff, what’s so interesting about the history that you have described here is that it feels like every decision the United States has made about oil was about avoiding a single scenario, which is that we would run out of oil and we would be beholden to our adversaries to get that oil. And it feels like we never really prepared for the opposite scenario, which is the situation we’re in now.
That’s right. Nobody anticipated a pandemic that would destroy demand. And no one is to blame for this, but we are now facing an entirely new set of problems.
And of course, if we had anticipated this problem, we would not have solved the problem that we had being dependent on producers in the Middle East and other unfriendly powers.
So my big takeaway, and it may be obvious to everyone, is the idea of energy security is simply an illusion.
We are not energy secure when we have little oil. And we’re not energy secure when we have a lot of oil. It’s hard to get it just right.
