BB Energy, an oil trading house based in London, bought 250,0000 barrels of oil when US prices turned negative on April 20, raking in a huge profit, Bloomberg reported on Thursday.
BB Energy was one of the few trading houses that had storage capacity when other traders were scrambling for options, allowing it to buy up the historically cheap oil, a source told Bloomberg.
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission said on Wednesday that West Texas Intermediate crude for delivery in June could also turn negative upon the contract's expiry.
One trader bought 250,000 barrels of oil and secured a rare payout as oil prices turned negative last month, causing jitters in markets and leaving most other traders scrambling to find storage options across both sides of the Atlantic, Bloomberg reported on Thursday .
But for BB Energy, a trading house based in London, the historic oil-market crash was a golden opportunity because it had storage capacity when other firms didn't, a source told Bloomberg. BB Energy bought about 10% of all barrels of West Texas Intermediate crude futures for delivery in May.
US oil prices hit an all-time low of negative $37.63 on April 20 because of an extreme shortage of storage options for oil, meaning many traders had to effectively pay others to take the oil off their hands .
It was unclear whether BB Energy was still holding on to the barrels it bought or how much the trading house paid (or, indeed, was paid), Bloomberg said.
Read more: Buy these 13 tech stocks that are abnormally disconnected from Wall Street's expectations for profit growth and poised to rocket higher, Credit Suisse says
BB Energy says it trades 20 million metric tons of crude and petroleum products annually.
A lack of storage options, particularly at a key facility in Cushing, Oklahoma , and a reduction in demand for the commodity contributed to WTI's historic price crash.
Oil has been ravaged by the coronavirus pandemic, which has all but shut down international travel and greatly reduced manufacturing output, torpedoing demand.
Concerns are mounting that the June WTI contract could follow the same pattern as the May contract, with demand for storage outweighing supply at the expiry of the contract, pushing oil below zero again.
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the US commodities regulator, issued a rare advisory on Wednesday urging market participants to prepare for a repeat scenario of negative prices for the June WTI contract.
"We note that we are issuing this advisory in the wake of unusually high volatility and negative pricing experienced in the May 2020 West Texas Intermediate (WTI), Light Sweet Crude Oil Futures contract on April 20 (the penultimate day of trading and expiration of the contract)," it said.
On Wednesday, OPEC downgraded its demand forecast by a third , saying it expects demand to fall by just over 9 million barrels per day in 2020. OPEC had previously forecast a slump of 6.84 million barrels per day.
WTI crude was trading at about $26.62, up 4.3%, on Thursday morning. Brent crude , the international benchmark, was at $30.36 a barrel, up 2.9%, as of 6:20 a.m. ET.
