However, crude oil is proving to be the most capricious commodity. In recent years as OPEC and other non-OPEC producers such as Russia strove to keep prices higher they simply encouraged shale producers in the U.S. to open production.
A wireline operator prepares a slick line at an oil rig pump jack site in the oil fields near ... [+] Bakersfield . The area is prime for oil development in the Monterey shale formation. (Photo by Al Seib/Los Angeles Times via Getty Images)
peaked at 888 on November 16, 2018 when WTI was priced at $56.40/barrel.
Can a deal be done, or will the Saudi's walk away once again if Russia and OPEC cannot agree? (Photo ... [+] by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images)
OPEC output agreements have often seen cheating as greedy producers sought to obtain as much revenue as possible at a time when neighboring suppliers were adhering to restrictions.
This time the Saudi’s wanted previously agreed restrictions to be extended in duration, however, Russia would not agree. In response the Saudi’s ramped up production confident they could endure the pain of lower prices for longer than the Russians where the economy is expected to slip into recession in 2020 amid low oil prices and the coronavirus outbreak.
The commodity markets are usually the favored home of the speculator. This is not really the case for the market in WTI as there are times when the volatility is just too extreme. For example, during 204/15 when WTI fell from $110.26/barrel to $26.21/barrel, -76.23% the level of crude oil volatility rose from 30 to 75, +250%.
However, from January 2 to today, when oil has declined from $61.18/barrel to $27.05/barrel, -55.78% the volatility has soared from 28.75 to 144.19 or + 501.53%. Movements of his nature can be simply too much to manage.
The combination of falling oil prices plus the collapse in public/corporate demand has forced the hand of the retailers. In the first wave of prices falls during February we saw 9p (11 cents) come off the price of a litre of unleaded according to the Royal Automobile Club (RAC), with average prices dropping from 122.72p ($1.38.64) to 113.54p ($1.39.65) a litre.
Diesel also fell, going from 125.7p ($1.57) to 117.8p ($1.45) a litre. That resulted in the cost of filling an average 55-liter car dropping by £5.05 ($6.21) for unleaded and £4.35 ($5.35) for diesel.
The price reductions slowly continued in March, but now April has begun and, with a “stay at home Easter” just around the corner, the scramble to lure customers has seen pump prices fall toward £1 ($1.23) a liter.
Price reductions are not uniform, and one will still find remote, rural garages charging relatively higher prices as they know for the motorist with a low level of fuel, they have a virtual monopoly on a sale.
Supermarkets will still be where the best price points will be found. Last week prices were down to 102.7p ($1.26) a liter and yet will it break below £1.00 ($1.23) is the pressing question.
Crude oil prices have bounced off local lows and there are new expectations that the Russians will return to the negotiating table.
Russia's economy continues to be driven by revenues from oil and gas exports, though less so than 18 years ago, during President Vladimir Putin's first term in office. Russia needs the oil price above $40/barrel for its economic plan to work. With prices below $30/barrel even Russia’s finance minister Anton Siluanov has hinted the economy will be in trouble within four years.
The market technical sentiment is for buying to persist in the short-term, so lifting prices. However, the sentiment turns ugly again in a week’s time and any rise in price will be reversed.
For U.K. pump prices to slip below £1/liter ($1.23) would be a major event, but I would not be at all surprised to see a supermarket chain either offer vouchers on shopping worth over £50 ($62), so effectively delivering that price. They may be eager to see how much price leadership can be exploited in a highly elastic market.
The sad reality is that whilst we, the consumers, may enjoy lower costs, many, small petrol stations will face closer as a result of the severe impact of low prices and limited demand.
Have no doubt, Europe is a region rich in history, great geographic and national variation. However, this complex territory is in a state of flux.
Have no doubt, Europe is a region rich in history, great geographic and national variation. However, this complex territory is in a state of flux.
Europe may be a small continent; however, it is comprised of 50 nations, several of which also claim to be in Asia. The relationship of the United Kingdom with the European Union will be a dominant factor for years to come, however, many aspects of mainland Europe are also undergoing major change as the existing political establishment is challenged from left and right. Therefore, there is scarcely a dull moment within the economies, markets and political arenas of this richly varied region.
led to uncertainty as to its future governance. Following several decades of relative calm, the future of Europe is far from certain. I intend to explain this changing landscape.
