NEW DELHI: With crude oil prices boiling above the $70 a barrel mark and the rupee hitting the 72 mark against the dollar, analysts said domestic stocks, especially the ones that have already rallied quite a bit such as banks, may take a beating.
Oil-linked stocks such as oil marketing companies, aviation players and paint and chemicals firms may also come under severe pressure, if the situation in West Asia remains tense, they said.
On Monday, the BSE Sensex fell over 700 points while NSE barometer Nifty tested the 12,000 level after Washington warned Iraq of sanctions if it asked the US army to leave the country, as the former looks to take on Iran if it retaliates to the killing of its major general Qassim Soleimani.
Shares of oil marketing companies fell over 5 per cent in Monday’s trade. HPCL declined 5.23 per cent to hit a low of Rs 250. BPCL fell 2.08 per cent to Rs 472, while IOC dropped 2 per cent to Rs 124.70.
Aviation stock InterGobe Aviation fell 3 per cent to hit a low of Rs 1,329. SpiceJet tanked 4.38 per cent to Rs 101, before recovering lost ground. Paint stocks Asian Paints and Berger Paints declined 2 per cent each. Some 37 of the 40 banking stocks fell up to 5 per cent. The BSE Bankex had gained 18 per cent in last one year.
“Rising crude oil prices may drag the rupee-dollar exchange rate to new lifetime lows. It is worrying for the economy due to persisting concerns over fiscal deficit and CAD imbalances. The only X-factor for the market to rise was the corporate tax cut, as the economy is showing no signs of uptick. Bond yields are pressuring PSU banks and corporate banks. Bajaj Finance has showed moderation in numbers,” said Yogesh Mehta, Founder, Yield Maximiser.
“Besides, if consumer companies like Asian Paints and Pidilite fail to pass on the rise in input cost, they will certainly see some reaction,” Mehta said.
Iran said it would no longer abide by the limits contained in the 2015 nuclear deal while the Iraqi Parliament has passed a resolution to cancel the US request for assistance from the US-led coalition, which had been working with Baghdad to fight the ISIL.
How Iran reacts to the US move holds the key than what Trump said Sunil Jain, Head of Equity Research, Nirmal Bang Securities.
“Sectors that had run up fast are the ones at risk,” said Dharmesh Kant, Head of Retail Research at IndiaNivesh, who sees some weakness in financial stocks.
“OMCs, aviation, paints and a lot of chemicals firms that use oil as derivatives may come under pressure. We have seen a big runup in select midcap stocks. If the problem persists, then these stocks may correct a lot,” Jain said.
