Wall Street futures move higher at 3pm, sending ASX up in final hour
That is all from us today. Thank you for your time and your comments.
We will be back in the morning.
Furniture seller Nick Scali will temporarily shut its 57 stores and showrooms across the country and stand down its workforce, becoming the latest retailer to do so due to the coronavirus pandemic.
The company told investors on Monday afternoon the introduction of social distancing measures by the Australian government meant it would have to shut its doors until May 1, during which it would focus on delivering its existing orders.
The S&P/ASX 200 staged another massive upswing during the final settlement, with CSL ending the day 12 per cent higher, the largest one day gain for the healthcare company since January 2017.
The index jumped from a 4.7 per cent rise around 3.50pm to a 7 per cent rise in the final 15 minutes of market activity. Or from 5065 points to 5181 points. Boosted by Wall Street futures moving higher, the massive gains also coincided with a new $130 billion Job Keeper package announced by the Federal Government in Canberra.
On the stock market the healthcare sector out-performed with gains of 11.4 per cent, driven by a 25 per cent rise in Ansell to $29.03, a massive 12 per cent rise in CSL to $312.68, an 11.8 per cent rise in Ramsay Health, and a 9.8 per cent rise in Cochlear to $182.81.
Financials also out-performed with gains of 8.8 percent, and consumer staples and consumer discretionary both gained about 8 per cent. Materials under-performed with a rise of 4 per cent.
Among the big four banks, Commonwealth Bank surged 10.9 per cent to $63.95 and Westpac gained 8.5 per cent to $16.16. Commonwealth Bank's chief executive, Matt Comyn, on Monday said while the bank will see higher loan losses, it can last ''a long time'' before needing to raise more money.
One of the largest shareholders in struggling department store Myer has said it would "make sense" for the company to use the coronavirus shutdown as an opportunity to shrink or close further stores across the country.
Geoff Wilson, who heads up 7.7 per cent Myer shareholder Wilson Asset Management, told The Age and The Sydney Morning Herald following Australia's recovery from the coronavirus pandemic he predicts Myer will see some "permanent changes to consumption".
The seasoned investor said the predicted recession set to follow the pandemic would see "behavioural changes", especially in younger Australians, which may prompt a focus on saving money rather than spending it. In this environment, closing more stores would be a good move for Myer, Mr Wilson said.
"It would make sense for Myer management to take the opportunity to rationalise the store portfolio," he said.
This could see the iconic retailer shift further towards selling online, an area which management has been making a concerted push into over the past few years.
Late on Friday, Myer announced it would shut the doors of its 60 stores across Australia and stand down 10,000 staff , a decision chief executive John King said was one of the hardest the company has had to make during its 120-year history.
It joins numerous other major Australian retail companies also closing stores in the face of the pandemic, such as Premier Investments, Michael Hill, and Cotton On.
Shares on Monday rose 14.2 per cent to 12 cents following the announcement, with Mr Wilson saying the decision to close stores was "prudent management" given the low level of consumer demand. However, not all investors were soothed by the news.
Tasmanian financial services company MyState says Bell Potter Securities has withdrawn from an agreement to partially underwrite a $7 million dividend reinvestment program (DRP), that was first announced on 21 February.  Since then shares have fallen from $6.10 on 26 February down to $3.29 a week ago.
Bell Potter was lead manager and agreed to underwrite a shortfall up to a maximum of $7 million, with MyState Limited expecting to raise up to $10 million. The interim dividend is 14.25 cents per share, with the reinvestment price set at a 2.5 per cent discount of the average price between 9 March and 20 March.
"Following significant market volatility, the Underwriter has decided to terminate the underwriting agreement,'' MyState chief executive Melos Sulicich told shareholders today.
"We are currently experiencing extraordinary market conditions and whilst the partial DRP underwrite will no longer proceed, MyState remains well capitalised and has other capital options at its disposal."
The company will proceed with the dividend reinvestment plan and the dividend will still be paid on 2 April.
The All Ords is up 4.7 per cent this afternoon with some significant swings.
The biggest move is a fall of 71 per cent, or 29¢, in Decmil Group to 12¢, after it emerged from a four-week trading halt. The company went into a trading halt on February 25 after announcing the end of a rapid prison deployment project in New Zealand. It has since updated its half-year results to record a 13 per cent decline in revenue and a loss of $75 million. It also warned about the potential for coronavirus to interrupt $490 million worth of work in the pipeline.
The next biggest decline is an 18.3 per cent decline in Magnis Energy.
However, the upswings are the main story today with 287 of the All Ords' 500 companies trading higher. Ansell is up 24.3 per cent, Regional Express is up 20.6 per cent, and Adairs is up 19.4 per cent. Cochlear is now up 16 per cent to $192.97.
Seventy ASX companies withdrew their earnings guidance last week, on top of the 52 that had already gone down that path in the fortnight before. Macquarie Research believes the acceleration could signal a wave of capital raisings may be on the way.
“Of the first 12 to withdraw guidance, three - WEB, COH and OML - were in the market looking to raise equity six to nine days later,” Macquarie said in a note.
“Given the surge in guidance withdrawals did not start until March 19, we may see more equity raisings in coming weeks.”
From a broader perspective, Macquarie said that one-third of ASX 100 constituents, and 25 per cent of stocks in the Small Ordinaries, have now withdrawn or reduced guidance over the past three weeks.
“Seeing so many companies provide negative earnings guidance so soon after the February reporting season reflects how quickly operating conditions have deteriorated in such a short space of time,” it said.
In a sign of how bad things are getting in New York, pictures are emerging of teams erecting field hospitals in Central Park to accommodate COVID-19 patients. The location is across the road from Mt Sinai Hospital, where many patients are being treated.
Overnight the US death toll rose to a total of 2,493, according to the live COVID-19 map produced by Johns Hopkins University.  Meanwhile, the number of new cases increased to a total of 142,356 which surpasses China's total of 82,356 cases, including 126 new ones.
Globally there are now 722,300 confirmed cases.
The ASX 200 is now up over 3 per cent, driven by the financial and healthcare sector.
The health sector is outperforming with gains of 7.8 per cent, driven by an 8 per cent rise in CSL (the largest company on the ASX), 11 per cent gains in Cochlear and 20 per cent rises in Ansell to $27.82.
China’s central bank has moved again to support a recovery in economic activity, reducing its 7-day repo rate by 20 basis points to 2.2 per cent moments ago, taking it to the lowest level on record.
Repo rates are short-term interbank interest rates.
“By offering funds at a lower rate, the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) will be able to keep market interbank rates low even as the liquidity from the required reserve ratio (RRR) cuts is absorbed by the banking system,” Capital Economics’ senior China economist Julian Evans-Pritchard wrote.
“But a lot more easing will be needed, especially on the fiscal front, to help the economy return to its pre-virus trend.”
