Energy minister Angus Taylor says Australia is taking advantage of historically low prices to begin building a national oil reserve. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian
Energy minister Angus Taylor says Australia is taking advantage of historically low prices to begin building a national oil reserve. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian
The Australian government is to spend $94m to begin building up a stockpile of crude oil – but will initially store the fuel in the United States.
The move is intended to ease longstanding concerns about Australia’s fuel security in the event of a major disruption, such as military conflict, and comes at a time when fuel prices are at historic lows.
But the location of the storage on the other side of the Pacific Ocean has drawn ridicule from the federal opposition, which says the “bizarre” plan will not help if sea lanes are closed due to global tensions.
Under International Energy Agency rules, each country has an obligation to hold emergency oil stocks equivalent to at least 90 days of net oil imports as part of planning to avoid a hit from any major disruption to oil supplies.
But Australia’s stocks were equivalent to just 55 days as of December, according to the latest Australian Petroleum Statistics .
The energy minister, Angus Taylor, said the government would “take advantage of historically low fuel prices across the world right now” to begin building a national oil reserve.
Taylor said it would be stored in the US at first because Australia currently did not have the storage space at home, but the government would work with industry to expand local storage capacity in the longer term.
Australian government-owned crude oil would be placed in the US Strategic Petroleum Reserve, which Taylor described as “amongst the world’s most cost-effective long-term oil storage facilities”.
Under a recent deal with the US, Australia has access to that storage facility for an initial period of 10 years.
Taylor characterised the $94m earmarked to buy the oil as “a down payment on a stronger and more secure fuel supply for Australian households, motorists, industry and the national economy”.
“We will be establishing and are establishing a strategic fuel reserve that can ensure, even in the event there is a global disruption that slows fuel supplies moving around the world, we will get access to the fuel we need to keep our country going,” he told reporters in Canberra.
The government also flagged temporary changes to fuel standards to provide relief to Australian refineries during the coronavirus pandemic.
The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said the location of the storage in the US was “rather bizarre” and did not protect Australia’s national interest.
“The United States isn’t New Zealand. I mean, it’s not next door,” Albanese told the ABC.
“If there’s the sort of international conflict or issues that provide disruption to sea lanes that may well occur at some stage in the future, then that is why nation states need to have this fuel capacity.”
Albanese called on the government to develop a plan for refining capacity and storage at home.
Labor went to last year’s election with a pledge to design a government-owned national fuel reserve to boost emergency supplies.
Taylor’s statement said that as of the end of February, Australia had 81 days’ worth of oil supplies – but that tally includes 25 days of stocks in overseas ports and in transit.
