The energy giant said its oil and gas assets were worth less, a move reflecting broad changes in the industry.
BP sent a signal to investors on Monday that the economic shock of the pandemic would reverberate for years, and that less gas and oil would probably be needed in the future .
The London-based oil giant told shareholders the company expected to write down as much as $17.5 billion of its oil and gas holdings in its next quarterly report.
The write-downs are an acknowledgment that the oil and gas fields on BP’s books are not worth as much as they used to be, and will probably stay that way for the foreseeable future. The move reflects broad changes in the energy industry as companies adjust to a new environment.
“Everywhere I have been — inside BP, as well as outside — I have come away with one inescapable conclusion,” Bernard Looney, the chief executive, said in a speech in February . “We have got to change.”
Since then, the coronavirus pandemic has caused steep declines in demand and prices for oil and gas that could linger for years. In addition, governments, consumers and investors are increasing pressure, especially in Europe, for oil companies to curb the greenhouse gas emissions produced by their fossil fuels.
With the write-down, which could amount to as much as 12 percent of the previous book value of the oil and gas assets, Mr. Looney, 49, is preparing the company for a future in which it will produce less fossil fuel than previously expected. It is likely to be the largest write-down since 2010, when the company recorded a $32 billion hit related to the Deepwater Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico.
In past years, companies rushed to acquire oil and gas fields and bring the crude or natural gas to market. Now, analysts say, investors are skeptical of all but the most profitable investments in fossil fuels because it is not clear that there will be demand for them — especially as many governments strive to meet the requirements of the 2015 Paris agreement on global warming.
“It is very clear that most energy companies are going to look very different in quite short order,” said Stuart Joyner, an analyst at Redburn, a market research firm. “The market will not pay for huge amounts of growth from these companies.”
Mr. Looney, an Irish citizen who was head of BP’s oil and gas exploration and production unit before moving into the top role, has been focusing on these issues. Promptly after becoming chief executive in February, he pledged to bring the London giant’s carbon emissions to net zero by 2050 or sooner and embarked on a sweeping reorganization to aid this quest.
The darker economic environment caused by the pandemic, he said in an email to employees on June 8, “is driving us to to move faster — and perhaps go deeper at this stage than we originally intended.” The makeover is now expected to lead to the loss of 10,000 jobs, or nearly 15 percent of the work force.
The write-downs are being taken for two reasons. BP has cut its long-term expectations of oil and gas prices by about 30 percent, to $55 a barrel for oil, a move that reduces the value of its assets. The company is also writing off resources, in places like the Gulf of Mexico and Canada, that it has on its books but may decide not to develop over the coming decades.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
“BP is already getting to grips with the idea that” its oil and gas fields are worth less than it recently believed, said Luke Parker, an analyst at Wood Mackenzie, a market research firm. “Indeed, some of them are worth nothing.”
Oil companies periodically review their businesses, leading to write-downs. In December, before the pandemic, Chevron took a $10.4 billion write-down , mostly for natural gas properties amid a glut. Analysts at Bernstein, a market research firm, said in a note on Monday that BP’s charges were the largest among major European oil companies in a decade.
Analysts said the $70-a-barrel price that BP was using looked increasingly unrealistic and was higher than that of other major oil producers in Europe. Analysts at Barclays wrote in a note to clients on Monday that BP’s new pricing assumption was the lowest among a group of European oil giants, including Royal Dutch Shell and the French company Total. BP’s move could put pressure on rivals to take similar steps.
Still, analysts at Morgan Stanley said Monday that BP’s $55-a-barrel price assumption might turn out to be “optimistic” because that level would encourage increased shale drilling in the United States, which could further depress prices.
Mr. Looney said in a statement that he was “confident that these difficult decisions” would better enable the company to compete as the energy industry changed. Several analysts, however, speculated that BP was likely to cut its dividend, a key consideration for investors.
