The authorities have moved to limit the damage. China’s banking regulator said it was investigating. The country’s top leadership has spoken out about the lack of investor protections in volatile markets.
A Bank of China spokeswoman in Hong Kong declined to answer questions. On May 5, the bank said it would try to protect clients’ interests, was negotiating settlements and would respect judicial decisions if it ended up in court with investors.
China strictly limits moving money abroad in part to protect its people from global market turbulence. It also restricts retail investors from trading in foreign commodity markets. But Bank of China and others in recent years have sold their customers investments that track global markets, exposing them to big risks as well as potential rewards.
China is still working to offer its people — traditionally relentless savers who would sock away their hard-earned savings under mattresses or in the bank — safe and diverse places to park their money. Its stock market has historically been volatile, and many Chinese investors consider it rife with insider trading. Its bond market is still limited. Housing is China’s most popular investment vehicle, but that market is prone to bubbles and government intervention.
Police officers outside Bank of China headquarters in Guangzhou in April.Credit...Alex Plavevski/EPA, via Shutterstock
A confluence of events, some of it just bad timing, hurt Bank of China and Crude Oil Treasure investors. But the bank’s poor oversight also played a role, experts say.
“This product is quite risky, and Bank of China itself did not anticipate such a risk,” said Wu Dong, a partner at Hui Ye Law Firm in Shanghai and an expert in finance law.
“Such operational risks are definitely not suitable for ordinary investors,” he added.
The hit stemmed from a crisis in the global oil markets. The coronavirus outbreak slashed global demand at the same time that Saudi Arabia and Russia were engaged in a production war.
On futures markets, where monthly contracts representing barrels of oil are traded, panicked investors drove prices to new lows. Investors scurried to get out of the May contract, which expired on April 20. Anybody holding the contract when it expired had to take physical possession of the oil.
Bank of China’s Crude Oil Treasure expired on April 20, when the price of oil was racing to zero. To make matters worse, a market rule change made that month allowed the price of oil to go negative . When the dust settled, Bank of China priced its product at -$37.63 per barrel, the final price of the May contract.
Sophisticated investors might expect turbulence in futures markets. But Bank of China pitched its product to consumers. It posted ads online and listed Crude Oil Treasure on the wealth management section of its app, which is meant for its retail customers. Other banks marketed their oil product to sophisticated investors.
“I think listing the Crude Oil Treasure in the bank’s wealth management section can be a problem for misleading investors,” said Ms. Chen, the Jefferies analyst.
Investors took to online forums to complain. They traveled to the bank’s local branches. Some threatened to go to Beijing to petition the central government. In one public letter, a group of investors accused the bank of “pure gangster logic.”
“As a leading state-owned listed company under the leadership of the party and the government, you are based in the capital of the country,” these investors wrote. “Do you think your above-mentioned behaviors matched your responsibilities and status?”
The police response was swift. Online, Crude Oil Treasure investors said members of their family and even colleagues had received calls and visits from local police officers worried that the investors would cause a scene.
An oil tanker at a Chinese port last year. “I feel like the Bank of China is bullying its customers because it is a big organization,” one investor said.Credit...Jason Lee/Reuters
On May 4, the Financial Stability and Development Committee, led by Liu He, China’s vice premier, issued a statement highlighting the risks in international commodities market and the need to “protect the legitimate interests of investors.”
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
A few days later, various Bank of China branches made settlement offers, according to investors. Some promised to pay 20 percent of their original investment. Those who took the deal had to agree to stop any legal action.
“You have suffered losses for investing in the Crude Oil Treasure product. For this, we feel for you and are willing to make an effort to go through this hard time with you,” Bank of China told investors in a message on its mobile app that was seen by The New York Times.
The Financial News, a newspaper affiliated with China’s central bank, said four-fifths of investors had agreed to a settlement, citing an official with China’s banking regulator that it did not name. The banking regulator did not respond to a request for comment.
Other investors are balking. One investor, surnamed Mr. Ma, said his losses had totaled $240,000. Mr. Ma, who requested that his first name not be published, has not yet told his family. He worries his wife will divorce him if she finds out.
Mr. Ma said he had decided to try Crude Oil Treasure after his restaurant was shut for weeks because of the coronavirus outbreak. He thought it could be a chance to make up lost revenue. Mr. Ma said he had trouble sleeping. At one point he began but did not complete a suicide note.
Mr. Chen, the Crude Oil Treasure investor, works in administration at a factory in China’s manufacturing capital of Dongguan. He worried that he would face severe consequences if he did not pay the bank, like being added to a blacklist of debtors who cannot buy train tickets, travel or even attend certain events .
“I feel like the Bank of China is bullying its customers because it is a big organization,” Mr. Chen said.
But he relented. On Tuesday, he said, local police officers and Bank of China officials showed up at his office to speak with him and his colleagues, who had also invested in Crude Oil Treasure, and his managers. Feeling pressure, he agreed to a settlement that left him about $1,300, or about one-fifth of what he originally invested.
“We did not want to get entangled in this incident,” Mr. Chen said.
