Collapse in crude oil hits equity market; Sensex drops 900 points
Broader market indices were faring in-line with their headline peers.
MSCI's broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan fell half a percent.
NEW DELHI: A historic collapse in US crude oil prices, led by demand destruction in the international market, sparked fears of severe economic distress, putting domestic equity indices under heavy pressure in Tuesday's trade. Swift rise in asymptomatic coronavirus cases also increased worries that many more such undetected cases may be lurking around the country.
Globally, Asian equity markets followed Wall Street lower, adding to the pressure.
May futures of WTI crude settled at minus $37.63 a barrel on Monday, a 306 per cent daily drop, driven by the rapid filling of the United States' main storage hub at Cushing, Oklahoma. This means sellers were paying buyers to take delivery of the oil.
At 9.20 am, BSE flagship Sensex was down 809 points or 2.56 per cent to 30,759 while NSE benchmark Nifty shed 225 points or 2.43 per cent to 9,036. Broader market indices were faring in-line with their headline peers as Nifty Smallcap fell 2.60 per cent while Nifty Midcap dropped 2.83 per cent. Nifty 500 was down 2.58 per cent.
Brent crude prices are trading at about $25/bbl. The reason for this sharp divergence is that WTI needs to be physically delivered at Cushing, Oklahoma whereas for Brent contract, deliveries can be done offshore at multiple locations, said Sugandha Sachdeva VP-Metals, Energy & Currency Research, Religare Broking.
“Note that the WTI June contract is still trading higher. The storage constraints at Cushing, Okhalama have led to dumping and unwinding in May contract and market participants moving to June contract,” she added.
MSCI 's broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan fell half a percent. Japan's Nikkei fell 1%, while bonds and the dollar held gains.
Among bluechip stocks, market breadth was heavily skewed in favour of losers. ITC and Sun Pharma were the only two names in the green in the 30-share pack Sensex.
IndusInd Bank was the biggest loser, down 6.82 percent to Rs 425 while Bajaj Finance fell 6.64 per cent to Rs 2154. ONGC, Axis Bank, ICICI Bank and Tata Steel were among other big losers, dropping more than 6 per cent.
Infosys, which came out with its quarterly numbers on Monday fell 1.65 per cent to Rs 642 as it refrained from providing any guidance for next year.
All sectoral indices on NSE trading with losses. Nifty Metal was the biggest loser, down 5.20 per cent while Nifty Bank, Nifty Auto and Nifty Financial Services crashed over 4 per cent each.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
