Saudi-led efforts to implement deeper oil cuts to tackle coronavirus' impact remained in limbo.
Crude oil prices declined for a fifth straight week, posting their longest weekly losing streak since 2018. The commodity is bearing the brunt of coronavirus , casting doubts over demand outlook, even as the market waits for a decision from Russia to go together with Opec for a further output cut of 6,00,000 bpd. The deeper reductions are key to restoring confidence to prop up the crude oil market, which is in a bear hug.
Chinese fuel demand is expected to drop by 1.4 mbpd from a year ago. A temporary decline of three million bpd in global oil demand for a month or more cannot be ruled out at this stage.
The outbreak has already eaten into a significant chunk of oil demand at a time when growth was expected to be moderate. If demand weakens further, even a bigger Opec bazooka might not have enough power to remedy oil demand malaise. Majors including Total and BP projected a significant hit to global oil demand this year due to the virus, compounding fears of a supply glut, plunging the market’s structure into a bearish contango.
Both state-owned and private refineries in China have scaled back processing by at least two mbpd over the past week. Throughput could fall further, as demand for aviation and transportation fuels continued to shrink, as entire cities are in lockdown and travel remained restricted. Independent refiners in China have stopped making fresh orders as they are struggling to sell products that are already in their tanks, traders said. This high inventory situation has triggered drastic run cuts at the worst hit refiners.
Saudi-led efforts to implement deeper oil cuts to tackle the coronavirus' impact remained in limbo, with key ally Russia not yet on board with a proposal for 600,000 bpd in new supply curbs. The+ group's existing 1.7 million bpd cut accord, which is scheduled to expire at the end of March, would be also extended, bringing the total supply curbs to 2.3 million. The market is not sure about Russia’s stance, but it will be a market moving event.
If Russia decides to go along with the production cuts then traders can look for a short-covering rally. If the country passes on the cuts, prices could plunge to multi-year lows. For the first time, this week’s Opec meeting was extended for a third, unscheduled day by Russia’s dragging of its feet on the supply reduction plan. Notwithstanding the drama, Putin could decide by as early this week that the additional 600,000 bpd cut is necessary.
Opec supply continued to fall, but non-Opec production grew once again in January. While oil prices will determine the path of non-Opec output, previous upstream investment is likely to support sustained production growth, especially due to increasing US, Brazilian and Norwegian production. Most estimates point to another increase of almost two million bpd in 2020.
The virus has spread to more countries, and although most of the cases are in China, the ripples are being felt even in distant countries. Travel disruptions – more than two dozen airlines have suspended or reduced their flights to China – a lockdown in the province of Wuhan and an extra week’s shutdown in provinces accounting for over two-thirds of the country’s GDP has severely disrupted the global supply chain. China is a dominant part of the global manufacturing supply chain and the reverberations will be felt across markets and economies.
Taiwan, Singapore, Thailand and Hong Kong show the highest beta to China’s growth and may experience the largest knock-on effect from China’s expected near-term downturn. It is estimated that mainland China accounts for 30-40 per cent of global exports of textiles and footwear products, and 20 per cent of the world’s exports of machinery and electrical equipment. The country’s role in the electronics supply chain is especially critical. Nearly half of Apple’s 800 global production bases are located in China.
From the aviation side, hundreds more Hong Kong flights are set to be dropped as the floodgates open on airlines cancelling services. Carriers based in Asia, Australia, South Africa and the Middle East revealed that they would cut all or some of their flights to the city.
Cathay Pacific is the latest to wield the axe, announcing new suspensions of major Hong Kong routes to London, New York and across mainland China because of the virus. Among the Middle East carriers, Emirates was halving its four daily Airbus A380 flights to Hong Kong from next week until March 28. Wuhan is one of the leading centers of the automobile industry in China, along with Shanghai, Guangzhou and Changchun. There are about a hundred factories of suppliers of automotive components in the region.
Prices continued its fall as cold weather has simply not arrived in the US. In fact, after the second warmest November on record, nine of the 10 weeks ending November 23 to January 25 were all warmer than normal. By the close of January, US gas inventories stood almost 25 per cent above the same time last year, and 10 per cent above the five-year average. On January 21, Henry Hub spot prices crashed below $2 per MMBtu for the first time since the end of May 2016. After rising some 13-15 per cent in 2018 output rose another 10-12 per cent in 2019 to almost 93 Bcfpd. This has led to a 3-4 Bcfpd oversupply in terms of US gas production rising above consumption.
For the oil market, overall demand is so negative that it will outweigh any positives. The 2019-nCoV pandemic has suddenly become a serious threat to the Chinese, global and US economies.
The outbreak can lower global economy growth forecast to 2.5 per cent from 2.8 per cent. Further, the fundamental outlook for the oil market is not constructive, with expectations that the market will return to surplus over H12020.
Global oil demand growth is still languishing and the market will be closely watching what Russia does next. We expect WTI prices to touch $46 if there are more cases of coronavirus. which will hamper global demand.
(Disclaimer: The opinions expressed in this column are that of the writer. The facts and opinions expressed here do not reflect the views of www.economictimes.com .)
