BP said on Monday it would be cutting 10,000 jobs.
Oil has completed its recovery from doomsday, but the next phase of the rebound is trickier. Prices were slumping on Monday despite the good news over the weekend that OPEC and its allies extended production cuts through July. Economies are rebounding from Covid-19 faster than expected, and gasoline use is on the rise.
Brent crude futures, the global benchmark, fell 3.1% to $40.97. West Texas Intermediate crude futures fell 3.5% to $38.18. Oil-relates stocks, however, were on the rise as the supply-demand balance in the industry continues to improve. Chevron (ticker: CVX) rose 0.9%. BP (BP) announced 10,000 job cuts ; its stock was up 1.%.
Riskier names were rising much more , beneficiaries of an apparent short-squeeze. Chesapeake Energy (CHK) soared by more than 100%, and trading in the stock was halted multiple times.
The OPEC+ meeting included positive news for oil bulls. OPEC said it would crack down on countries that don’t comply with production cuts and force them to make up for commitments they haven’t kept. Countries such as Iraq haven’t cut as much as others. If OPEC compliance improves, it would further depress supplies and could cause prices to rise more.
In addition, there is a chance OPEC will continue the cuts through August, another positive for prices, according to RBC Capital Markets analyst Helima Croft.
On the negative side, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Kuwait will end more than 1 million barrels a day of additional production cuts they had made. And Croft isn’t convinced that OPEC can truly enforce cuts for laggards like Iraq.
“However, the OPEC leaders did not specifically respond to questions about the Iraqi finance minister’s request for a quota reconsideration of quotas based on ‘economic conditions and living standards,’ ” she wrote. “We remain skeptical about Iraq’s ability to meet their enhanced output commitments.”
Oil companies don’t make much money with prices at $40, but they at least won’t be hemorrhaging cash like they were in April. For the sector to truly rebound, prices will have to eclipse $50 and hold above that level. That might not happen in the near term.
“Despite an amazing rally from almost negative $40 to positive $40 in just over a month, the curve indicates energy traders shouldn’t expect much higher prices over the next couple months,” wrote analyst Edward Moya at currency broker Oanda. “Oil’s path forward will rely on the demand outlook and that will be determined by improving air travel and driving traffic.”
Crude Prices Drop but Oil Stocks Are Rising. Here’s What’s Behind It.
Oil has completed its recovery from doomsday, but the next phase of the rebound is trickier.
