Crude oil prices have been under pressure after Larry Kudlow, said the Chinese were making “a big mistake” with national security laws enacted in Hong Kong.
Brent crude dropped slightly to 0.17%, trading at $36.18 by at 6 am Nigerian time. U.S’s West Texas Intermediate crude futures also lost about 0.35%, at $34.23 a barrel.
Crude oil prices have been under pressure after America’s President Trump’s economic adviser, Larry Kudlow, said the Chinese were making “a big mistake” with national security laws enacted in Hong Kong.
What these means for Nigeria; The country’s foreign exchange reserves declined from $45 billion recorded in June 2019 to around $35.22 billion in May 2020 due to low crude oil prices. A decline in crude oil prices hurts Nigeria’s foreign earnings because Nigeria’s main source of funds is crude oil.
(READ MORE: Crude oil continues its bullish run, U.S crude inventories drop)
However, OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) and major oil producers including Russia, a group also known as OPEC+, are reducing their crude oil production by 10 million barrels per day in May-June to support crude oil prices as measures to curtail relative weak demand for crude caused by COVID-19.
“Early estimates suggest gasoline demand is down by as much as 30% from last year as people stay close to home,” ANZ Research said in a note to Reuters.
READ ALSO: Oil price gains likely to halt over demand uncertainty, as US-China tension intensifies
“Some analysts and banks are predicting a balanced oil market as soon as June, but that could be too optimistic”, according to Eurasia Group.
There is … a significant risk of repeat outbreaks and lockdowns. Even without them, some restrictions – especially on aviation – will remain in place,” Eurasia Group added.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
Your email address will not be published.
The NPA said it does have an account with Unity Bank Plc, but has not operated it since 2010.
The Nigerian Ports Authority (NPA) has denied the allegations of a whistleblower who claimed that the authority has a hidden $1 billion account with Unity Bank Plc.
The NPA, in a statement responding to a petition by a man named John Okpurhe to President Muhammadu Buhari, said the allegations that it operates such accounts are untrue.
The petitioner had also accused the Attorney General of the Federation, Mr. Abubakar Salami (SAN) of allegedly refusing to reward him after allegedly exposing over $1 billion in a hidden account with Unity Bank Plc operated by the NPA.
The petitioner also claimed that an account number 0013680344 operated by the NPA with Unity Bank contains the hidden amount. However, the NPA vehemently denied the allegations and claimed that it only operates the bank account 0013670344 which had a total sum of $1,057,772.03 as of December 2019 and not the $1,034,515,000.00 as alleged by the petitioner.
The NPA also says the account has not been in operations since August 2010 due to a Garnishee Order placed on it in the Aminu Ibrahim & Co $ Anor vs Nigerian Ports Authority case, which went from Federal High Court to the Supreme Court in 8 years. Parts of the detailed statement released by the NPA said:
“The Judgment creditors continued with the Garnishee process which resulted in the credit of the amount $1,057,772.03 in favour of Suit No: FHC/L/CS/582/2010 GARNISHEE ORDER NISI – AMINU IBTAHIM & CO & ANOR vs  NIGERIAN PORTS AUTHORITY on December 4rg 2019 in line with the Garnishee order absolute.
READ ALSO: NPA and BUA Group dispute to affect 1000 jobs, $500,000 monthly revenue
“The account under discussion was frozen on the strength of a court order in August 2010, following the completion of the case, the money was consequently transferred to the judgment creditor on December 4, 2019 in line with the Garnishee Order Absolute.”
— Nigerian Ports (@nigerianports) June 29, 2020
N-Power opens batch C application portal, reveals requirements and how to register
The N-Power 2020 recruitment portal will re-open by 11.45 pm today Friday, June 26, 2020. See more details below.
The Federal Government has announced the reopening of the application portal of its social investment scheme, N-Power, for fresh registration of the June 2020 Batch C intakes.
This was disclosed in a series of tweet posts by the Federal Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and Social Development on Friday, June 26, 2020.
According to the tweet posts, the N-Power 2020 recruitment portal will re-open by 11.45 pm today, Friday, 26 of June 2020. The ministry noted that those that all applications made prior to the re-opening date and time will not be recognised, but instead declared null and void.
The humanitarian affairs ministry also explained that all the processes involved in the application are free.  As such, applicants do not have to pay anybody. Part of the post from the ministry said:
“Dear intending N-Power 2020 applicants. Here is how to prepare for the N-Power application. Remember Portal opens 11.45 pm, June 26, 2020, application is free. Do not pay anyone to apply on the N-Power portal. Get a printout or accurate details of your BVN.’
‘’We understand some people have attempted registration. Please note that your registration is null and void. It doesn’t’ count till the portal opens at 11.45 pm tonight.’’
Dear Intending N-Power 2020 Applicants,
Here is how to prepare for the N-Power application.
2. Application is FREE. Do NOT pay anyone to apply on the N-Power portal.
3. Get a printout or accurate details of your BVN. #NPowerNG pic.twitter.com/q9enxbvzCP
The N-Power programme, which was inaugurated by President Muhammadu Buhari in 2016 under the National Social Investment Programme (NSIP), has the mandate of lifting citizens out of abject poverty through capacity building, investment, and direct support.
Ensure you are not an existing employee in any organization.
A current passport photograph (1MB) either JPEG or PNG files.
Your degree certificate and NYSC certificate (if you are a graduate) and want to apply for N-Teach or N-Health.
The information will be redirected to your email for a confirmation.
Once your email address has been confirmed, you are to fill in your 11-digit BVN and date of birth in the following format (dd/mm/yy). Note that if your BVN details are inaccurate, you will not be allowed to go past this interface.
Fill in your surname, first name, and middle name in identical terms to your BVN information for your biodata and contact page.
Kindly indicate if you have received education or not on the education and programme page. The N-Power programme is open to all, however.
The N-Teach and N-Health sub-programmes are however open to only graduates. ii. (In addition, please note that for N-Power Health, selection preference will be given to holders of Bachelor’s Degree, HND, OND in health sciences such as Medicine, Microbiology, Nursing, Public Health, Botany, Midwifery, Psychology or other allied disciplined in the sciences). iii. Where applicable, you will be required to upload your degree certificates and NYSC certificate.
You will be required to answer some questions and upload your Government issued Identity Card on the employment and other details page. Kindly note that the acceptable Government IDs are International Passport, National ID Card issued by NIMC, Valid Driver’s License and Permanent Voter’s Card.
Review all the information you have inputted and then submit on the review and submit page and upon submission, you will receive a unique ID number. write it down and keep it safe.
