Gold prices fall after touching all-time high in previous session; should you buy or sell the yellow metal
Yes, last month was a historic month for oil markets. The price tanked below zero-mark for the first time in history. Having said this, the market since then has stabilised. OPEC and Saudi Arabia have spoken of extended oil output cuts going ahead. The US too has convinced oil producers to go slow. Most importantly, unlike the last expiry, we are not seeing any unusual movement in oil trading volumes and open interests. Hence in our view, prices will not go below zero.
2. Will reopening of business activities in order to revive the economy battered by coronavirus benefit oil prices?
China has slowly resumed economic activities. Metro trains in France and the UK have started. We believe if economic activity begins even in the slightest way, it might help the oil to recover from current levels.
3. With a surge in gold rates, and upticks in crude oil prices in the last two weeks, how are other commodities faring?
See, gold and crude oil are facing different fundamentals. Still, some are colliding factors. The COVID-19 has pushed the global economy into recession. Cross border trade has halted. Countries are in complete lockdown for more than 30/40/50 days and that’s unprecedented. Hence, the demand for oil has nosedived massively. Storages are overflowing. Oil tankers are floating in the sea. Hence crude oil price fell from a cliff. But going ahead, we believe, crude oil will soon stabilise as historical lows are part of history.
On the other side, all these above-mentioned factors have encouraged traders to park their hard-earned money in safe havens. The world’s largest and most liquid gold ETF is SPDR Gold ETF which has witnessed inflows that have reached the highest since June 2012. Central banks liquidity adrenaline rush, resurface of the trade war, US election year and bad economic data are supporting the yellow metal. Hence we believe going ahead, bullion will continue to rally.
4. What is your near to medium-term outlook for crude oil?
Sentiment will be positive. Crude Oil has recovered smartly in the last week by more than 20%. From the lows below 900, it has fantastically rebounded. Going ahead, although virus vaccination is not yet found, the economic activities have started to some extent in world countries. Hence, we believe demand scenarios will improve and oil will rally further.
5. How do you see crude oil futures after lockdown restrictions are over?
Once the restrictions are over, we believe oil will be in great demand and sometimes will turn bullish. The only critical aspect is the trade war if it escalates then possibly crude may not see levels of $50-$60 soon but undertone will be bullish.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
