Crude oil for April delivery was quoting lower by Rs 899, or 28.03 per cent, to Rs 2,308 per barrel with an open interest of 3,711 lots.
On the Multi Commodity Exchange, crude oil for March delivery plunged by Rs 943 or 29.85 per cent, to Rs 2,216 per barrel with a business volume of 33,703 lots.
New Delhi: Crude oil futures on Monday slumped nearly 30 per cent to Rs 2,216 per barrel as participants reduced their positions in line with weak trend overseas.
Brent crude futures plunged nearly 30 per cent after top exporter Saudi Arabia launched a price war in response to a failure by leading producers to strike a deal to support energy markets.
On the Multi Commodity Exchange, crude oil for March delivery plunged by Rs 943 or 29.85 per cent, to Rs 2,216 per barrel with a business volume of 33,703 lots.
Crude oil for April delivery was quoting lower by Rs 899, or 28.03 per cent, to Rs 2,308 per barrel with an open interest of 3,711 lots.
Global crude prices tanked after Saudi Arabia on Monday cut its price for April delivery by $4-6 a barrel to Asia and $7 to the United States. The fall in prices was largely due to Aramco selling its Arabian Light at an unprecedented $10.25 a barrel less than Brent to Europe, reports said.
According to reports, Saudi Arabia plans to raise its crude oil production in April.
Globally, West Texas Intermediate crude oil fell 28.71 per cent to $29.43 per barrel and Brent Crude slumped 26.51 per cent to $33.27 per barrel in New York.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
