Director, Head - Commodity & Currency Research, Prithvi Finmart
Global demand of crude oil is affected by the virus and prices crashed in the last two months.
If WTI prices can sustain below $50 per barrel, it could test $46-45 per barrel in the coming days.
Global crude oil prices have slipped more than 25 per cent in the last two months. After signing the first phase of trade deal between the US and China, global oil showed some recovery in December. However, during the New Year holiday season in China, the city of Wuhan reported cases of coronavirus and it rapidly spread from China to other countries.
Major Chinese cities are facing a lock down situation and most countries have cancelled flights to China from other countries.
Global demand of crude oil, too, is affected by the virus and prices crashed in the last two months. Production in the US and Russia is reported at record levels and fear of slower global demand prices are trading under pressure and breached crucial support of $50 per barrel at the Nymex division. Crude oil prices will continue to remain soft till the major demand is not resumed from China. If WTI prices can sustain below $50 per barrel, it could test $46-45 per barrel in the coming days.
Crude oil formed a double top pattern on the monthly chart for January and prices have corrected more than 25 per cent in the last two months. On the monthly chart, crude oil prices breached crucial support of $51 per barrel and are trading at around $48.50 per barrel. At present, prices are in the oversold territory. Any bounce towards $50 to $50.50 per barrel will again be an opportunity for short selling with a strict stop loss of $52 on a closing basis for the down side target of $47-45 per barrel.
At MCX, crude oil prices breached crucial support of Rs 3,655 and is trading below Rs 3,500 levels. Prices are in a highly oversold zone. And any bound towards Rs 3,520-3,550 will be an opportunity to short sell again with the strict stop loss of Rs 3,655 on closing basis for the downside target of Rs 3,420-3,300.
(Disclaimer: The opinions expressed in this column are that of the writer. The facts and opinions expressed here do not reflect the views of www.economictimes.com .)
