Crude oil for February delivery was up by Rs 142, or 3.16 per cent, at Rs 4,636 per barrel.
Crude oil prices on Monday rose over 3 per cent to Rs 4,646 per barrel as tensions in Middle East escalated further after US president Donald Trump warned of a "major retaliation" if Iran tries to avenge the killing of its top military commander Qasem Soleimani.
On the Multi Commodity Exchange, crude oil for delivery in January traded higher by Rs 147, or 3.27 per cent, to Rs 4,646 per barrel in 66,031 lots.
Crude oil for February delivery was up by Rs 142, or 3.16 per cent, at Rs 4,636 per barrel with an open interest of 3,368 lots.
General Soleimani, the head of Iran's elite al-Quds force and architect of its regional security apparatus, was killed following a US airstrike on Baghdad's international airport on Friday.
The ongoing geo-political events raised concerns regarding disruption in supplies of crude oil, the analysts said.
Soleimani's killing was the most dramatic escalation yet in spiralling tensions between Iran and the US, already hit by serious differences over Tehran's ambitious nuclear programme.
Globally, the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) was trading up 2.09 per cent to $64.32 per barrel.
Meanwhile, Brent crude , the international benchmark, edged up 2.27 per cent to $70.16 per barrel in New York.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
