Brent futures for May delivery rose 52 cents, or 1.9 per cent, to $27.55 as of 0015 GMT.
West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures for May delivery rose $0.67, or 2.9 per cent, to $24.03 as of 2353 GMT, adding to gains on Monday.
West Texas Intermediate ( WTI ) crude futures for May delivery rose $0.67, or 2.9 per cent, to $24.03 as of 2353 GMT, adding to gains on Monday.
Brent futures for May delivery rose 52 cents, or 1.9 per cent, to $27.55 as of 0015 GMT.
"However volumes are terrible, they're very low, so this is not a high confidence move," CMC Markets and Stockbroking chief market strategist Michael McCarthy said.
The US administration has appointed a special energy representative to Saudi Arabia, Victoria Coates, as part of a diplomatic push to stabilise energy markets, hammered by a price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia. [nL1N2BG2DI]
The market is testing support following a more than 60 per cent slide in oil prices since the start of the year due to the impact of the coronavirus on global demand and a market share war between Saudi Arabia and Russia set to bloat oil supply from April.
"Given the market's already pricing in full production from Saudi Arabia and Russia and we've already priced in significant demand destruction, it's hard to see what would cause the next significant downdraft from here," McCarthy said.
Australian refiners Viva Energy and Caltex Australia Ltd said they expect jet fuel demand to shrink by 80 per cent to 90 per cent due to air travel grinding close to a halt and plan to take in less crude.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
