Genesis Energy oil tanks in the Clear Lake area. U.S. crude inventories grew slightly in the third week of June despite increased refinery output, a sign that oil supply continues to outstrip demand.
U.S. crude inventories grew slightly in the third week of June despite increased refinery output, a sign that oil supply continues to outstrip demand.
Domestic commercial crude inventories increased by 1.4 million barrels during the week ended June 19, compared with the previous week. The national crude supply sits at 540.7 million barrels, about 16 percent higher than the five year average for this time of year, the Department of Energy said Wednesday.
Meanwhile, U.S. refineries processed an average of 13.8 million barrels of crude oil per day last week, an increase of 239,000 barrels per day compared to the previous week. Refineries operated at about 75 percent of its capacity, the agency said.
Energy companies have sharply cut crude production after the coronavirus pandemic plunged demand for petroleum products such as gasoline, diesel and jet fuel. The pandemic exacerbated the global oil glut and heightened concerns that producers would run out of space to store it.
At one key storage point in Oklahoma, oil had filled up to about 85 percent of capacity by the first week of May. However, as states have lifted coronavirus-related restrictions on business and travel, crude supply in Cushing, Okla. has fallen to about 62 percent of capacity as of last week.
As more drivers hit the roads, gasoline inventories fell by 1.7 million barrels, or 0.7 percent, last week, although they are still about 9 percent above the five year average for this time of year. Meanwhile, gasoline production last week increased by nearly 5 percent from the previous week, averaging 8.8 million barrels per day.
As oil prices have recovered, settling above the $40 threshold on Monday before falling again, some producers are turning the spigots back on.  Concho Resources and Parsley Energy are reopening existing wells while ConocoPhillips and EOG Resources said they are looking to increase production in the third quarter.
Jennifer Rowland, a senior energy analyst at Edward Jones, warned oil prices could fall again if producers bring back production prematurely as oil prices recover. Prices for West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark for crude oil, fell by more than 5 percent to $38.17 on Wednesday morning.
“That’s a significant risk,” Rowland said. “You’re reliant on producers not opening up the spigots too quickly because we don’t need all that supply to come back online too quickly yet.”
