Staying invested in oil contracts or energy companies during these recessionary periods would have led to significant losses for investors, which makes it all the more important to assess where oil prices are headed in 2020.
Fears of a global economic slowdown are overblown; good news for oil
Over the past couple of years, many investors have worried the trade war between the U.S. and China would negatively impact global growth, as these two countries are the largest economies in the world. However, the latest data reveals that both regions are seeing better-than-expected growth. For instance, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis confirmed in early December that the American economy grew at an annualized rate of 2.1% in the third quarter, beating expectations of a 2% improvement. On the other hand, in China, the Caixin/Markit manufacturing purchasing managers' index for November was reported at 51.8, up slightly from 51.7 in October. Any reading above 50 indicates an expected expansion in manufacturing activity.
As expected, this increased level of business activity resulted in higher demand for oil. According to data from the International Energy Authority, global oil demand in the third quarter grew by 1.1 million barrels per day. China was the largest contributor to this growth with an increase of 640,000 barrels on a year-over-year basis.
On the back of successful trade negotiations between the U.S. and China, IHS Markit now projects the global economy will grow 2.5% in 2020 and 2.7% in 2021. In its annual Top-10 Economic Predictions report released last Friday, the company confirmed that global recession odds are falling due to the latest geopolitical developments.
While this is good news for oil markets in general, the decelerating growth rates in China and the maturing nature of emerging market economies are not positive developments. A drastic decline in oil prices, however, cannot be expected in 2020 based on these forecasts.
On Dec. 6, OPEC agreed to deepen production cuts by an additional 500,000 barrels a day through March 2020. Along with this decision, Saudi Arabia's Energy Minister, Prince Abdulaziz bin Salman, confirmed the country would extend a voluntary cut of 400,000 barrels a day as well. This brings the total reduction in output to 2.1 million barrels a day.
This reduction in supply is meant to stabilize oil prices and prevent a sharp decline of a similar nature to what happened in 2014-15. Neil Beveridge, an energy analyst at Bernstein, commented on this decision in a note:
"While we await full details from OPEC and non-OPEC, we think a 0.5MMbls/d announced cut relative to existing quotas is just enough to keep markets balanced for 2020."
Analysts from Goldman Sachs, Saxo Bank and Jefferies also shared Beveridge's view that oil prices would be stable in 2020. This is good news for energy companies as they were looking at declining prices for the next couple of years, which would have eroded profit margins.
All eyes are on the March 2020 meeting in Vienna, in which OPEC will decide on the level of oil supply for the remainder of the year.
The American Petroleum Institute releases inventory levels of U.S. crude oil on a weekly basis, which shows how much oil is available in storage. If the increase in crude inventories is more than expected, it implies weaker demand and is bearish for crude prices, and vice versa.
The latest data released on Tuesday reveal that the stockpile rose by 4.7 million barrels in the week ended Dec. 13, in contrast to the expectation of a drawdown of 1.28 million barrels. This is bad news for energy companies as it indicates a worse-than-expected slowdown in demand. However, this could be the result of many multinational organizations keeping their capital investments in check until the U.S.-China trade deal is signed in January. Therefore, weekly data in January will provide a much better idea of where oil prices are headed.
Investment banks, economic data providers, central banks and research firms release their expectations for crude oil prices on an annual basis. While there could be differing opinions about the price, many of these institutions and individuals generally agree on the broad market direction. The below table provides the projections for 2020.
