Crude oil prices dropped after two consecutive weeks of upward movement, as the global supply glut continues to affect the prices.
Although the death rate in many of the high-risk countries has dropped, the relaxation of the lockdown and restrictions by various governments may leave the global economy vulnerable to a resurgence of the coronavirus disease.
Data from oilprice.com shows that the American headline crude, the WTI dropped by 3.88% after selling for $24.49 . The Brent crude dropped by 3.65% as it is selling for $29.94 per barrel of crude oil.
With the improvement in global oil demand and reduction in unsold crude inventory witnessed in the past few weeks, the oil market showed some signs that it is beginning to rebalance.
The implementation of the output cut by OPEC+ and top oil producers, which took effect from May 1, appears to be showing signs of impacting on the market just as China’s inventories have reduced in recent weeks.
The US output cuts are moving rapidly with active drill rigs falling to a level not seen before since the shale revolution kicked off at the beginning of the last decade.
According to a report from Bloomberg , an economist at Oversea Chinese Banking Corp. in Singapore, Howie Lee, said, ‘’There are definite signs of the oversupply situation easing. Today’s move looks like a slight break from overall uptrend’’.
There has been a drop in oil production globally in order to reduce a swelling supply glut which still appears to be a challenge.
Chike Olisah is a graduate of accountancy with over 15 years working experience in the financial service sector. He has worked in research and marketing departments of three top commercial banks. Chike is a senior member of the Nairametrics Editorial Team.
You may contact him via his email- chike.olisah@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
This was disclosed in a tweet post by the Minister of Aviation, Hadi Sirika.
The Federal Government has announced the resumption schedule for domestic flight operations in our airports.
In the schedule that was announced by the Minister for Aviation, Hadi Sirika, domestic flight operations will resume in Abuja and Lagos airports on July 8, 2020. The airports in Kano, Port Harcourt, Owerri and Maiduguri will resume on July 11 and the domestic flight operations in the other airports will resume on July 15.
This was disclosed in a tweet post by the Minister of Aviation, Hadi Sirika, on his official Twitter handle on Wednesday, July 1, 2020.
I am glad to announce that Abuja & Lagos airports will resume domestic operations on the 8th of July, 2020. Kano, Port Harcourt, Owerri & Maiduguri to resume on the 11th. Other airports on the 15th. Date for international to be announced in due course. Bear with us, please
— Hadi Sirika (@hadisirika) July 1, 2020
This was disclosed by Petroleum Products Pricing Regulatory Agency (PPPRA) in a circular.
The Federal Government has announced an increase in the new pump price of Premium Motor Spirit, otherwise known as Petrol, to N143.80 per litre.
According to a monitored report, this was disclosed by Petroleum Products Pricing Regulatory Agency (PPPRA) in a circular dated Wednesday, July 1, 2020, to oil marketers,
The statement from the circular says, ‘’After a review of the prevailing market fundamentals in the month of June and considering marketers’ realistic operating costs, as much as practicable, we wish to advise a new PMS pump price band of N140.80-N143.80 per litre for the month of July 2020.’’
Fidelity Bank Plc is expected to release its half-year 2020 financial statement on or before August 29, 2020.
Fidelity Bank Plc announced earlier today (Wednesday, July 1st, 2020) that it has commenced the preparation of its half-year 2020 financial statements.
A statement sent by the bank to the Nigerian Stock Exchange (NSE), said the financial statements would be sent to the Central Bank of Nigeria for approval, once the audit process is completed.  All things being equal, Fidelity Bank’s H2 2020 financial statements will be made available to the public by August 29 this year.
In the meantime, the tier-2 bank said it shall observe a close period from today until twenty-four hours after the H2 financial statement is eventually released. The implication of this closed period is that all persons with insider knowledge of the company’s affairs shall be prohibited from trading the company’s shares. Part of the statement by the company said :
“Upon completion of the audit, the Audited Financial Statements shall be presented to the Central Bank of Nigeria for approval and thereafter, published in compliance with the provisions of the Nigerian Stock Exchange Rule Book and other relevant statutes and/or regulations. The Bank expects to publish its Audited Financial Statements for the Half Year ended June 30, 2020, on or before August 29, 2020.
“In addition, the trading window for dealings on the Bank’s shares shall be closed to all insiders from July 1, 2020, until 24 hours after the release of the Bank’s audited Financial Statements for the Half Year ended June 30, 2020.”
Recall that Fidelity Bank Plc released its Q1 financial statement back in April this year which showed gross earnings at N51.1 billion compared to N48.4 billion in Q1 2019 . Overall, both Profit before tax and profit after tax declined by 1% y/y to N6.6 billion and N5.9 billion respectively. Annualised RoAE however moderated to 9.8% in Q1 2020 compared to 12.0% in Q1 2019 and 13.3% in FY 2019.
Fidelity Bank’s stock closed trading earlier today on the NSE at a share price of N1.70, dropping by -2.30% from a previous close of N1.74. Year to date, the stock has shed about -8%.
