When the production cut expires?
The OPEC+ production cut has been in place since the global supply glut, and it is due to expire at the end of this month. To put things in perspective, when the agreement expires, every member of the cartel will be allowed to pump as much oil as they want, and if a new supply cut agreement isn’t put in place before that, it will amplify the supply at a time when the demand is at its lowest.
When is The Next Meeting?
The next official meeting between the two giants, Saudi Arabia and Russia, won’t take place until June. Keep in mind, there is always the possibility of an emergency meeting, and if one happens before that, it will likely be about curbing the oil supply so that they can put a floor under the oil price.
Do we know the long-term impact on demand?
Wall Street analysts have taken out the chopper and started to slash their forecast for oil prices. On Tuesday, Goldman Sachs said in its note that it anticipates the oil price averaging $20, which of course occurred yesterday. Most of the analysts are comparing the current oil shock with the financial crisis, but the reality is that the actual impact of Coronavirus on the long-term oil demand equation is uncertain because this is unknown territory.
In a situation like this, one needs to utilize the wealth of technical analysis to determine a significant support level. Looking at the chart below, it seems like the weekly candle of Nov. 11, 2001 provides decent support. I believe that if the sell-off resumes, it is highly likely that the WTI price may fall deep in the defined support zone, and that means the price may fall to $16.
So, is it a good time now?
The pandemic situation continues to slam the demand equation for oil. Given the massive sell-off, I believe the price is likely to experience an upward price retracement, something we are experiencing today. However, the current downward trend and the overall sentiment is still way too pessimistic, and this could push the price lower again. Therefore, investors may want to wait a little bit more. Having said this, the price is at its lowest in eighteen years; if one decides to dip their toe in this trade, it may not be a bad idea as there will be the opportunity to go all-in at a better price if it continues to fall.
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have a wealth of knowledge from trading in the financial markets which spans over 10 years and specialize in forex, commodities and equities. I frequently partake across all major tier one media channels such as CNBC and Bloomberg discussing investment strategies around major macroeconomic and political events. I have often participated in panel discussions on notable events across the globe. More recently, during the Brexit referendum, I predicted the crash in sterling against the dollar to a level of 1.18 in an interview with MarketWatch. I also called the bottom in Crude oil when it was trading near $25 with numerous print and digital financial media outlets. I have also worked  with top UK universities to give lectures and delivered an investment and trading course at the London School of Economics.
