Investors just scored a historic $6 trillion haul — in one quarter of market gains. And these quick gains in the S&P 500 were even larger for those in the right place .
The S&P 500 powered 20% higher during the second quarter, driven by huge gains in energy stocks like Apache ( APA ), consumer discretionary winners like eBay ( EBAY ) and information tech champs like PayPal ( PYPL ). That's according to an Investor's Business Daily analysis of data from S&P Global Market Intelligence and MarketSmith .
Huge gains showered on investors despite horrid data on employment and economic growth the past three months. Trillions of dollars of stimulus money poured into the market. And that's what made it all the more important to participate in stocks once the market told you it was time .
"It's been an incredible bounce-back quarter for stock markets, building on the recovery that started in the final week of March, as central banks and governments around the world launched enormous stimulus programs in order to prevent a catastrophic economic collapse," said Craig Erlam, senior market analysis at Oanda Europe.
But it's a disconnect that paid off for investors.
The S&P 500's run in the second quarter is highly unusual. Hope you didn't miss it .
The S&P 500 hasn't jumped this much in a month since the S&P 500 rocketed 20.9% in the fourth quarter of 1998, says Howard Silverblatt, index analyst at S&P Dow Jones Indices.
Seeing the market jump 20% in a short time is so rare you can count the times it's happened on two hands.
The S&P 500 rose 20% or more in a quarter just seven times since 1930, says The Stock Trader's Almanac. The biggest-ever gain in a quarter was the impressive 86.5% jump in the second quarter of 1933. The second quarter of 2020's gain ranks as the ninth best in history.
If you include small and mid-size stocks, the run is even better. The Wilshire 5000 Total Market Index jumped 22.1% in the quarter. That's the best quarterly percentage jump for the index since the first quarter of 1975.
It also showed important trends in the market.
S&P 500 Energy stocks stormed 30.2% higher in the second quarter. That's tied with consumer discretionary at the top of the 11 S&P 500 sectors from April to June.
Energy dominated. A third of the top S&P 500 stocks in the quarter hail from the energy sector.
But don't get too impressed. Even after the jump, the Energy Select Sector SPDR ETF ( XLE ) is still down 37% for the year. The sector lost more than half its value in the first quarter.
Driving the S&P 500 energy recovery is the rising price of oil. The price of crude oil on the Nymex jumped more than 90% in the second quarter. But it's still down by a third this year.
Apache is the top winner from the energy recovery trend. Shares soared more than 220% in just the second quarter.
The tech sector was the second best in the quarter, rising 30%. But unlike S&P 500 energy stocks that tanked in the first quarter, the tech sector rose 14% in the first quarter.
S&P 500 stocks with strong IBD Composite Ratings showed their strength. PayPal was a classic example, with a 98 Composite Rating. The online payment company vaulted 82% in just the second quarter. And that's coming off a 61% rise in the first quarter.
There's profit growth where that came from, too. Analysts think PayPal will make $3.34 a share this year, up nearly 8% from 2019. That's amazing amid an S&P 500 where profit is seen dropping 20% in 2020.
Given the shutdown in retail and restaurants, you might think S&P 500 consumer discretionary stocks would be suffering.
But consumers haven't stopped buying. They're just shifting . Consider the Consumer Discretionary Select Sector SPDR Fund ( XLY ). It's not only up 30.2% in the second quarter, but also up 1.8% on the year.
Consumer discretionary winners, though, are better positioned. Top winners in the sector are online focused. Online auctioneer eBay is a good example. Shares are up 74.5% just in the second quarter. That puts the stock, with a Composite Rating of 96, up more than 45% this year.
And again, it's not just speculation. Analysts think eBay will earn $3.50 a share in 2020, more than 23% higher than 2019's profit.
What's next for the S&P 500, though, is less concrete. And expecting another huge gain is a bit of a stretch.
"Investors know that the third quarter is typically the most challenging for the equity markets," said Sam Stovall, strategist at CFRA.
