Interested in blogging for timesofindia.com? We will be happy to have you on board as a blogger, if you have the knack for writing. Just drop in a mail at toiblogs@timesinternet.in with a brief bio and we will get in touch with you.
Covid-19 is pushing many sectors into uncharted waters. As the chorus for social distancing rose across the globe, many governments imposed stringent containment measures—India too imposed a nationwide lockdown, with the results soon visible.
As on 1 May, India reported only 34,000 cases compared to the US that reported over a million cases. Further, the doubling rate in many countries also improved due to lockdown measures. India’s doubling rate slowed from 3.3 days before the lockdown to eleven days after the lockdown. However, the consequence of the lockdown has been the closure of industrial establishments and a reduced demand for energy. According to International Energy Agency (IEA), energy demand will reduce by 15% due to the impact of corona crisis in FY 2020–21. In India, particularly, industrial and commercial establishments along with passenger railways consume almost 40% of the total energy. According to the official data from Power System Operation Corporation Limited, daily energy demand fell by almost 25%, comparing 31 March 2020 with 1 April 2019.
Adding to this chaos, weak coordination among OPEC countries has led to a situation where there is an excess supply of crude oil into the market. This, in fact, pushed the crude oil price below zero, which essentially means that producers are ready to pay dealers to take oil off their shelves. These two interrelated and mutually reinforcing events—that is, reduced oil prices and reduced energy demand—have important ramifications on the renewable energy sector.
Under the Paris agreement, India promised to reduce its emission intensity by 33%–35% below 2005 levels by 2030. In line with its promise, India has already achieved almost half of the target 175 GW. However, the fall in crude oil prices has now implications for renewable energy targets. IEA opines that the downward spiral of oil prices will reduce the appetite for clean energy.
For India there are two sides of the coin. On the positive side, the fall in oil prices has only marginal implications for electricity generation as 54% of electricity generation in India is through coal. However, the existence of the same marketplace for both renewable and non-renewable energy projects mean projects that offer better financial returns get implemented. The volatility seen in oil prices will weigh negatively on investors’ mind since OPEC countries control the oil market supply chain and the market is far from being competitive. On the other hand, electricity generation through renewables has little or no supply side risks. The investors, therefore, may shift towards safer and stable renewable projects that offer durable returns compared to high-risk–high-return oil projects that are extremely sensitive to oil prices.
On the negative side, first, electric vehicles may become less competitive, at least in the short term, as a fall in oil prices may push consumers away from such vehicles. The reduced consumer demand due to the ongoing pandemic will only exacerbate stress on electric vehicle demand.
Second, low oil prices if passed on to the consumer, may reduce their incentive to conserve and use efficiently. People are less likely to resort to energy-saving measures with falling energy costs. With increased fossil fuel consumption and reduced energy efficiency, Green House Gases are only going to increase.
Third, the lower energy demand may put downward pressure on solar prices, which, at Rs 2.44 per unit in India, are already the lowest in the world. Any further downward pressure in per unit tariff will only affect the long-term sustainability of solar companies. There is also evidence in the form of reduced activity by solar companies wherein only two of eleven solar project auctions are fully subscribed in 2019. India’s march into the solar sector without strong manufacturing capabilities will only mean future risks in the sector with respect to: tariff rate, exchange rate, import tariffs on solar panels and capital cost are only going to amplify. Before, the emergence of the corona crisis, the solar sector, majorly funded by private equity, saw a decline in funding as the policy uncertainty surrounding power purchase agreements increased. With Covid-19 and reduced energy demand, the impact on the solar sector is going to be huge.
Fourth, the impact of Covid-19 will reduce fiscal space and the government may be forced to cut back investments in the renewable energy sector. ‘Mapping India’s Energy Subsidy 2020’, report brought by the Council on Energy, Environment and Water and the International Institute for Sustainable Development, points at a glaring statistic of seven times more subsidies provided to fossil fuels than alternative investments in India.
Last, oil and gas companies may find it difficult to fund their investment targets in the renewable sector. Also, in countries like India, weakened energy demand will present a significant challenge for grid operators. Owing to the inherent nature of fluctuations in renewable energy generation, balancing baseload with fluctuations in energy generated from renewable sources becomes a major challenge.
The Covid-19 crisis provides an opportunity for the government to correct the skewed distribution of subsidies and promote investments in renewable energy. According to the National Institute of Wind Energy, the current installed capacity in India stands at 35.6 GW against a potential of 302 GW. According to NITI Aayog, India’s installed capacity in solar is just around 29 GW against potential of 750 GW. Thus, there is a huge scope for growth in both sectors as the current installed capacities are nowhere near the potential. Reduced greenhouse gases as a result of increased clean energy adoption also has a positive impact on the health of the country.
First, to push solar manufacturing to achieve same strategic growth levels as in China, domestic manufacturing companies need to have low cost access to capital. The current lending rates at 10%–12% for solar manufacturers in India need to be brought on par with lending rates in China at 3%–4%. This will provide a level playing field for domestic manufacturers.
Second, along, with low-cost access to capital, the government should consider rolling out incentives in the form of land, power and labour to promote domestic sector. Third, the government’s flagship Make in India scheme should promote knowledge creation in the solar sector as the number of patents owned by India is at mere 246 compared to a staggering 39,784 patents owned by China.
Last, the policy uncertainty especially in the implementation of power purchase agreements should be removed and the state government should be encouraged to come with a ten-year vision document for the sector to instil confidence among the companies.
The higher renewable energy contribution in total energy mix will not only reduce India’s fiscal pressure given its huge import dependence on fossil fuels, but also lays down a path for a sustainable and greener tomorrow.
DISCLAIMER : Views expressed above are the author's own.
Venugopal Mothkoor is Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, NITI Aayog.
Venugopal Mothkoor is Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, NITI Aayog.
