Crude oil stocks in the US rose by 15.2 million barrels.
WTI clings to gains near $25 after data.
Commercial crude oil inventories in the United States increased by 15.2 million barrels in the week ending April 3rd, the Energy Information Administration announced in its Weekly Petroleum Status Report on Wednesday. This reading came in much higher than the market expectation for a buildup of 9.271 million barrels.
"US crude oil refinery inputs averaged 13.6 million barrels per day during the week ending April 3, 2020 which was 1.3 million barrels per day less than the previous week’s average."
"Total products supplied over the last four-week period averaged 18.3 million barrels a day, down by 10.7% from the same period last year."
"Over the past four weeks, motor gasoline product supplied averaged 7.6 million barrels a day, down by 19.2% from the same period last year."
The barrel of West Texas Intermediate's reaction to these figures was largely muted. As of writing, the WTI was trading at $24.88, adding 2.6% on a daily basis.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
