The agency said in its latest energy outlook report the projection is subject to heightened levels of uncertainty because the impacts of the 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on energy markets are still evolving.
New Delhi: U.S. Energy Information Administration ( EIA ) has projected Brent crude prices to average $33 per barrel in 2020, down from $43 per barrel forecasted earlier.
The agency said in its latest energy outlook report the projection is subject to heightened levels of uncertainty because the impacts of the 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on energy markets are still evolving.
“Crude oil prices , in particular, have fallen significantly since the beginning of 2020, largely driven by the economic contraction caused by COVID-19 and a sudden increase in crude oil supply following the suspension of previously agreed upon production cuts among the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and partner countries,” EIA said.
EIA expects Brent crude prices to average $23 per barrel during the second quarter of 2020 before increasing to $30per barrel during the second half of the year.
The agency forecasts that average Brent prices will increase to an average of $46 per barrel in 2021, lower by $10 forecasted last month, as declining global oil inventories puts upward pressure on prices.
It estimated global petroleum and liquid fuels consumption to average around 94.4 million barrels per day (b/d) in the first quarter of 2020, a decline of 5.6 million b/d from the same period in 2019.
EIA expects global petroleum and liquid fuels demand to decrease by 5.2 million b/d in 2020 from an average of 100.7 million b/d last year before increasing by 6.4 million b/d in 2021.
Lower global oil demand growth projected in its latest energy outlook edition reflects growing evidence of significant disruptions to global economic activity along with reduced expected travel globally because of COVID-19.
EIA expects global liquid fuels inventories to grow by an average of 3.9 million b/d in 2020 after falling by about 0.2 million b/d in 2019.
Inventory builds are expected to be the largest in the first half of 2020, rising at a rate of 5.7 million b/d in the first quarter and increasing to builds of 11.4 million b/d in the second quarter as a result of widespread travel limitations and sharp reductions in economic activity.
Firmer demand growth as the global economy begins to recover and slower supply growth will contribute to global oil inventory draws beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020. EIA expects global liquid fuels inventories will decline by 1.7 million b/d in 2021.
The agency has forecasted the US to return to being a net importer of crude oil and petroleum products in the third quarter of 2020.
How did you hear about us?
Instead of treating CO2 as liability, we can make it raw material: Mukesh Ambani
The other participants in the conference included Prince Abdulaziiz bin Salman al-Saud, Minister of Energy, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and Patrick Pauyanne, CEO, Total and Tanya Beckett, as the moderator
HPCL delays $3 billion Vizag refinery expansion: Source
Oil rises on manufacturing data, US inventories
"The market's main concern is demand and how COVID-19 affects it, so any hint that demand is recovering is welcomed with a price boost," said Rystad Energy analyst Louise Dickson
LONDON: Oil prices rose on Wednesday on a string of positive manufacturing data and a drawdown in U.S. crude inventories, both indicating an economic recovery and rise in energy demand despite surging coronavirus infections around the world.
Brent crude was up 59 cents, or 1.4 per cent, to $41.86 a barrel at 1107 GMT, and U.S. crude was up 64 cents, or 1.6 per cent, at $39.91 a barrel.
U.S. crude and gasoline stocks fell more than expected last week, while distillate inventories rose, data released by the American Petroleum Institute (API) late on Tuesday showed.
"The market's main concern is demand and how COVID-19 affects it, so any hint that demand is recovering is welcomed with a price boost," said Rystad Energy analyst Louise Dickson.
Official inventory data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) is due out later on Wednesday.
Sentiment was also boosted by improving economic data around the world. In China, the manufacturing purchasing managers' index (PMI) showed factories slowly gathered steam in June after the government eased lockdowns.
Germany's manufacturing sector contracted at a slower pace in June, while French factory activity rebounded into growth.
A surge in new infections in the United States has worried some investors, but most are betting this will not be enough to derail a broader rebound in the global economy.
The U.S. PMI, due later on Wednesday, is forecast to show that activity in June continued to recover from an 11-year low in April, while the non-farm payrolls report on Thursday is expected to show the economy added 3 million jobs in June.
Also supporting prices was a drop in output from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies, known as OPEC+, following an agreement to curb supplies.
"Although there is still the danger of demand outages in view of increased new cases of COVID-19, OPEC+ seems to have the market under control at the moment," said Commerzbank analyst Eugen Weinberg.
OPEC produced an average of 22.62 million barrels per day (bpd) in June, a Reuters survey found, down 1.92 million bpd from May's revised figure.
Iraq's oil exports in June fell to 2.8 million bpd from 3.21 million bpd in May, the oil ministry said.
Indian state-refiners' gasoline and gasoil sales rose in June compared with May, continuing with a gradual recovery as the nation relaxed lockdown.
Crude held on tankers fell below 150 million barrels by the end of June, down from more than 180 million barrels in late April, IHS Markit estimated
LONDON: Tens of millions of barrels of crude and oil products stored on tankers at sea due to the coronavirus crisis are being sold, in a sign fuel demand is recovering as lockdowns ease, shipping sources say.
Fuel demand tumbled as much 30 per cent from March to May, with some surplus stored at sea as land storage filled up.
Crude held on tankers fell below 150 million barrels by the end of June, down from more than 180 million barrels in late April, IHS Markit estimated.
Refined products held on vessels dropped to 50 million barrels from a mid-May peak close to 75 million barrels, IHS said, adding gasoline stocks were the fastest to be offloaded.
"Volumes shown under floating storage can potentially drop rather fast during July," Fotios Katsoulas of IHS said, adding there were several tankers off China waiting to discharge.
Demand for floating storage at the peak of the crisis was helped by a market contango, a price structure where cargoes for delivery in the shorter term are cheaper than those for later delivery, encouraging traders to store fuel until prices pick up.
As the contango has narrowed with rising demand, there is less incentive to store fuel.
In addition, OPEC , Russia and other allies, a group known as OPEC+, have curbed production and output from the United States and elsewhere has fallen, leaving less surplus oil to keep at sea, a more costly alternative to onshore storage.
"With output levels lower, this has reduced the need for storage on land and combined with a reduction in price contangos, there is less of an incentive to store crude at sea," said Rebecca Galanopoulos Jones , with broker Alibra Shipping .
Clarksons Research estimated 218 million barrels of crude was held on tankers by June 26 from a peak of 290 million barrels in early May, while about 70.5 million barrels of oil products were stored versus a May peak of 100 million barrels.
"We believe floating storage is going to gradually decline from now and reach normal levels sometime during the autumn," a spokeswoman with shipping group NORDEN said.
ONGC, OIL top bidders for 11 oil, gas blocks
New Delhi: India's latest oil and gas block bid round attracted only 12 bids for the 11 areas on offer, with 10 of them getting single bids from state-owned ONGC and Oil India Ltd, upstream regulator DGH said. The government had offered 11 blocks for exploration and production of oil and gas in the fifth bid round under the Open Acreage Licensing Policy (OLAP), bids for which closed on June 30.
According to the Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH ), the 11 blocks on offer got a total of 12 bids -- seven bids by Oil and Natural Gas Corp (ONGC) and four by Oil India Ltd (OIL). Invenire Petrodyne Ltd was the only private bidder.
While ONGC was the sole bidder for six blocks, OIL was the lone bidder in all the four blocks it bid for, DGH said.
The last bid round, OALP-IV, too had seen just eight bids coming in for seven blocks on offer. ONGC had walked away with all the seven oil and gas blocks on offer.
OALP-V, which opened in January, was to initially close on March 18, but the bid deadline was thrice extended -- first to April 15, then to June 10, and finally to June 30, in view of the COVID-19 lockdown in the country.
So far, the government has awarded 94 blocks in four OALP bid rounds in the last two-and-a-half years. These 94 blocks cover an exploratory area of about 1,36,800 square kilometres over 16 Indian sedimentary basins.
In the latest bid round, about 19,800 sq km of area was offered for bidding, according to DGH.
OALP-IV was the first round on revamped terms approved in February 2019.
Unlike previous rounds, where blocks were awarded to companies offering a maximum share of oil and gas to the government, blocks in little or unexplored Category-II and III basins are now awarded to companies offering to do maximum exploration programme.
At the time of the launch of OALP-V, DGH had stated that the round is expected to "generate immediate exploration work commitment of around USD 400-450 million".
"An area of 1,36,800 sq km has already been awarded under OALP bid round I, II, III, and IV. These OALP bid round-V blocks would add further 19,800 sq km. Overall exploration acreage of India would then increase to 2,36,600 sq km," it had said at that time.
Of the 94 blocks awarded in the first four rounds of OALP, Vedanta has won the maximum at 51. Oil India Ltd has got 21 blocks and ONGC another 17.
Under OALP, companies are allowed to carve out areas they want to explore oil and gas in. Companies can put in an expression of interest (EoI) for any area throughout the year, but such interests are accumulated thrice in a year. The areas sought are then put on auction.
All 11 blocks in OALP-V are based on EoIs received during EoI Window-V from May 16, 2019 to November 30, 2019, according to DGH.
The fifth cycle of submitting EoIs closed on November 30, 2019. This was followed by the sixth cycle that began on December 1, 2019, and was to last till March 31, 2020. It was to be followed by the seventh cycle from April 1, 2020, until July 31, 2020.
DGH has merged the sixth and seventh cycle of EoIs.
The EoI cycle for Round VI (ended March 31, 2020) and Round VII (ending July 31, 2020) stand merged, DGH said, adding that the EoIs received between December 1 and July 31 will be clubbed and put on offer as a combined bid round.
