The U.S. Energy Department said Wednesday that it has released a "Request for Proposals" to buy up to one million barrels of sweet crude oil to test the conditions of physical oil available to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. The department plans to buy oil sourced from small to midsize U.S. oil producers and delivery will be made to one or more of the three SPR storage sites during July, with early deliveries accepted in June. The purchase would complement deliveries of crude that are currently scheduled for June or July under the Energy Department's oil storage initiative that was launched in April. For the week ended May 8, 1.9 million barrels of crude oil was added to the SPR to total 639.8 million barrels. The reserve's current storage capacity is 713.5 million barrels. June West Texas Intermediate crude clj20 traded at $25.61 a barrel in electronic trading, up from the $25.29 Nymex settlement .
Workhorse's stock set to snap record win streak, while BTIG analyst nearly doubles price target
Shares of Workhorse Group Inc.  are down 4% in Wednesday trading, putting them on track to snap a record 9-day winning streak in which they rocketed more than 4-fold (up 321%). Analyst Gregory Lewis at BTIG reiterated his buy rating on the electric van maker's stock but boosted his price target to $26, which is 77% above current levels, from $10. Lewis said a key takeaway from a call he hosted with management on Tuesday was that the company has "first-mover" advantage, which was solidified when the Series C van received final regulatory safety approvals, giving the company a 1-to-2-year head start on other electric vehicle (EV) last-mile delivery competitors. He said this should allow the company to secure a revolving credit facility, which would allow it to scale up operations. Lewis said a major potential catalyst could be a $6 billion to $8 billion contract from the U.S. Postal Service, in which bids are due later this month, and an announcement of the winner is expected later this year. He said another bullish factor is the optionality around the company's 10% equity stake in Lordstown Motors Corp., which unveiled its EV Endurance pickup truck last week. The stock has skyrocketed 881% over the past three months. Among its EV rivals, shares of Tesla Inc.  have run up 133% the past three months and Nikola Corp.  have climbed 537%, while the S&P 500  has gained 26%.
