Houston pipeline and export terminal operator Enterprise Products Partners is shipping rising volumes of ethylene despite an industry downturn caused by record low crude oil prices.
Houston pipeline and export terminal operator Enterprise Products Partners is shipping higher volumes of ethylene despite an industry downturn caused by record low crude oil prices.
Enterprise expects to export a record 175 million pounds of ethylene in June from the company's new export terminal along the Houston Ship Channel at Morgan's Point, the company said Thursday.
The ethylene export terminal is being developed as a joint venture with the British-owned liquefied gas tanker operator Navigator Holdings Ltd.
Enterprise and Navigator expect to complete the construction of an above-ground ethylene storage tank that will bring the total loading capacity of the export terminal to 2.2 billion pounds per year by the end of 2020.
With ethylene used to make plastics and numerous other products, the rising shipments at Morgan's Point come at a time when record low oil prices sent U.S. crude oil exports from a record-high of 4.4 million barrels per day in mid-March to nearly 2.5 million barrels per day in mid-June.
A shipment of 44 million pounds of ethylene is currently being loaded aboard a Navigator-owned tanker named Navigator Eclipse.
Morgan's Point is already fed by four ethylene pipelines but Enterprise expects to add three more sources by the end of the year.
“To meet the growing demand for petrochemical products, Enterprise built the world’s first fully open access global hub for polymer grade propylene; now, we have developed the first global hub for ethylene,” Enteprise Products Partners Co-CEO Jim Teague said in a statement.
Sergio Chapa covers the oil & gas industry for the Houston Chronicle and writes for Texas Inc., a weekly Monday insert dedicated to covering the most powerful business leaders in Texas. Sergio was born and raised in the Lone Star State and studied journalism at the University of Texas at Austin. He previously worked at the San Antonio Business Journal, KGBT-TV in the Rio Grande Valley and Al Día in Dallas.
Past Articles from this Author:
