OMCs derive nearly two-thirds of their gross operating profit from marketing margins.
State-owned OMCs are likely to be preferred over oil exploration firms as the impact of falling crude oil prices on the earnings of OMCs will be lower than on exploration companies.
ET Intelligence Group: A sharp fall in crude oil prices could lead to portfolio churning in energy stocks over the medium term. State-owned oil marketing companies (OMCs) Bharat Petroleum Corp, Hindustan Petroleum Corp and Indian Oil Corp are likely to be preferred over oil explorer Oil & Natural Gas Corp and Oil India, as the impact of falling crude oil price on the earnings of OMCs will be lower than on exploration companies. Energy stocks have a weight of 10.1 per cent in the BSE 200 index.
The state-owned OMCs derive nearly two-thirds of their gross operating profit from marketing margins — the money earned from sales of retail fuel such as petrol and diesel. Their gross marketing margins are Rs 2-2.50 per litre on retail fuel on a normalised basis. As they have passed on only partial benefits from falling crude oil prices to the consumer, the gross marketing margins expanded to Rs 6.50 and Rs 3.80 per litre for diesel and petrol, respectively, at the beginning of the March 2020.
Retail prices of diesel and petrol have been cut by up to 5 per cent since the beginning of February 2020, while international Brent crude oil dropped 38 per cent in the same period, according to data compiled by ETIG. This is the prime reason for expansion of the marketing margins. The extent of the marketing margin benefit will hinge on how the union government tweaks its excise duty in the next few days. During the last major correction seen in crude oil price, the government hiked excise duty to boost its revenue.
The impact of every 50 paise increase in the marketing margin could potentially lift expected earnings of the OMCs for the next fiscal year in the range of 15-30 per cent. The biggest beneficiary will be HPCL, followed by BPCL NSE 1.64 % and IOC. HPCL’s proportion of marketing sales to refinery throughput is the highest. In the first nine months of FY20, HPCL had domestic marketing sales of 29 million tonnes, while its refinery throughput was 12.6 mt. BPCL had marketing sales of 32.4 mt and refining throughput of 23.5 mt. The benefit accrued from higher marketing margin minimises the earnings hit coming from the refinery segment due to inventory losses.
Apart from marketing margin expansion, lower crude price reduces the working capital requirement of the OMCs and also lowers the amount of outstanding subsidy payment on LPG and kerosene from the government. The oil subsidy burden was Rs 28,684 crore and Rs 43,387 crore for FY18 and FY19, respectively, according to the Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell.
The shares of HPCL, BPCL and IOC are trading at1.07, 2.37 and 0.83 times their book value, which is 16-46 per cent lower than their five-year average. In the past five years, the market value of state-owned OMCs has doubled, while that of oil explorers has shrunk to half.
