1of2Federal officials have temporarily suspended their review of an offshore crude oil export terminal in the Gulf of Mexico about 30 miles south of Brazoria County.Photo: Enterprise Products Partners LP
2of2This sign along State Highway 36 is one of many in the Brazoria County town of Jones Creek where Canadian pipeline operator Enbridge proposed building a crude oil storage tank farm that would feed an offshore crude oil export terminal.Photo: Sergio Chapa / Houston Chronicle
Federal officials have temporarily suspended their review of an offshore crude-oil export terminal proposed by Houston pipeline company Enterprise Products Partners and Canadian pipeline operator Enbridge.
Citing unanswered questions from the companies about the project description and a list of affected landowners, the U.S. Coast Guard and the Maritime Administration said Monday it stopped the clock on drafting an environmental impact statement for the Sea Port Oil Terminal.
Enterprise and Enbridge hope to build an underwater pipeline and an offshore export terminal on an oil storage tank farm in Brazoria County. The terminal would accommodate supertankers that can haul 2 million barrels of crude oil in a single shipment.
In a statement, Enterprise officials said the company is in regular communication with regulators and is working to provide the requested information.
“Enterprise has a history of working in concert with the public and various stakeholder groups to develop projects responsibly, safely and with a focus on protecting the environment," the company said. "The Sea Port Oil Terminal is no different.  The company is working on addressing information requests from the U.S. Coast Guard and MARAD, reviewing submittals from the public comment period, as well as other input from landowners and public officials."
As the lead developer in the project, Enterprise filed its application for the terinal in Jan. 2019.  Enbridge scrapped similar plans for a tank farm and offshore export terminal and joined Enterprise's project in December.
Under federal law, maritime officials have 356 days to review the application but can stop the clock as needed. The agency experienced delays in reviewing the project because of a federal government shutdown last year.
The proposed project faces opposition by area landowners and the Washington, D.C.-based environmental group Earthworks. Residents of the towns of Oyster Creek and Jones Creek have voiced environmental and safety concerns about new tank farms being built in their communities.
Joining thousands of public comments filed against the terinal, the Surfside Beach City Council voted unanimously March to oppose the project.
"While MARAD's stop clock order is no surprise given SPOT's inability to provide permitting agencies with crucial information in a timely manner, MARAD has the information it needs to deny SPOT's Deepwater Port License now," Earthworks energy campaigner Ethan Buckner said. "SPOT is widely opposed by impacted communities because it threatens drinking water, public health, the endangered Kemp’s Ridley sea turtle, and the region's robust tourism-dependent economy."
Sergio Chapa covers the oil & gas industry for the Houston Chronicle and writes for Texas Inc., a weekly Monday insert dedicated to covering the most powerful business leaders in Texas. Sergio was born and raised in the Lone Star State and studied journalism at the University of Texas at Austin. He previously worked at the San Antonio Business Journal, KGBT-TV in the Rio Grande Valley and Al Día in Dallas.
Past Articles from this Author:
