When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
There's good news for motorists as fuel prices continue to plummet despite an increase in the price of crude oil.
Although traffic levels have now shot up again as Ireland exits lockdown, drivers are not being punished at the pumps.
The AA revealed that the cost of a litre of petrol has now fallen to a four-year low, the lowest level recorded since March 2016.
On average, a litre of petrol now costs 121.8c – down almost 2c from last month’s average price of 123.7c, according to the AA latest fuel price study released today.
Meanwhile, diesel prices have also continued to fall, dropping by 1.6c on average to a current price of 113.9c.
These prices are in stark comparison to the beginning of the year when a litre of petrol cost a whopping 144.5c and diesel costing 135.9c on average.
The price of crude oil has recovered somewhat, after a significant plunge in late April and early May.
A diesel car at a filling station (Image: Getty Images/Sol de Zuasnabar Brebbia)
Currently, Brent Crude Oil is trading at approximately $40/€36 per barrel, up from a price of $35-$36/ €31/€32 per barrel in late May.
But the price has almost halved since late 2019 when crude oil was fetching up to to $65/€58 per barrel.
The FREE email will land into your inbox every single morning at around 9:30am and give you all the latest news from around the capital.
Whether it be traffic and travel, what's on or crime - this newsletter will have you covered for everything.
You can unsubscribe from this service at any time. And rest assured that your data will not be shared with any other party.
Conor Faughnan, AA Director of Consumer Affairs said: "On many major routes across the country, according to TII data, traffic levels have increased by over 100% compared to the first week of Covid-19 restrictions, and the continued drop in fuel prices is welcome news for those who are now beginning to travel more regularly."
