How can I buy spot oil?  It is the question I am asked most often by individual investors.  It is certainly a straightforward question, but unfortunately, there is no straightforward answer.  Many come to the conclusion, as in this well-written article from ETF.com, that buying spot oil is impossible.  Therefore investors that want oil must crowd into futures-holding ETFs, of which USO is the largest.
As I have mentioned in several Forbes columns , USO has been a disaster from a performance standpoint and is imbued with severely flawed governance by its sponsor, USCF Investments.
So, I have made my aversion to USO quite clear, but how do I get my clients and my firm, Excelsior Capital Partners, exposure to real-time oil prices?
Again, it is important to note that there is no large, liquidly-traded market for "spot oil" in the world.  Most transactions are done on an index based on either the U.S. benchmark, WTI, or the global benchmark, Brent.  The closest economic setup to a spot market might be Saudi Arabia's monthly price fixings, but, as that specific supply is strictly controlled, it is the opposite of an efficient market.  Also, those bids are placed in large quantities, typically by Chinese buyers, so that's not a market that outsiders can easily access.  Otherwise, spot oil typically only applies to cargoes that are smuggled from conflict zones (Syria and parts of Iraq, for instance) and I certainly would not recommend investing there, even if it were possible.
So, any trade to play spot oil involves some level of compromise.  That said here are three:
1. U.S. Gasoline Fund (UGA.)  This fund, which shares the same sponsor with USO, has not suffered from the governance issues of USO.  Buying RBOB (reformulated blendstock for oxygenate blending) gasoline is not buying spot oil, but it is akin to buying oil from last week or two weeks ago.  As crude is refined into gasoline, there is a slight time lag, but it is essentially worthless on its own, so producers have an incentive to get it to marketers as quickly as possible.  So, in a rising market, that gives an investor more exposure to "real-time" energy prices than buying USO, which has its largest holding in December 2020 oil futures.
