                    storage capacity will soon run out, taking out
                    any floor in pricing. The eventual response has
                    to be a major cut in US production, ICIS
                    analysts and editors said on Tuesday.
                    plunged to settle at -$37.63 on 20 April, a day
                    NYMEX contract is concerned, you need to unwind
                    your positions before the contract expires.
                    the oil… in Cushing, Oklahoma,” said Ignacio
                    market in the last 15 minutes of trade, [the
                    continued on 21 April unabated, with the June
                    WTI contract plunging 43% to $11.57/bbl, and
                    Brent falling 28% to $18.29.
                    crude oil storage capacity.
                    to go negative… And when prices go negative,
                    production in the US,” said Richard Price,
                    deputy global oil editor at ICIS.
                    are particularly at risk, as the breakeven
                    price for shale oil production is $40-50/bbl,
                    depending on the region, he said.
                    financial support for the oil and gas industry.
“We will never let the great U.S. Oil & Gas
                    the future!” Trump tweeted.
Net US crude oil stocks stand at 375m bbl, with
                    another 128m bbl in pipelines or in transit.
                    week to 10 April, noted Price.
                    of working storage capacity in the US. While
                    this may appear there is plenty of space left,
                    and with last week’s almost 20m bbl build, it
                    estimate for global demand declines to the US,
                    this could drop further, which would lead to
                    more record stock builds, said Price.
                    months until storage completely runs out, he
                    exports likely to fall further, this could be
                    drastically shorter,” said Price, pointing out
                    be reached by mid-May.
                    months from now],” said Price.
                    don’t cut production further.
                    of storage for crude. Those tank farms are
                    market analyst at ICIS.
This crisis for the oil market is unique, as in
                    the refining side or the upstream side, and
                    can weather the storm in whatever situation,
                    high or low prices,” said Parmar.
                    for gasoline and jet fuel. That in turn works
                    who have had to drop their prices severely.
                    core demand collapse for refined products, the
                    like the US,” said Parmar.
                    from this crisis due to the Covid-19 shutdowns,
                    demand could be spotty.
“The longer this goes on, the more likely
                    businesses adapt to a new normal, and things
                    therapeutic,” said Jeremy Pafford, head of
                    North America at ICIS.
“Even as we go into 2021, the need for those
                    types of fuels may have changed,” he added.
                    the northern hemisphere amid colder weather,
                    stepping up and doing their share,” he said.
                    oilfields diminishes with lower oil production.
                    improve on a relative basis.
                    prices globally going down, and then rising
                    margins further,” said Pafford.
                    coronavirus impact and crash in oil prices,
Stay on top of market volatility and inform your commercial strategies with pricing, data, news and analysis.
