We examine the impact of international monetary policy and professionals' announcements on WTI crude oil futures around the Lehman Brothers collapse.
The direction, magnitude and significance of impacts are assessed in returns and volatility for price, volume and open interest series in both daily and weekly frequency.
The UK monetary policy announcements and the US monetary policy announcements significantly affect the daily close price returns, daily volume returns, daily open interest returns and weekly open interest returns.
The EU monetary policy and Goldman Sachs announcements, significantly affect daily range of oil prices
We examine the impact of international monetary policy and professionals' announcements on West Texas Intermediate crude oil futures. Our methodology features an event study and a case study. The event study refers to an analysis of each category of events, while the case study refers to the selection of a particular time period around the Lehman Brothers' collapse. The direction, magnitude and significance of impacts are assessed in terms of returns and volatility for both daily and weekly price, volume and open interest series. The research questions are assessed in a nonparametric quantile regression framework. Announcements are classified into four categories, three of which concern international monetary policy from the United Kingdom, the United States and the European Economic and Monetary Union, with the fourth category concerning financial professionals' announcements.
You may share this content using our article tools. Printing this content is for the sole use of the Authorised User (named subscriber), as outlined in our terms and conditions - https://www.infopro-insight.com/terms-conditions/insight-subscriptions/
You may share this content using our article tools. Copying this content is for the sole use of the Authorised User (named subscriber), as outlined in our terms and conditions - https://www.infopro-insight.com/terms-conditions/insight-subscriptions/
