Investing in oil stocks is popular among thick-skinned investors, but it comes with unpredictability. FTSE All-Share members Tullow Oil (LSE:TLW) and Premier Oil (LSE:PMO) are enduring a tough year as depressed oil prices compound their debt problems and suppress their share prices. The rumour mill has been rife with takeover talk and speculation about their possible demise. So, what is the latest outlook for these two oil stocks?
The Tullow Oil share price took a 30% tumble then 70% crash late last year when the company announced a string of production cuts. Free cash flow numbers were slashed, and the CEO resigned. This year, the pandemic piled further pressure on the oil industry and plummeting oil prices have not helped. Tullow suspended its dividend in early March, which pushed its share price to its lowest point this year.
Tullow Oil has an 85% debt ratio and negative earnings per share. So, is there hope for the African oil producer? While some oil stock shareholders are sitting on significant losses, the future is now looking more favorable. Tullow is focused on reducing its debt, with a $1bn fundraising plan in place. In April, it sold its Ugandan project to Total for $575m. Then in May, it declared force majeure on its main licences in Kenya. This gave it an opportunity to resolve tax issues it is facing in the country.
Meanwhile, from a low of 12p a share in the March market crash, the Premier Oil share price has rebounded to pass the 30p mark. Premier remains massively indebted and is focused on making further debt-fuelled acquisitions, which are being opposed by one of its creditors, Asia Research & Capital Management. However, a court recently ruled in PMO’s favour on the first of these buys and it proves the determination and ambition of the company should not be ignored.
How well the PMO share price recovers from this year of challenges very much hinges on the future price of oil. Premier previously said its break-even price is under $50 a barrel. Last month the company said it is preserving its liquidity with $330m of available credit facilities and $160m in cash.
Short-term demand for oil remains uncertain in the West, but demand has already started returning to China. The longer-term outlook still looks as if global demand for oil and gas will not be diminished quickly.
A glut of oil means storage space is limited, so OPEC+ is meeting tomorrow to examine extending its oil production cuts. Agreeing to these cuts should extend oil price gains and keep Brent Crude above $40. In another positive sign for oil prices, the price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) futures for July is rising. It was panic-selling of these in May that caused the WTI price to fall into negative territory. On the flip side, the oil price stabilising too quickly may bring US shale producers back on-line, which would be counterproductive to reducing the glut.
I don’t think traditional energy markets will disappear soon and there is still money in investing in oil. I think the Tullow and PMO share prices will continue to rise as long as the oil price stays above $40. Just remember they are volatile and remain riskier investments than many other shares.
Are you looking to invest in growth stocks with money making potential? Perhaps the Motley Fool can help you...
Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all fired up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the pandemic!).
But its capital-light, highly scalable business model has previously helped it deliver consistently high sales, astounding near-70% margins, and rising shareholder returns … in fact, in 2019 it returned a whopping £150m+ to shareholders in dividends and buybacks!
While COVID-19 may have thrown the company a curveball, management have acted swiftly to ensure this business is as well placed as it can be to ride out the current period of uncertainty… in fact, our analyst believes it should come roaring back to life, just as soon as normal economic activity resumes.
That’s why we think now could be the perfect time for you to start building your own stake in this exceptional business – especially given the shares look to be trading on a fairly undemanding valuation for the year to March 2021.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Growth Share… free of charge!
Kirsteen has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
