Oil companies, perhaps more than any other industry, always see their fortunes move in line with the price of their underlying asset – crude oil. While the coronavirus scare is causing a general sell-off in stocks, the oil sector is suffering from a more fundamental problem, one that has been on the horizon for most of the past 12 months.
This problem of course, is oversupply. Crude oil prices are currently trading below $30 a barrel. The coronavirus has been perhaps the straw that broke the camel’s back, but it is the glut of crude that has allowed it to plummet so far, so fast.
The reason oil companies are so linked with the price of crude is that so many facets of their business are dependent on crude prices being at or above certain levels. From downstream to upstream, different aspects of the business are only viable when crude prices are a certain level.
For example, let’s say it costs $50 to get each barrel of crude from deep wells or from shale fields. You need to be able to sell it for more than $50 to make a profit.
Of course the big oil companies have been doing this for a long time, and they know how to act when oil tanks – they cut capital expenditure, halt production at expensive fields, and generally batten down the hatches until crude goes back up. Historically, it always has gone back up.
I believe that oil will, once again, go back up…at some point.
In the meantime though, the coronavirus is having a broad impact on fuel consumption, and thus crude consumption. This is likely to continue for some time. I suspect that once the world finally gets a handle on the situation and life returns to normal, then travel will again become an everyday thing. This may not be for another year, but it will eventually happen.
OPEC and its member countries have been particularly obstinate in their refusal to cut quotas. I think long-term greed will eventually outweigh the short-term variety, and the group will begin to cut production in order to bolster prices.
Given my belief that crude prices will recover, I see the current situation as an opportunity rather than a cause for panic. There is risk, however, and I would only consider investing in the large blue chips.
For me, this means BP (LSE: BP) and Royal Dutch Shell (LSE: RDSB) . I have long been a fan of these two oil companies. Both are well placed in size, scope, and cash to withstand the pressures of low crude prices, certainly for a year or so.
At the moment, both companies are maintaining their respective dividends , though I suspect this may change if crude prices stay at these levels for the next few months.
Both companies are as diverse as an oil company can be, and Shell particularly has shown a willingness to try out new things – exactly what is required in these kinds of times.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Karl has shares in BP and Royal Dutch Shell. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
