Currently trading at Rs 184 per share, HPLC is down 31% year-to-date. HPLC’s integrated margin are up 50-67%, and it is starting at an inventory loss of $6.7/bbl, according to ICICI Securities. “In addition to the weakness being seen in refining margins, HPCL is also likely to see a decline in Refining thruput rates for the first time in the past several years – Combined with the sharply lower fuel consumption growth, EPS estimates for FY21/22E see a sharp decline,” noted Centrum Broking in a research note. For the scrip to reach the target price pegged by Centrum Broking it will need to jump 46% from the current market price.
BPCL, according to ICICI Securities is looking at $6.4/bbl  crude inventory loss. “Sharp correction in downstream stocks has made valuations attractive and higher marketing margins on auto fuels amid declining global crude oil prices will offset sustained weakness in underlying refining margins and one-time inventory loss,” said Kotak Institutional Equities while highlighting the positives for downstream companies in the current market scenario. BPCL has an upside of 62% from its current market price.
India’s largest downstream oil company and will reap the benefit of higher marketing margins. “ IOC ’s Mathura, Bongaigaon and Guwahati refineries will take Euro VI related shutdown in Q4FY20. This is likely to reduce its auto fuels yield and hit GRM to that extent,” said ICICI Securities. IOCL also gets impacted by sharply lower Petchem earnings due to a weak demand environment, according to Centrum Broking. For IOC to reach the fair value price pegged by Kotak Institutional Equities it will have to move up by 64%.
(The stock recommendations in this story are by the respective research and brokerage firms. Financial Express Online does not bear any responsibility for their investment advice. Please consult your investment advisor before investing.)
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
