The oil price crash has seen the price of Brent Crude oil fall more than 60% this year. In the US, oil prices even went negative for a short time. I think this could be a good time to hunt for cheap oil stocks to buy.
Although the coronavirus pandemic has put a big dent in oil demand, I expect demand to improve during the second half of 2020. I’ve identified three UK oil stocks which I think should perform well in this scenario.
If you’re looking for oil stocks to buy, you can’t ignore the FTSE 100‘s biggest company, Royal Dutch Shell (LSE: RDSB) .
Shell hit the headlines last week by cutting its dividend for the first time in 75 years. This will reduce the stock’s dividend yield to around 3.8%. Although this is a disappointment for income investors, I think it’s a far-sighted decision that will prove to be correct.
At more normal oil prices, Shell is a formidable cash machine. Its oil business has low operating costs for fields that are already in production. The group also has a very large gas business and a sizeable ‘downstream’ division – that’s industry jargon for refineries which convert oil into petrol, diesel, and chemicals.
I see Shell as a potential winner as the coronavirus pandemic recedes. I’m also encouraged by the company’s plans to cut emissions over the coming years. I remain a buyer.
North Sea firm Serica Energy (LSE: SQZ) has been around for 15 years. But in 2017 the firm acquired a number of oil and gas fields from BP. This deal transformed the company into a mid-tier producer with 2019 production of more than 30,000 barrels of oil equivalent (boe) per day.
More than 80% of Serica’s production is gas, which is piped to the UK for electricity generation. Operating costs are low, too, at just $12.60 per boe.
Serica’s low costs support strong cash generation, and net cash rose from £43m to £102m in 2019. The group plans to pay its first ever dividend in July, giving the stock a forecast yield of more than 3%.
Serica could still face challenges from coronavirus. In the future it could face significant decommissioning expenses. But the shares look reasonably priced to me. I’d be happy to buy at current levels.
The final company on my list produces oil for an operating cost of just $3 per barrel. Genel Energy (LSE: GENL) was one of the first companies to strike oil in the Kurdistan region of Iraq. It remains a leading producer in this region.
There are some potential problems for investors. Genel’s oil is sold to the Kurdistan government and payment is sometimes delayed. The political environment isn’t always stable. However, this business has a track record of operating successfully and maintaining a good relationship with the authorities. I can live with the political risks.
Genel’s net cash stood at more than $90m at the end of last year, supporting a generous dividend. Looking ahead, analysts currently expect the firm’s strong cash generation to support a 9% dividend yield in 2020.
This oil stock isn’t without risk, but if oil prices rise stabilise above $40, I think shareholders could see big gains. I’d be happy to take a small position in Genel.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Roland Head owns shares of Royal Dutch Shell B. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
