All told, global investments in exploration and production are expected to fall in 2020 by $100 billion, or 17 percent below last year, according to Rystad Energy, a research and consulting firm based in Oslo. That drop is only the latest jolt to an industry that has been tightening budgets for years. The $446 billion that the industry is expected to invest is just over half the $880 billion it spent on exploration and production in 2014.
The share prices of large companies like Exxon Mobil, ConocoPhillips and Chevron have nearly halved in recent months, while the stocks of smaller firms with less healthy balance sheets have fallen even more.
In ordinary times, a big drop in energy prices would be a boon to consumers, who would have more money left over after filling up their cars and trucks. But many people have nowhere to drive to, and gas stations report that sales have plummeted, even as the national average price of gasoline has tumbled to less than $2 a gallon , according to AAA. Refiners are shutting down several gasoline distillation units on the Gulf of Mexico because demand is so weak.
The crisis may only be just beginning. The U.S. rig count last week was 728, down 44 from the week before, according to Baker Hughes. In Texas, the biggest oil-producing state , 368 rigs were operating on Friday, compared with 491 a year ago. Mr. Latshaw said those numbers could go down by another 300 or more by the time the oil price hits bottom.
In a sign that the industry expects lasting distress, Phillips 66 has put on hold two pipeline projects connecting West Texas oil fields with Gulf Coast refineries and export terminals.
Occidental, Chevron, Pioneer Natural Resources, Parsley and other oil companies are sharply cutting operations in the Permian Basin of Texas and New Mexico , the epicenter of the U.S. shale-oil production boom. Schlumberger and other large service companies are cutting and furloughing thousands of workers.
Workers are beginning to see furloughs and staffing reductions as oil prices continue to fall. Credit...Tamir Kalifa for The New York Times
The situation is no better elsewhere in the world. With more oil than they can possibly sell, major producing countries like Nigeria, Brazil, Ecuador, Angola and Canada have only a few weeks of storage available before pipeline systems back up and production has to be curtailed.
The Algerian state oil company, Sonatrach, is planning to halve its spending to $7 billion. Brazil’s Petrobras is slashing its spending by more than 25 percent, and its offshore partners Royal Dutch Shell, Exxon Mobil and Equinor of Norway are cutting as well. Large global oil companies, like Shell, Total of France and Eni of Italy, are averaging spending cuts of 20 percent in their global operations.
Even Saudi Arabia and Russia — which helped to spark the oil price collapse with their recent moves to increase, rather than cut, production — are vulnerable to the demand shock produced by the pandemic. There may be fewer buyers for the extra oil those countries are producing.
“They can undercut U.S. pricing, but refiners likely don’t want any more crude,” said Paul Sankey, managing director at Mizuho Securities. “If there is no market, there is no market.”
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
The fallout will be severe for oil-producing developing countries that finance social programs with oil revenues. Mexican Maya crude is already selling on American markets for under $10 a barrel for the first time in over two decades, undercutting Colombian and Ecuadorean producers struggling to break even.
And despite the cuts in American exploration, production will fall only gradually from its current 13 million barrels a day, perhaps by a couple of million barrels a day in the coming months.
Energy experts say profit margins for a small, though increasing, number of older wells have morphed into losses, so that companies cannot even cover fixed costs. Under those circumstances, it makes no sense to produce oil, and those wells will have to be turned off completely — a process that is expensive to reverse and sometimes damages wells.
“There is no precedent for the scale of potential shut-ins,” said Fraser McKay, a vice president at Wood Mackenzie, an energy research and consulting firm. “The industry’s ability to keep higher-cost barrels flowing will be severely tested.”
At particular risk are the hundreds of small private American oil companies that have as few as a handful of wells, or as many as a couple of hundred. They were highly profitable when oil prices were $100 a barrel or more. These companies are the backbone of rural communities in states like Oklahoma, Texas, Louisiana and Montana. But now they could be a big liability for local economies because they may not be able to repay loans to regional banks.
“It’s disastrous, devastating,” said Darlene Wallace, president of Columbus Oil, a small Oklahoma company. “I hate to sound like a little old lady, but it’s frightening.”
Ms. Wallace said she shut down two wells late last year as oil prices began to slide and would shut eight of her remaining 19 wells on Tuesday. She said many other producers were in worse shape because they had borrowed money in recent years to buy wells for what they considered low prices. She has been paying off debts and cutting payroll and other costs since oil prices fell in 2014.
There may be no solution for those operations, along with dozens of larger private and public companies, said Raoul LeBlanc, a vice president at IHS Markit.
“We’re going to have a whole lot of consolidation with a lot of small players going broke or joining together to try to stave off their debt situations, reduce their expenses and survive this,” Mr. LeBlanc said. “There’s literally no room to put the oil.”
