Spread bets and CFDs enable you to speculate on the price of oil without having to take ownership or delivery of the underlying market. This means that they can be used to take a position on the price of oil rising (by going long), as well as falling (by going short).
When is the best time to trade oil?
The best time to trade oil will depend on the current balance between supply and demand in the oil market. Any supply cuts made by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) will surely cause the price to rise – assuming demand remains the same. Any supply increases will surely cause the price to fall – with consistent demand.
Other factors will also affect the price of oil, such as the strength of the US dollar or any possible trade disputes between key oil producers – such as the US and Russia.
However, because you can speculate on the price of oil rising and falling with spread bets or CFDs, there is no one ‘best’ time to trade oil because you have the opportunity to profit from both rising and falling markets. That said, it is still important to carry out your own analysis on the oil markets to help you determine whether the price is going to rise or fall.
What are the ways to trade oil?
You can trade oil with spread bets and CFDs on spot prices, on oil futures or on oil options.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
1In the case of all DFBs, there is a fixed expiry at some point in the future.
Practice makes perfect. Take what you’ve learned in this commodities strategy article, and try it out risk-free in your demo account.
Put the lessons in this article to use in a live account. Upgrading is quick and simple.
Put the knowledge you’ve gained from this article into practice. Log in to your account now.
