The oil market is reacting to shocks on both the supply and demand sides.
Oil prices plunged once again on Thursday, as President Donald Trump banned all travel from Europe, except for the United Kingdom . International travel is coming to a near standstill, and will have an enormous impact on energy demand this year: Jet fuel accounts for about 8 million barrels a day of crude demand, or about 8% of total global usage.
Brent crude futures, the international benchmark, were down 6.6% to $33.48. Futures on West Texas Intermediate, or WTI ,
      dropped 5.8% to $31.06. U.S. oil stocks fell hard, with Pioneer Natural Resources (PXD) down 12% and EOG Resources (EOG) down 13%. European oil majors were also struggling, as Royal Dutch Shell (RDSA) fell 11%.
Goldman Sachs this week updated its Brent oil-price targets for the second and third quarters to $30, with possible dips to $20. A rebound to $40 isn’t likely until the fourth quarter, the bank said.
The oil market is reeling from supply and demand shocks, and every day brings more bad news. Russia, Saudi Arabia and other major producers are ramping up production just as the coronavirus is destroying demand for oil.
Those simultaneous forces could cause supply to be several million barrels higher than demand, causing a prolonged slump that some strategists have projected could take crude below $20 per barrel . The marginal cost of producing oil from a U.S. shale well is in the mid-$20s, some analysts say, so a sustained drop below that would remake the American oil landscape in a hurry.
At $30 oil, several companies would need to drastically restructure their capital budgets, said David Heikkinen, CEO of Houston-based equity research firm Heikkinen Energy Advisors. Among the large-caps that could come under stress in a world of $30 oil are Hess (HES), Apache (APA) and Occidental Petroleum (OXY), he predicted on Monday.
Since then, Apache and Occidental have released new capital plans, with Occidental making a big cut to its dividend.
A Hess spokesperson said: “We are reviewing our capital and exploratory budget and intend to make significant reductions to what we have previously announced. It should be noted that approximately 80% of the company’s 2020 oil production is hedged, with 130,000 barrels a day at $55 per barrel WTI and 20,000 barrels a day at $60 per barrel Brent. We have a strong capital structure, including more than $1.5 billion in cash and cash equivalents on our balance sheet entering 2020, a $3.5 billion undrawn revolving credit facility and no material debt maturities until 2027.”
Even though oil stocks are at multi-year lows, strategists are wary of recommending that investors jump in.
“For now there could be another downdraft in the price of oil so there is no rush to jump into energy stocks,” wrote Ed Yardeni.
When the market settles down, he says, investors ought to look for quality instead of companies with riskier profiles that could rise more in the short term. “The best opportunities are in blue chip companies that have a long history of paying dividends,” Yardeni said.
Oil Falls Another 6%. Strategists Say It’s Too Soon to Buy the Stocks.
Oil prices plunged once again on Thursday, as President Donald Trump banned all travel from Europe, except for the United Kingdom.
