The 11-year contango highs follow market predictions of near-term declines in crude oil demand with whole economies in lockdown mode . According to the International Energy Agency (IEA) oil demand could be a fifth less per day from its previous projection rate of around ~100 million barrels per day (bpd) for 2020.
All of it depends on how quickly, or not, the coronavirus pandemic is brought under control in key crude consuming markets of U.S., China, India, Japan and South Korea – all which seem to be gripped by the pandemic that first surfaced in China at the start of the first quarter .
With the westward spread of the coronavirus many fear the U.S. in particular could be the new epicenter of the pandemic that's currently crippling many European economies, especially those of Italy, France and Spain. Now major U.S. economic heartlands such as the states of California, New York and Texas are in lockdown.
But current market sentiment points to a bounce in consumption at the end of third quarter and for much of the fourth quarter of this year, with a further uptick in 2021 to follow. That's what many traders are betting on, creating the contango structure with many rushing to grab onshore and floating storage to hoard crude.
Prices for onshore storage in North America have doubled over the last fortnight, while lease rates for floating storage in the shape of Very Large Crude Carriers (VLCCs) have jumped by a stupendous 700% to an average of $300,000 per day in some cases on the lucrative Middle East to Asia routes.
As oil prices struggle to find a near-term floor with the crisis exacerbated following the collapse of OPEC+ , many including the IEA suggest demand growth could bounce back strongly and rise by 2.1 million bpd in 2021. It's what many are pinning their hopes on leading to record contango spreads, even if the current market situation has some way to run.
I am a UK-based oil & gas sector analyst and business news editor/writer with over 20 years of experience in the financial and trade press. I have worked on all major
I am a UK-based oil & gas sector analyst and business news editor/writer with over 20 years of experience in the financial and trade press. I have worked on all major media platforms – print, newswire, web and broadcast. At various points in my career, I have been an OPEC, Bank of England and UK Office for National Statistics correspondent. Over the years, I have provided wide-ranging oil & gas sector commentary, including pricing, supply scenarios, E&P infrastructure, corporations' financials and exploration data. I am a lively commentator on 'crude' matters for publications and broadcasting outlets including CNBC Europe, BBC Radio, Asian and Middle Eastern networks, via my own website, Forbes and various other publications. My oil market commentary has a partial supply-side bias based on a belief that the risk premium is often given gratuitous, somewhat convenient, prominence by cheeky souls who handle quite a few paper barrels but have probably never been to a tanker terminal or the receiving end of a pipeline. Yet having done both, I pragmatically accept paper barrels [or should we say ‘e-barrels’] are not going anywhere, anytime soon!
