For traders News and features Features Oil stocks to trade in summer 2020: four companies that could profit from volatility
Major swings in the crude oil market in the past few months have presented challenges and opportunities for companies in the oil industry. With the US benchmark having rebounded from negative territory, are oil stocks a good investment now?
The combination of a rebound in financial markets and an oil market in recovery from historic lows has boosted oil stocks. The share price of US oil and gas major ConocoPhillips (COP) has surged by as much as 115 per cent from the stock market lows reached in March, leaving investors asking, “should I invest in oil stocks right now?”
This oil stocks price analysis considers four oil stocks to watch this summer: BP (BP) , Frontline (FRO) , Chesapeake Energy (CHK) , and ConocoPhillips . Scroll down for a video in which Capital.com’s chief market strategist, David Jones, discusses what oil stocks to invest in right now given the recent boost in oil prices off the lows, and uses technical analysis to set up potential trades.
Oil stocks to trade: are these companies well-positioned for recovery?
Oil price analysis shows the US benchmark West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil price has made a remarkable recovery after turning negative for the first time in history in April, when it reached -$40.32 per barrel. It has soared from that low, rebounding towards $40 per barrel – the level at which it was trading earlier in March. That has set the backdrop for recovery from oil stocks 2020 lows. But it is not an uninterrupted upward trajectory, and the oil price dipped in recent trading sessions in a retracement of the rising trend.
Oil stocks in June 2020 have been increasingly volatile, rising sharply early in this month then subsequently falling back, then showing signs of moving higher again. This is presenting new opportunities to trade oil stocks, as companies adapt to rapidly-changing market conditions. We’ve selected four stocks for you to consider adding to your investment portfolio in June.
Shares in BP , ConocoPhillips , and Frontline plunged by around 50-60 per cent from the start of the year to late March, as a broad-based sell-off driven by the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic hit commodities stocks. The Chesapeake Energy share price plummeted by 80 per cent, but it continued to fall with the company heading towards bankruptcy.
The short-term outlook for crude oil demand remains uncertain as economies around the world are not operating as normal even as the countries come out of lockdowns to halt the spread of Covid-19. But with the resumption of some activity and share prices rising, there are opportunities for trading oil stocks.
Watch our latest oil stocks analysis video in which David Jones, chief market strategist at Capital.com, discusses four oil stocks to trade and suggests how to speculate on their volatility based on the technical charts.
UK-based oil and gas major BP said recently it will write down $13-17.3bn in non-cash impairment charges and write-offs for the second quarter. The company “sees the prospect of the pandemic having an enduring impact on the global economy, with the potential for weaker demand for energy for a sustained period.” It has revised down its average Brent crude oil price forecast for 2021-2050 to $55 per barrel, down by 27 per cent from its previous assumption.
BP’s UK-listed share price has reflected the broader market volatility. The stock dropped to £2.23 at the March lows from £4.80 at the start of the year, bouncing up to £3.66 earlier this month before retreating toward £3.14 per share. Although the share price has been under pressure and BP recently announced 10,000 job cuts, investors tend to view such moves as showing the company is addressing the change in the oil market.
Trade BP PLC - GBP - BP. CFD
