This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Crude oil futures are making new gains above $40 a barrel, a remarkable turnaround for a product that briefly traded below $0 in April .
On Tuesday, Brent crude futures, the global benchmark, rose 1.2%, to $43.58 a barrel. West Texas Intermediate crude futures rose 1.1% to $41.17. On Monday, the West Texas Intermediate contract climbed above $40 for the first time since March 6
The rebound has been spurred by two factors: Demand is gradually rising as economies around the world reopen, and oil producers have cut back on drilling to keep supply from building up.
Oil still has a long way to go before producers can signal an all clear. At $40, most U.S. producers can’t make money on new wells.
But $40 has been a kind of psychological barrier in recent months, and breaking it is a very positive sign. For the momentum to continue, the U.S. and other countries will have to find a way to contain the uptick in coronavirus cases in the coming weeks . Rising cases in some states have already begun to affect businesses -- Apple (ticker: AAPL) stores closed in several states with rising infections, for instance .
And traders are also clearly worried about increasing tensions between the United States and China. White House trade adviser Peter Navarro spooked the market—and oil traders—on Monday evening when he said the trade deal was “over,” but President Donald Trump sought to reassure markets that it remains on track.
“Oil prices were already looking vulnerable before Navarro’s comments, which were quickly refuted by White House adviser Kudlow and President Trump,” wrote analyst Edward Moya at currency broker Oanda. “This morning, crude prices have recovered all of their losses from the Navarro’s confusing comments on trade and extended higher after global [manufacturing] readings made a compelling argument that crude demand is continuing to improve.”
The stocks that have done best since March 6 are more focused on natural gas than oil. Gas started its rebound earlier than oil. Traders have bet that the slowdown in oil drilling will also reduce the associated natural gas that oil drillers produce. Lower production of gas should help the supply-demand balance of that commodity.
The top energy stocks in the S&P 500 since March 6 are Williams Companies (WMB), up 12%, HollyFrontier (HFC), up 11%, and Cabot Oil & Gas (COG), up 10%. Williams processes and transports natural gas, Holly is a refiner, and Cabot produces natural gas.
The top oil-focused producer Hess (HES), which has risen 4% since the last time oil traded above $40. Analysts have warmed to Hess because of its promising project off the coast of Guyana in South America. That deal, which Hess shares with Exxon Mobil (XOM) and Chinese company Cnooc (CEO), could result in more than 8 billion barrels of oil over the next several years. Other than Hess, every other oil-focused producer in the S&P 500 is still down since March 6.
Crude oil futures are making new gains above $40 a barrel, a remarkable turnaround for a product that briefly traded below $0 in April.
