OMC shares surge riding softer crude oil prices; analysts upbeat
Analysts expect softening crude oil prices to affect corporate earnings positively.
NEW DELHI: Stocks of oil marketing companies (OMCs) that have been beaten down since June have surged on increasing oil prices.
State-owned BPCL is leading the pack, surging about 40 per cent in last one month. HPCL and IndianOil have jumped 19 per cent and 13 per cent, respectively. However, most of them are far below their all-time high levels.
Most analysts are bullish on the OMC space. They expect softening crude oil prices to affect corporate earnings positively.
“Oil prices corrected earlier because of crude oil prices and global geopolitical tensions. We believe that overall structural positivity continues for the OMCs,” said Siddharth Khemka, VP and Head of Research (Retail) at Motilal Oswal Financial Services.
“The profitability was affected to some extent when crude oil prices rose, but they softened recently. Stock prices had come down making valuations look attractive. Plus, these stocks have good dividend yield ratios,” he said.
Mahesh Singhi, Founder and MD, Singhi Advisors, called the recent rise in stock prices an upward correction. He said margins of OMCs would rise as retail oil prices have not been moving proportionally.
“Retail oil prices have been going up. We do not anticipate crude prices to go up further. And OMCs will keep the delta of that, increasing the margin,” Singhi said, adding that he is ‘positive’ on the space.
Some of the positive governmental decisions have helped the state-owned OMCs. “The government did not go forward on its subsidy-sharing plans, and that has helped the state-owned OMCs,” Khemka said.
Recent reports indicated that the government was considering a stake sale in BPCL, foregoing the controlling rights.
Khemka said the oil marketing stocks would definitely be affected by any sharp volatility in crude oil prices, but he was positive on the space. “The underlying structural business remains strong and we are positive on them. Investors can pick them for the long term after understanding the risks associated with crude oil prices and currency movements,” he said.
