A drilling platform outside of Midland, Texas, Feb. 20, 2019.
Houston-based Occidental Petroleum is warning investors that it expects to reduce the value of its assets by $6 billion to $9 billion in the second quarter after crude prices sank to historic lows during the past six months.
"The impairment estimate is primarily attributable to the expected prolonged period of lower commodity prices brought on by lower oil demand as a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic to the worldwide economy," the company said in an SEC filing this month.
The write down of assets reflects the lower value of company holdings, including equipment and oil and gas reserves, caused by the declining price of crude, which started 2020 at about $60. As the coronavirus became a pandemic in the spring, efforts to slow its spread wiped out demand for oil-related products and pushed the price of West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark, deep into negative territory by April.
The steep decline continues to take a t0ll on energy companies around the world. Shell on Tuesday warned that it would write down asset value by $15 billion to $22 billion in the second quarter. The period is expected to result in far worse results for the world's energy companies than the first quarter.
Oxy wrote down $580 million on its oil-related assets and lost $2.2 billion in the first quarter, so the company's warning could foreshadow horrendous second quarter results when the company releases its earnings report July 29.
The company is already struggling under the weight of $39 billion in debt after its acquisition in August of Anadarko Petroleum. Efforts to sell assets to reduce the debt have failed because of the pandemic and oil crash.
The price of oil, meanwhile, has recovered to about $40, but the rising number of COVID-19 cases in states like Texas and California is increasing fears of a double dip if demand shrinks again.
"While crude oil prices modestly recovered in June 2020, a reversal of recent improvements or a prolonged period at current prices may materially and adversely affect our operations, financial condition, cash flows, level of expenditures and the quantity of estimated proved reserves that may be attributed to our properties," the company said in its filing.
