Palm oil climbed 1.87% to its highest since April 20 in the previous session.
Palm oil is affected by price movements in related oils as they compete for a share in the global vegetable oils market.
KUALA LUMPUR: Malaysian palm oil futures snapped a three-day winning streak on Wednesday due to lower crude oil prices , while the resumption of buying by India and Malaysia's renewed commitment to its biodiesel programme capped losses.
The benchmark palm oil contract for August delivery on the Bursa Malaysia Derivatives Exchange slid 22 ringgit, or 1.01%, to 2,160 ringgit ($496.32) by 0320 GMT.
Palm oil climbed 1.87% to its highest since April 20 in the previous session.
Indian buyers have resumed purchases of Malaysian palm oil after a four-month gap following a diplomatic row, with buying spurred by a fall in domestic inventories and discounted prices.
Malaysia will restart its nationwide roll-out of the B20 biodiesel programme in September after postponing it due to a two-month partial lockdown to contain the coronavirus, alleviating concerns that the mandate would be abolished amid low crude prices.
Oil prices dipped as concerns over the lasting economic fallout from the pandemic outweighed signs of improving demand and production cuts by major oil producers.
Weaker crude oil futures make palm a less attractive option for biodiesel feedstock.
Dalian's most-active soyoil contract gained 0.04%, while its palm oil contract was up 0.31%. Soyoil prices on the Chicago Board of Trade were trading 0.18% lower.
Palm oil is affected by price movements in related oils as they compete for a share in the global vegetable oils market.
Palm oil may end its current gains around a resistance at 2,223 ringgit per tonne, as suggested by a gap and a projection analysis, Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao said.
Asian stocks are likely to come under pressure on Wednesday, tracking declines on Wall Street, while gold prices were buoyed by safe-haven demand as economic indicators pointed to more signs of recession.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
