Houston export terminal operator Moda Midstream has completed a project to add 10 million barrels of crude oil storage at its Port of Corpus Christi facility.  Companies operating at the Port of Corpus Christi are adding 17 million barrels of crude oil storage at time when record low commodity prices have producers desperate to find a place to store their barrels until market conditions improve.
The Port of Corpus Christi will have 17 million barrels of additional oil storage by August as record low commodity prices have producers desperate to find a place to store their crude until prices rise.
In total, six companies are adding more than 20 million barrels of new oil storage over the next year, CEO Sean Strawbridge said. The port's existing 40 million barrels of crude storage is about 65 percent full.
The additional storage will give oil companies in the Permian Basin of West Texas and Eagle Ford Shale of South Texas more storage options until prices improve.
The price of West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark, which was just above $30 a barrel Tuesday, plunged to nearly negative $40 in April over fears that the Cushing, Okla., trading hub would run out of storage.  The hub has a storage capacity of 76 million barrels, and tanks are 79 percent full, EIA data shows.
Companies operating at the Port of Corpus Christi are adding 17 million barrels of crude oil storage at time when record low commodity prices have producers desperate to find a place to store their barrels until market conditions improve.
Houston export terminal operator Moda Midstream completed a project in late April to add 10 million barrels next to the company's docks in Ingleside and an inland depot near Taft.
The next biggest project is from Houston pipeline and storage terminal operator Buckeye Partners, which plans to add 5 million barrels of crude oil storage to its Port of Corpus Christi facility.
Port of Corpus Christi officials are seeking a permit to build 3 million to 5 million barrels of oil storage as part of the proposed Lone Star Ports project on Harbor Island near Port Aransas. The project faces opposition from environmentalists and nearby residents.
Louisiana-based Pin Oak Terminals is adding 2.5 million barrels of crude oil storage at the Port of Corpus Christi facility while San Antonio-based NuStar Energy is adding 1 million barrels and Kansas-based Flint Hills Resources is adding 750,000 barrels.
Sergio Chapa covers the oil & gas industry for the Houston Chronicle and writes for Texas Inc., a weekly Monday insert dedicated to covering the most powerful business leaders in Texas. Sergio was born and raised in the Lone Star State and studied journalism at the University of Texas at Austin. He previously worked at the San Antonio Business Journal, KGBT-TV in the Rio Grande Valley and Al Día in Dallas.
Past Articles from this Author:
