Experienced traders here are either buying or selling crude spreads on the local bourse, said Kishore Narne, associate director at Motilal Oswal Financial Services .
If a punter feels the spread could rise, she would sell April crude and buy May crude while the counterparty would expect the spread to shrink and does the opposite .
Mumbai: With US light sweet crude trading near 18-year lows of $20.37 a barrel, veteran global traders are buying oil in cash and selling crude futures on Nymex at a premium way higher than the storage and interest costs they incur. They are effectively locking into 2-3 per cent risk-free returns a month and giving rise to the socalled contango — where futures trade at a premium to spot price or where a far-month futures contract trades at a premium to the near-month, said a dealer at a global asset management firm.
Back home, amid extreme bearishness due to Covid-19, experienced punters are playing on spreads between contracts on local stock exchanges like MCX which offer commodity segments. The MCX energy contracts mirror those traded on Nymex, part of the US-based CME Group. Experienced traders here are either buying or selling crude spreads on the local bourse, said Kishore Narne, associate director at Motilal Oswal Financial Services .
For example, crude for April 20 expiry was trading at Rs 1,772 /bbl (barrel) and that for May 18 expiry was trading at Rs 1,933 intraday Thursday on MCX. That’s a 9 per cent premium or spread. Normally it’s not more than 2 per cent, said analysts.
If a punter feels the spread could rise, she would sell April crude and buy May crude while the counterparty would expect the spread to shrink and does the opposite . “Those who feel the spread between the near and the mid /far month will rise are selling the near month and buying the latter, while those betting on the spread shrinking are buying the near month and selling the mid or far month contract,” said Narne.
With the spreads at 8-10 per cent against the normal 1.5-2 per cent, those able to raise funds and take the risk can rake in 3-4 per cent a month in such exceptional times, said Naveen Mathur, director (commodities ) at Anand Rathi.
Reflecting the overseas price movements, the generic MCX crude contract plunged to Rs 1,686/ bbl intraday on Thursday from Rs 4,046 on December 31 last year. The plunge is the fallout of the Covid-19 impact and the effect of increased output from Saudi Arabia. The initial margin to trade April expiry crude contract (100 barrels) was 45 per cent intraday on Thursday. This has been raised from 20 per cent a week ago, given the extreme volatility in prices.
