Analysts said Reliance and IndianOil have higher refining capacity and therefore higher inventory levels, making their earnings more sensitive to inventory losses.
Most of the refineries of IndianOil, the country’s largest refiner, are landlocked and have a lot of inventory locked up in their pipelines, making them vulnerable during price fall.
New Delhi: A crude oil crash would cause inventory losses to refiners while cutting cost of their borrowings and fuel consumption, industry executives and analysts said.
Shares of Reliance Industries NSE 1.97 % and Indian Oil NSE 0.35 % , expected to have higher inventory losses, fell while those of HPCL and BPCL, with expected lower inventory losses, soared on Monday.
Reliance Industries and Indian Oil shares fell 12.3% and 1.3%, respectively, on Monday while HPCL and BPCL jumped 6.17% and 5.2%, respectively, on a day benchmark sensex tumbled more than 5%.
Analysts said Reliance and IndianOil have higher refining capacity and therefore higher inventory levels, making their earnings more sensitive to inventory losses.
Most of the refineries of IndianOil, the country’s largest refiner, are landlocked and have a lot of inventory locked up in their pipelines, making them vulnerable during price fall. By comparison, much of the facilities of HPCL and BPCL are located on coast, obviating need for higher inventory.
“Inventory loss depend on the net effect of price movement for a period. Sudden price fall leads to inventory losses. But if the price were to improve again tomorrow by the same quantum, those inventory losses will be nullified,” said MK Surana, chairman of Hindustan Petroleum Corp (HPCL), explaining how volatility in crude prices hurt refiners and the effect can be really seen only over a specific time period.
Inventory losses have troubled refiners for much of the current fiscal year as crude prices have tumbled. Earnings of refineries, however, will also depend on the demand-supply situation of refined products and how much margins they leave for refiners.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
