Storage is shown at the Marathon Petroleum Corp. refinery in Detroit, Tuesday, April 21, 2020. The world is awash in oil, there's little demand for it and we're running out of places to put it. That in a nutshell explains this week's strange and unprecedented action in the market for crude oil futures contracts, where traders essentially offered to pay someone else to deal with the oil they were due to have delivered next month.(AP Photo/Paul Sancya) (Paul Sancya/AP)
A barrel of oil Tuesday cost less than a 12-pack of beer, a cheap bottle of wine, a dozen doughnuts, or a 12-ounce bag of your favorite coffee.
U.S. benchmark crude was trading as low as $6.50 a barrel, The Associated Press reported, more than 80% lower than the start of the year. Americans are now looking to cash in.
“How to buy crude oil stock” and “How to invest in oil” were the most commonly asked questions on Google over the previous 24-hour period Wednesday morning, coming in just above the query, “When will I get my stimulus check?”
Before you invest your $1,200 payment in these troubled times, here are five things to know about what’s happening in the oil industry and why experts say you should probably avoid oil stocks right now.
President Donald Trump said Tuesday he had directed his administration to find money to support the U.S. oil industry, but offered no specific actions his administration might take.
“We will never let the great U.S. Oil & Gas Industry down,” Trump tweeted. “I have instructed the Secretary of Energy and Secretary of the Treasury to formulate a plan which will make funds available so that these very important companies and jobs will be secured long into the future!”
Monday night, Trump called for the purchase of 75 million barrels of crude oil to fill the federal oil stockpile, the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
Industry experts and lobbying groups said the government should not try to interfere in the global market. The American Petroleum Institute, the largest oil and gas lobby, has said it’s not seeking a bailout and opposes government intervention in oil markets.
MarketWatch, a popular website providing financial information, business news, analysis, and stock market data, said there’s too much volatility to risk buying oil stock right now.
[More Business] Lehigh Valley business casualties of coronavirus pandemic: Restaurants, stores and more that we’ve lost »
Analysts say the COVID-19 pandemic, which has significantly reduced travel, will keep the market in flux until stay-at-home orders are lifted and more people return to driving and flying. That will begin to reverse the drop in demand and bring stabilization to energy prices.
MarketWatch quoted Dan Wantrobski , a technical analyst at Janney Montgomery Scott, saying that investors should watch out for “explosive moves” among energy stocks, but there’s just no clear picture on which direction the sector might move.
Experts at The Motley Fool, a private financial and investing advice company, say it could take years for the oil and gas industry to recover from this historic collapse.
“Is it time to buy oil stocks? My answer is, in most cases, no,” wrote author Jason Hall, calling the oil and gas industry a “minefield for individual investors” at present.
