Summary ONGC is the country’s largest oil exploration and production company. ONGC is quoting at a lower valuation compared to other PSU oil majors in terms of price to earnings and price to book ratios.
ONGC is the country’s largest oil exploration and production (E&P) company.
Analysing public sector upstream oil companies like ONGC is a tough task. Public sector and private sector companies go down with fall in international crude oil prices, as it reduces their realisations. While private sector companies go up when crude oil prices spurts, public sector companies fall due to the fear of government forcing subsidy on them.
As visible from the Relative Performance Chart, ONGC fell when the Brent variety of crude oil hit $71.75 during the first week of January. Its share price fall continues due to the fall in crude oil prices, which is now at $59.25. One of the few Maharatna companies, ONGC is trading at a decade low owing to these problems.
Extremely low valuation is the main reason, why analysts are getting bullish on this counter now. ONGC is quoting at a lower valuation compared to other PSU oil majors in terms of price to earnings (PE) and price to book (PB) ratio (see chart). This decade low valuation is the result of market’s fears about ongoing privatisation of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL). The market is scared that the government might force ONGC to buy its stake in BPCL, just like it did with the HPCL stake in January 2018. However, since the government has already ruled out the chancees of ONGC being forced to buy out BPCL, this is unlikely.
Stability in production is the second factor. ONGC is the country’s largest oil exploration and production (E&P) company and accounts for around 90% of India’s proven oil and gas reserves. Though there was some production fall in the first half of 2019, production figures are getting stable now and analysts are hopeful that the domestic production growth will come back in 2021. No major threat is expected on the realisation front because ONGC’s realisation of $60.3 per barrel during the last quarter is close to the prevailing international price.
ONGC Videsh, its wholly-owned subsidiary, continues to do well and its production contribution to the group has reached a new high of 23% in 2018-19. ONGC also holds majority stakes in two domestic oil refining and marketing companies–HPCL and MRPL. Its stake in HPCL and MRPC are placed at 51.11% and 71.63% respectively.
The decade low valuations and improving prospects are its main attraction now. Though price pressure will continue in the short term due to piecemeal divestment by government using the CPSE ETF route, this is a good opportunity for long term investors.
ONGC compared with ET Oil & Gas and Sensex. Stock price and index values normalised to a base of 100. Source: ETIG and Bloomberg.
We pick up the stock that has shown maximum increase in “consensus analyst rating” during the last one month. Consensus rating is arrived at by averaging all analyst recommendations after attributing weights to each of them (ie 5 for strong buy, 4 for buy, 3 for hold, 2 for sell and 1 for strong sell) and any improvement in consensus analyst rating indicates that the analysts are getting more bullish on the stock. To make sure that we pick only companies with decent analyst coverage, this search will be restricted to stocks with at least 10 analysts covering it. You can see similar consensus analyst rating changes during the last one week in ETW 50 table.
