As a result, investment firms are sitting on roughly $300 billion of equity ready for deployment, said Douglas M. Weill, a founder of Hodes Weill & Associates, a global real estate capital advisory firm in New York. “It’s a staggering amount of dry powder,” he said.
Every commercial property owner has its specific problems, but mom-and-pop landlords that own a handful of apartment buildings, retail centers or other assets are in a much more compromised position, said Sanford D. Sigal, president and chief executive of NewMark Merrill, a shopping center owner and manager in Woodland Hills, Calif.
“Very few small owners are equipped for this type of market,” said Mr. Sigal, who expected to collect about 57 percent of his May rent from tenants across some 70 properties in California, Colorado and Illinois. “I’ve seen more deals in the past week that were worth looking at than I did in the entire prior year.”
Puerto Rico’s economy will shrink this year, an oversight board says.
The federal board overseeing Puerto Rico’s finances said the island’s economy would contract sharply this year because of the global pandemic, then sputter along with little growth for the next five years.
As a result, Puerto Rican government is unlikely to have enough cash to resume paying its bondholders anytime soon, even at reduced levels. Puerto Rico stopped paying most of them in 2016,
The federal oversight board has been negotiating debt reduction plans for the island’s government in court proceedings similar to bankruptcy. Those proceedings began in May, 2017, but have since been disrupted by a devastating hurricane, several earthquakes and now the global pandemic.
The debt reduction plans had not yet been completed as of March, when global markets plunged, prompting the oversight board to ask the federal judge overseeing Puerto Rico’s case, Laura Taylor Swain, to suspend the talks.
The circumstances warranted a “one-year pause” in further budget cuts for Puerto Rico, the oversight board said in a statement issued Tuesday evening. But it also said there would be no pause in reforming Puerto Rico’s government, which delivers services that many residents of the island consider inferior without accounting clearly for the cost.
Also on Tuesday, a company that insures some of Puerto Rico’s bonds, Ambac Assurance, sued the oversight board in the United States District Court in San Juan, saying its efforts to reduce Puerto Rico’s debt were unconstitutional. The Constitution requires uniformity in bankruptcy laws, Ambac said, but Puerto Rico’s case was a one-off.
The board is scheduled to vote on its fiscal plan for the coming year in a public meeting on Wednesday.
Companies use pay cuts as a way to avoid layoffs.
Martin A. Kits van Heyningen, chief executive of KVH Industries, decided to cut salaries rather than lay off workers. “It was one of the hardest things I’ve done,” he said.Credit...Cody O'Loughlin for The New York Times
Even as American employers let tens of millions of workers go, some companies are choosing a different path. By instituting across-the-board salary reductions, especially at senior levels, they have avoided layoffs.
The ranks of those forgoing job cuts and furloughs include major employers like HCA Healthcare, the hospital chain, and Aon, a London-based global professional services firm with a regional headquarters in Chicago.
Others that managed to avoid layoffs include smaller companies like KVH, a maker of mobile connectivity and navigation systems that employs 600 globally and is based in Middletown, R.I.
“We’d never done a pay cut before,” said Martin Kits van Heyningen, who started KVH in his parents’ basement more than three decades ago.
The trend is a reversal of traditional management theory, which held that salaries were sacred and it was better to cut positions and dismiss a limited number of workers than to lower pay for everyone during downturns.
There is often a genuine desire to protect employees, but long-term financial interests are a major consideration as well, said Donald Delves, a compensation expert with Willis Towers Watson. “Companies learned the hard way that once you lay off a bunch of people, it’s expensive and time-consuming to hire them back,” he said.
Amazon has a missed opportunity.
There’s recently been a surge of people who are picking up their online orders in-person at Walmart, Target, Home Depot and other stores big and small. With the best shopping ideas coming from big box retailers, Amazon is missing out, writes the On Tech columnist Shira Ovide.
I’ve been impressed by how old-school companies, from Best Buy to my local cheese shop, have quickly adapted to offering low-contact pickups like this. Some of this activity is a temporary coronavirus-related spike, but I bet some of these habits will stick.
Three years ago, Amazon agreed to pay $14 billion to buy the Whole Foods supermarket chain . This was the moment when Amazon acknowledged the importance of physical stores, and I couldn’t wait to see how the company reimagined in-person shopping experiences that had not changed much in my lifetime. And then, not much happened.
Yes, Whole Foods stores are offering home deliveries now. But it’s other retailers that are rethinking how their physical stores can work hand-in-hand with online shopping.
How Powell’s Books is managing through the crisis.
Powell’s Books, an enormous independent bookstore in Portland, Ore., was initially laid low by the pandemic. In the days after it decided to close its stores and suspend operations in mid-March, the company laid off some 450 of its roughly 500 employees.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
Since then, the company’s chief executive, Emily Powell, has been trying to hire back employees where she can, all while trying to reimagine how bookstores work in the age of social distancing.
Ms. Powell discussed Powell’s, the book business and Amazon on a live Corner Office call with reporter David Gelles on Tuesday afternoon. It was part of a series of live Corner Office calls happening each Tuesday, and a replay is available now .
A condensed and edited version of their conversation will be available in the coming days, and next week David will chat with Joey Bergstein, chief executive of Seventh Generation, about the great toilet paper shortage, social responsibility during the crisis and more.
China’s young workers struggle to find jobs, challenging Beijing.
Applicants reading recruitment information last month at a job fair in Wuhan, China, the city where the coronavirus outbreak originated.Credit...Getty Images
Chinese leaders meeting since last week in Beijing have stressed their efforts to create jobs and get the country back to work. But surveys and interviews show many young workers are entering into the work force in the worst market in decades .
“When it was April and I still couldn’t start my job, I started to feel worried,” said Huang Bing, 24, who graduated last year from a prestigious Chinese drama school. Her new job, set to begin this past January, ended before it began.
“I began worrying that I may not be able to work this year at all,” Ms. Huang said. “I can’t just keep waiting.”
Online, young people despair over finding a good job, with many settling for something that pays less. Many others are reluctant to relent. “The graduates do not fully understand the market,” said Martin Ma, a human resources officer for a Chinese software company. “Their expectations are quite high.”
For the world, global growth will be hard to rekindle until China gets fully back to work. But the damage to the Communist Party could be long-lasting. It derives its political power from the promise of delivering a better life for the Chinese people, a promise that has become increasingly difficult to fulfill.
The floor of the New York Stock Exchange reopens.
The stock trading floor of the New York Stock Exchange reopened on Tuesday, though at a reduced head count to allow space for social distancing measures to remain in force. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo rang the opening bell at 9:30 a.m. at the start of trading.
Floor brokers and trading floor officials will be allowed back, while designated market makers — the specialist traders who buy and sell in order to “make markets” in certain securities — will continue to operate remotely.
Those who are returning must comply with a number of restrictions to regain access to the floor including avoiding public transportation, submitting to temperature checks on entry and wearing a face mask. They will also be expected to maintain a six-foot social distance and avoid physical contact such as shaking hands.
Other markets are also planning to reopen. Cboe Global Markets, owner the Chicago Board Options Exchange, said on Tuesday that it planned to reopen the trading floor on June 8 and resume operation in a modified manner.
The ability to trade electronically muted the market impact of the more than two-month shuttering of the trading floor, one of the most significant disruptions to the floor operations of the exchange since 1914, when it was closed for about four months as World War I began (not when the United States entered the war, as an earlier post said.).
Back then, the exchange floor was the only way to trade shares listed on the exchange. But floor volume fell from around 70 percent of all New York Stock Exchange trading activity in the early 1990s to less than 20 percent by 2006, academic studies found.
But even that likely overstates the impact of the floor. Over the past decade, the New York Stock Exchange’s share of American stock trading has fallen to about 24 percent from 80 percent, with trading in U.S. stocks now shared by 12 public exchanges and many more nonpublic venues.
That means that the share of stock that actually is touched by the New York Stock Exchange’s flesh-and-blood traders is quite small — as little as 1 percent, according to one recent study .
Catch up: Here’s what else is happening.
Latam , the largest airline in Latin America, said on Tuesday it had filed for bankruptcy protection, the latest carrier to fall victim to the pandemic. The company, based in Santiago, Chile, said it had secured $900 million in financing from major shareholders, including the Cueto and Amaro families and Qatar Airlines, and that it would work with creditors to reduce its debt while it continues operating. Avianca, Colombia’s flagship airline and one of the world’s oldest carriers, filed for bankruptcy protection earlier this month.
Lufthansa will receive a bailout worth 9 billion euros, or $9.8 billion, to help the airline survive an “existential emergency” caused by the pandemic and a virtual shutdown of passenger air traffic, the German government said Monday. The agreement , reached after several weeks of negotiations, will give the government part ownership of the airline for the first time since it was privatized in 1997.
Reporting was contributed by Joe Gose, David Gelles, Nelson Schwartz, Alexandra Stevenson, Keith Bradsher, Elizabeth Paton, Jack Ewing, Jason Karaian, Matt Phillips, Noam Scheiber, Jesse Drucker, Jessica Silver-Greenberg, Kevin McKenna, Sarah Kliff, Tim Arango, Shira Ovide, Thomas Fuller, Niraj Chokshi, Mohammed Hadi, Julie Creswell, Neal E. Boudette, David Yaffe-Bellany and Kevin Granville.
