Another timely discussion.  Generally speaking, a market economy should be the mechanism to balance supply and demand for oil and not collusion.  Government assistance provided through an economic stimulus should be tied to developments and guarantees on the regional economy and the climate.  The following comments may help explain the position I take on this issue:
1.	I agree that the global oil market today is competitive.  It is important to point though that the market has become more competitive and contestable with the entry of US fracking and particularly since 2016 and not before.  World oil supply / demand is of course subject to world demand for oil, the health of the world economy, expansion and contraction of oil production capacity, etc.  But a review of production data, 2016 – present, of the key oil producers: OPEC, Russia, and the US shows consistent increase in US production, fluctuation in Russian production, and significant loss of market share by OPEC.  We should also note that increased production was coming not only from the US but also Brazil, countries entering oil production for the first time, etc.  But the US production increases were the biggest of all resulting in persistent oversupply of the market.  This was the period during which OPEC and Russia’s attempt to counter US increased production was made using production cutbacks to maintain a higher Brent oil price.  It resulted in a relatively higher oil price but a loss of market share for OPEC and vastly increased US oil production.
2.	The combination of a major loss in demand mostly as a result of the Corona virus and oversupply of oil is what led to the oil price collapse and the situation we have today of significant oversupply of oil.  The oversupply is estimated at 10 % increasing to 20 % of all oil traded in the world.  An oversupply of this size is a major concern for the world economy and not only an issue of Russian or Saudi Arabian market shares or oil revenues.  Here are few pointers to keep in mind much of which have been discussed in the press.
a.	If the price does not recover through some mechanism, the price can continue to drop.  Last week it was in the $ 20’s.  Several market observers caution that it could drop to as low as $ 10.
b.	Such prices even if they were to hold for a short time would have an extensive impact on:
iii.	The economies of developing countries making entry into the oil business: Kenya, Tanzania, Chad, Guyana, Vietnam, etc.
c.	A low oil price, however, can counteract the effect of the virus on the world economy and subsequent recovery reducing the impact of an economic recession.
d.	A low price is severely impacting the oil majors: delayed and cancelled expansion projects, reducing or eliminating dividends, and the outlook for asset sales, stranded assets, and mergers and acquisitions.  A comeback can be difficult with lower share prices and reduced access to capital.  It is important to point though that the oil majors are in position to survive the present situation without US government assistance but with significant implication to the very identity of the oil majors.
e.	A low price can devastate the fracking industry given high debt situation, an oil price close or below their short run marginal cost, and diminishing access to the capital markets.  The near term outlook thus is for: no new shale wells being drilled, reduced production, bankruptcies, and M&A.  Fracking would still survive but liberated of debt and under new ownership.
f.	The biggest risk thus is for independent and shale US oil and gas producers and the economies of the regions they operate in.
g.	A key concern is the impact of the current events on oil and gas capital projects and the strategic direction IOCs would take in the energy transition and beyond.
3.	All this points to the care that should be exercised as to how the call for reduction in oil production is exercised and by whom.  OPEC is a cartel.  OPEC and OPEC+ countries are probably able given each country’s institutional framework to act or join in setting oil production limits outside the working of a competitive oil market.  In the case of the US, the Texas Railroad Commission can legally act to constrain oil production.  The question is as to how able the commission is to do that in an economically and equitable manner.  A key concern for all members of the oil and gas industry particularly US is antitrust and the prospect for legal action for collusion in setting the price of oil.
