From $82 Million Wedding To Bankruptcy, The Descent Of Lakshmi Mittal’s Brother
But that conclusion would be a mistake.
We have only to look at the price of Brent crude, the widely-used European benchmark, to see that things aren't so bad after all. Prices for Brent futures fell around 5% Monday to approximately $27 a barrel. That's not far off from where the price was last Thursday. In other words, Brent futures traders more or less shrugged when WTI futures hit the skids.
Why the plunge in one futures price but not the other?
Alexander Burgansky, head of oil & gas research at Renaissance Capital, says the matter comes down to the way that WTI futures contracts work and the lack of oil storage capacity available in Cushing Oklahoma.
WTI May-dated futures contracts, which expire Tuesday, require futures buyers to take delivery of the oil in Cushing. But given that there is little if any storage space available in that location the traders are ditching their contracts, Burgansky explains.
"[O]il traders are selling tomorrow's futures to avoid taking a physical delivery," he wrote in a recent report. Instead, traders are now buying June-dated contracts, which recently were fetching approximately $23 a barrel .
None of these gyrations are happening with Brent crude futures. Brent crude can be delivered offshore to a variety of locations, explains Burgansky. If there isn’t much storage in one place then the oil can be delivered elsewhere.
In simple terms, the flexibility of the Brent futures contract means that lack of storage in one place isn't forcing traders to dump futures contracts in the way that it is with WTI futures.
Simon Constable | Author | Broadcaster | Journalist | Commentator | Speaker. Author of The Wall Street Journal's 'In Translation' column. Fellow at the Johns Hopkins
Simon Constable | Author | Broadcaster | Journalist | Commentator | Speaker. Author of The Wall Street Journal's 'In Translation' column. Fellow at the Johns Hopkins Institute for Applied Economics, Global Health and the Study of Business Enterprise. Former staffer for General Motors Treasurer's Office. MBA from Darden Graduate School of Business at The University of Virginia. MA New York University. MA (Hons) University of St. Andrews, Scotland. Co-author of the award-winning book The WSJ Guide to the 50 Economic Indicators that Really Matter. Have written for Middle East Eye, TheStreet.com, The South China Morning Post, Barron's, Dow Jones Newswires, MarketWatch.
