The crude oil monthly chart shows more:
This much longer-term picture shows clearly how the price of oil has plummeted to a lower level than early 2016 and the 2008/2009 era. Notice how it’s been basically down trending since 2014. Is it possible that renewables — and a general distaste for fossil fuels — has had an effect?
The crude oil point-and-figure chart offers a different kind of perspective:
Just to make sure you are aware of the extent of the slide, that’s the cost of a barrel of crude dropping from 76 dollars in 2018 to just 21 dollars in 2020. Commodity prices are well-known for volatility but I don’t think I’ve ever seen the oil market move quite like this.
The Energy Select SPDR exchange traded fund daily price chart:
Energy Select SPDR ETF daily price chart, 3 21 20.
This is the major ETF that contains the major oil stocks including Exxon Mobil, Chevron and Conoco. The price chart has the same kind of look as that of the underlying commodity. As global oil becomes cheaper and cheaper, the price at the pump gets lower and lower — might be a few weeks lag time but it’s inevitable.
The Energy Select SPDR monthly chart has this look:
Energy Select SPDR ETF monthly price chart, 3 21 20.
Similar to the oil price chart, this exchange traded fund with the big oil company stocks in it has fallen below the 2008/2009 lows. You can see how the oil stocks generally have been in decline since 2014. This red bar indicating selling in the current month is the biggest bar on the chart and March is not even over yet.
In the past much lower oil prices like this and much lower interest rates have been ingredients for powerful bull markets — but, first, a bottom for both must be found. It’s not at all clear we’re there yet.
I do not hold positions in these investments. No recommendations are made one way or the other.  If you're an investor, you'd want to look much deeper into each of these situations. You can lose money trading or investing in stocks and other instruments. Always do your own independent research, due diligence and seek professional advice from a licensed investment advisor.
