Deloitte: COVID-19 Fallout Demands That U.S. Shale Completely Transform Its Operations
Most of these companies have already cut drilling and capital budgets to the bone, as evidenced by the Enverus Daily Rig Count sliding below the 300 level for the first time this week (it hit 294 on Tuesday). With tens of thousands of layoffs and cost-cutting measures already enacted, the sector doesn’t have a lot more running room ahead.
Many industry observers have anticipated a flood of bankruptcies would hit the upstream sector of the business due to the COVID-19 impacts, but that has not materialized thus far. In its Oil Patch Bankruptcy Monitor report , Haynes and Boone catalogs 18 bankruptcy filings that have taken place among U.S. E&P firms through the first five months of 2020. But, as E&P revenues have crashed along with crude and natural gas prices, the sector’s total debt has continued to rise to a current record total of $132 billion.
While there is some reason for optimism that commodity prices will recover as the year progresses, the cumulative weight of all of this debt combined with inadequate cash flows likely means that many more bankruptcy filings from the sector are inevitable. Whether that will become a flood like the industry witnessed during 2015-16 remains to be seen.
Reuters reported earlier in the week that Chesapeake Energy appears is engaged with final negotiations with its major creditors on a plan and is likely to formally make a filing by the end of this week. It’s a safe bet that other E&Ps have embarked on similar planning efforts.
Should the anticipated bankruptcy flood come about, there is little question that Texas, home most of the Permian Basin, along with the Barnett and Eagle Ford Shale regions, will be hard hit. Haynes and Boone finds that over $78 billion of the E&P sector’s $132 billion in total debt lies with companies headquartered in the Lone Star State.
What this all means for E&P activity for the remainder of 2020 is obvious: Do not expect to see a big jump in the number of active rigs or frac spreads anytime soon. While we could and likely will see some some modest increases in both assuming prices do improve over the second half of the year, the extreme tightness of both cash and access to capital will severely limit any overall industry recovery.
The U.S. Energy Information Administration reports this week that overall U.S. oil production shrank by 2 million barrels per day from March through May. All of this latest data indicates that much larger declines will come before any recovery can begin in earnest.
David Blackmon is an independent energy analyst/consultant based in Mansfield, TX. David has enjoyed a 39-year career in the oil and gas industry, the last 23 years of
David Blackmon is an independent energy analyst/consultant based in Mansfield, TX. David has enjoyed a 39-year career in the oil and gas industry, the last 23 years of which were spent in the public policy arena, managing regulatory and legislative issues for various companies, including Burlington Resources, Shell, El Paso Corporation, FTI Consulting and LINN Energy. During this time, David has led numerous industry-wide efforts to address a variety of issues at the local, state and federal level, and from April 2010 through June 2012, he served as the Texas State Lead for America’s Natural Gas Alliance. In addition to client-related work, David also maintains a growing media communications practice. He is currently Associate Editor for Shale Magazine (www.shalemag.com), a contributor on energy-related matters at Forbes.com, and a feature writer for World Oil Magazine. He is the resident energy expert on the "In The Oil Patch" radio program, and executes frequent public speaking engagements around the state of Texas and at conferences. The text or links to all of David’s writings and podcasts can be found at www.dbdailyupdate.com. He attended Texas A&I University and The University of Texas, earning B.A. in accounting in 1979.
