Flames emerge from flare stacks at Nahr Bin Umar oil field, as a worker wears a protective mask, following an outbreak of coronavirus, north of Basra, Iraq March 15, 2020. REUTERS/Essam Al-Sudani
of clean energy deployment and climate action.
implications for the energy sector and the environment:
emissions to drop this year, the first time since the financial crisis of 2009,
ranging from 0.3% to 1.2%. Some see this as a silver lining of the crisis —and the NASA satellite images of pollution reduction in China are truly remarkable, following an
what a future powered by clean energy could look like.
lesson to take from this drop in emissions. That it requires a global pandemic
scale of the climate challenge and the complexity of solving it.
the climate crisis. But this line of thinking is counterproductive at best. The
make the scientific advances necessary to solve crises like this one.
this year may buy a little extra time to act on climate change. But if the
pollution will return to the way they looked before, just as they are already starting to do in China .”
COVID-19’s effects on the global energy system is a story of energy consumption,
the world begins to recover.
natural gas (LNG), clean energy technology, and critical materials supply
of transformation prior to the outbreak of the coronavirus. Natural gas was
and Latin America. The critical minerals underpinning those technologies were,
sustainability throughout their development and trade.
of those energy supply chains and more, at a moment when the global energy
transition was beginning to build steam. Low oil and gas prices will place
pressure on the economics of renewable energy sources and, without policy
fuels. Furthermore, the impact of low oil prices on US shale producers might, at least temporarily , knock US LNG out of the game.
Economic shutdowns wrought by the virus have revealed the weight that China, South Korea, and others have in supply chains across global
industry— renewable energy sources included. Companies and policymakers
would do well to take note, particularly as the ambitions for low-emission and
renewable energy technologies continue to grow.
geopolitics of crisis, whether that be Chinese efforts to lead the global response to the pandemic, the Trump administration’s
delayed and insular approach to the first global crisis of the decade, or the
recovers. The effects of these events are uncertain and have a long arc, but
competitiveness of alternative energy sources. However, it is clear at the
likely slow the energy transition for a number of reasons, even though it also
has made the need for clean and reliable power even more immediate.
the culmination of years of erosion in the transatlantic relationship, in which
adversaries like Russian President Vladimir Putin. Autocrats have used the
learned quickly that the notion of energy independence is illusive at best,
of the energy system into sharp relief, and decisionmakers will have to
as the coronavirus pandemic slows travel and overall economic productivity. One analysis shows that China’s response to the
virus temporarily wiped out around a quarter of the country’s CO2 emissions.
transportation across several major US cities.
environmental improvements are likely to be short-lived. COVID-19 has disrupted
technologies. Tesla has closed its factories in California and New York. And
Siemens Gamesa, the world’s second largest wind turbine manufacturer, has
solar farms up and running, due to travel bans and maintenance delays.
reduced ridership, undermining a sustainable mode of transit in many cities. A
slow consumer uptake of electric vehicles as well as newer, more efficient
counter economic damages from COVID-19.
energy tax credits in a larger stimulus bill. In an
effort to buoy employment and reduce energy bills, advocates and trade groups
have proposed boosting federal funding for sustainable infrastructure, energy
measures will prove challenging for governments to adopt. European Union
leaders are already under pressure to abandon the EU Green Deal. The focus on
carbon emissions and diversify their businesses into renewables, electric
balance sheet strain from low oil prices. One possible twist is that oil prices
might remain volatile for several months, which could prompt energy majors to
curbing global emissions is hazy, boosting the likelihood of increased climate
challenges in future, as the world grapples with immediate priorities.
dialogue turned increasingly to climate policy, the world now finds itself confronting
a crisis that threatens to cause harm now rather than in the long term. How countries
intrusion into every day freedoms is often a ratchet. New powers are rarely
would extend financial support to the domestic oil industry, the pandemic opens
reduction in the role of free trade and competitive markets. Such a long-term
lower for longer and slow decarbonization efforts. But it does not have to be
effective is support of fundamental, innovative research. Channeling the energy
of state intervention, under the cover of economic support to combat the coronavirus,
deployment. Perhaps we will harness the storm to ride to a new, more exciting
destination rather than just battening down the hatches, hoping to survive and
energy advisor, The Delegation of the European Union to the United States; senior fellow, Global Energy Center,
coronavirus health crisis that is affecting the economy and daily life. The
and the erosion of global energy demand. With a supply surplus in global energy
markets and a significant demand shock, the current state of global affairs has
pressure to decarbonize the energy system.
consequence of a potential economic recession, and far less political will.
of the energy transition for years to come.
environment created by central banks, there is a golden opportunity for
industries work to optimize supply chains disrupted by COVID-19. The International
energy technologies such as solar, wind, hydrogen, batteries, and carbon
capture (CCUS) at the center of stimulus plans. There is also room for greening
proposed stimulus bills by the House and Senate. The final outcome could
potentially include provisions benefiting renewable energy deployment.
to be seen how governments manage to make policy during the current crisis.
E.W. Stetson, senior fellow, Global Energy Center, Atlantic Council and Roger Sorkin, executive director
a sharp reduction in air pollution, likely as a result of the social upheaval
caused by the spread of COVID-19.
public and private sectors to accelerate telecommuting plans, reduce
international travel, and implement general policies to reduce carbon emissions,
the exponential increase in emissions over the past decades.
“Behavioral scientists might argue that a shock is required for rapid,
“This may be wishful thinking, but one can only hope that this moment
significantly limits reliance on automobiles for getting to and from work.
and other cleaner options for personal and commercial transportation. Will the
clearer skies above this global disaster zone finally resonate with the industry,
with consumers, with the citizens of the world?
to the energy transition since the concept arose. With coronavirus, the energy
transition and even climate change are not priorities. From now, and for a while
prices, coupled with the resulting low revenues for oil companies, should lead
to a serious contraction of oil supply. In short, major oil companies that had
in 2020 and perhaps beyond. Years from now, a resulting shortage of oil could
director, KKR Global Institute and KKR Infrastructure; senior fellow, Global Energy Center, Atlantic Council
competition for customers is the norm. Indeed, oil demand destruction is a
central goal of most climate change policies.
demand is in freefall due to coronavirus, OPEC producers have also
unintentionally provided a sneak peek into the oil market of the future:
extremely low oil prices backed by massive, low-cost, and quickly deployable
reserves concentrated in the Middle East. This should be taken as a warning for
cleaner transportation alternatives such as electric vehicles, biofuels, and
hydrogen. Successful climate policies may over time, perversely, create fiercer
price competition with ultra-cheap oil. Technology and policy need to
down costs of clean energy technologies, coronavirus has vividly exposed the
manufacturing. As China’s manufacturing engine shut down from coronavirus,
essential links in clean energy supply chains were severed. From solar power
developers left scrambling to secure panels for installation, to electric
vehicle manufacturers clambering for lithium hydroxide necessary for batteries,
supply chain risk reverberated across the clean energy landscape. Fortunately,
supply chains are already starting to recover. However, our long-term national security
the essential building blocks of clean tech. Policy-makers and the private
got his wish to crater prices. However, cutting production by 20 percent to
Kingdom. COVID-19 is fundamentally changing global economies, and it is mostly
likely to provoke a steep recession, in spite of government efforts throughout
the world, as well as the present decline in energy prices. Demand for oil
will not return quickly, even if US shale producers disappear. Russia is
would take to bring prices up.
mid-$20s for the foreseeable future, Saudi Arabia will be forced to dip into its
cash reserves to the tune of $120 to $150 billion per year. Although this
may not initially cause harm to Saudi Arabia, this may prove more of a hardship
than Saudi Arabia had anticipated, and it could limit the Kingdom’s ambitions
dependent on a working global economic system, especially air and sea
transportation as well as international trade and tourism. Iceland is not alone
in relying on global trade and supply chains, which is why the whole world is
geopolitical effects of the COVID-19 crisis, and there will likely be more. All
be meaningless in situations such as we have been witnessing. Unilateral travel
place without any previous notice or discussions with neighbors or allies. The
restoration of trust once this moment has passed.
demonstrates, innovation will thrive at this time of crisis, and this time may
Energy Policy and Climate Program, Johns Hopkins University; senior fellow, Global Energy Center,
requires initiative, as well as investment of human and financial resources. However,
the coronavirus pandemic is consuming global leadership and execution capacity,
and the economic aftermath will strain and possibly break countries,
utilities are rightly shifting resources to crisis response, so renewables and
other clean energy planning and investment will face delays.
resilience of supply will gain in priority, so distributed energy resources,
to tell what influences will dominate in any given timeframe, but when the
transition away from carbon emitting fuel sources (coal, petroleum, and natural
gas) to non-carbon emitting technologies including solar, wind, tidal,
geothermal, and in a few instances new nuclear power. In this evolving scenario
transition plan. However, immediately before the coronavirus crisis, a number
plants and as a heating fuel. In parallel, many parties concerned with climate
atmospheric internal combustion engine produced carbon emissions.
crude oil and gas prices in two decades. The economic downturn will no doubt
even off the immediate political agenda. For example, in the United States, low
global crude oil will mean lower prices at the gasoline pump, and lower natural
gas prices will mean lower electricity bills for consumers. These lower prices
considerations around the world over the next few years, as recovery and growth
are prioritized after many months of severely curtailed real economic activity.
Russian budget and capacity for autarky.
“Moscow is unlikely to blink.
Putin has been insulating the Russian economy for years, from the energy
industrial sector to food production, and perceives a profound geo-strategic
opportunity in the wider crisis. In an epic worldview where societies
compete around who can best self-insulate and endure hardship, the strategy is
to sow discord among adversaries, and then exploit catastrophic moments to test
transition, the United States divided and over-leveraged, and global
cooperation severely eroded, now is such a moment. Saudi shock-and-awe will not
bring Russia back to the negotiating table, no matter how desperately Riyadh or
Washington wants that to happen.
impact of COVID-19 and also very low oil prices will persist, forcing producers
and supply chains to adapt. Saudi Vision 2030 and other expensive transition
Iran will face profound political pressure. US shale production will collapse
in the near term, and already-low natural gas prices will suffer too. On its
depend on using the crisis to learn valuable lessons. Massive economic stimulus
for managing electricity security with high shares of variable renewable power.
the problem the Kingdom faced was that, by adopting such a policy, it risked
using up its financial reserves to cushion the initial blow, before increased
output could compensate for reduced prices.
tide it through any immediate challenge to this policy. But in the long run, a
its financial reserves, possibly at some point next year, then it will either
facing the Kingdom is this: What is the point of attempting to control the oil
coronavirus-induced economic collapse, which will curtail the market for oil,
the Saudi policy change is particularly bad because of COVID-19. While
the impact of the virus on the oil market, it has to be acknowledged that most
planners in the rest of the world also failed to assess its economic impact.
perhaps more pertinent now is that, while COVID 19’s impact on the oil market
hit: cancellation of the Hajj. This is due to start at the end of July, with
anticipated timing from July 28 to August 2.
dare hold it in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak? If they go ahead, what
kind of medical facilities will they have on standby? The Tokyo Olympic Games,
which were due to be held at the same time, from July 24 to August 9, and which
were expected to draw around 600,000 overseas visitors will be postponed. So
it’s hard to see the Saudis managing to hold a full-scale Hajj, which normally
draws around two million pilgrims a year.
relationship with Russia and China, which can have two opposing effects. For
some, this will lead to more cozying up to both countries. Russia and China have
already found cracks (and an opportunity) in Italy, which will certainly
Italy’s desperate call for help, with China sending medical equipment and
Russia sending military assistance. Supporting Italy, a founding member of NATO,
is both a strategic and a political move for Russia and China, which will
impact Russian and Chinese energy supplies and infrastructures in the future.
dependency even more, and this could increase demand for US LNG. This is the
time for the United States not to withdraw from Europe; instead, the United States
must stay the course for infrastructure investments, especially in Eastern
Europe, even in these economically trying times. Withdrawal should not be an
States to cement itself as a long-term player in European energy security.
“The European green transition will probably slow down, as
surviving the coming recession at any cost will take front seat. This in
return will most probably make Europeans rethink the energy mix. Natural gas might
come out as the winner. However, the lack of solidarity among European
continue to drive a common climate policy, as the Commission has been doing in
“Energy cooperation has been a solid pillar of the transatlantic cooperation in the toughest of times. Therefore, the importance of maintaining this cannot be over-stated.”
Coronavirus and the oil market: The effects thus far and what to expect next
The week of February 21 will be one the oil market won’t soon forget—one which exposed exactly how sensitive the prices are to the demand side of the market. Yet, while the possibility of a major supply correction remains in the cards, a longer-term correction to the oil price collapse of the past week will require a restoration of market confidence in economic growth and the future oil demand picture.
