The red flags have come in the form of prominent forecasts about collapsing corporate earnings, or a contraction in G.D.P. that would have been unthinkable before the outbreak. (Goldman Sachs expects the economy to shrink at an annualized pace of 34 percent in the second quarter.)
This week, it came from the oil markets, as the price of one oil benchmark dipped below zero for the first time, meaning some holders were ready to pay people to take a barrel off their hands.
“Every so often, reality bites,” said Steve Sosnick, chief strategist at Interactive Brokers in Greenwich, Conn. “You could not ignore what was going on in the oil markets.”
The unnerving inversion in oil prices reflected an economy in free-fall, disappearing demand for petroleum, and the fact that there are few places left to store all the crude still being pumped.
On Tuesday the sell-off in oil continued, with the most closely watched price for oil in the United States, for a futures contract stipulating delivery of West Texas Intermediate crude in June, plunging to $11.69 a barrel, well away from negative territory but still down by nearly half. Brent crude, the global benchmark, also cratered.
Shares of some oil producers, however, rose on Tuesday after President Trump said on Twitter that he was asking administration officials to “formulate a plan that will make funds available” to help the industry.
Recipients of small-business loans are pressured to return the money.
Shake Shack and Harvard University have been under fire this week for taking millions of dollars of stimulus money that was meant to help small businesses cope with the coronavirus pandemic. With Congress set to replenish the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program this week, the White House is planning to update its guidance to ensure that rich organizations do not take money that they do not need.
“Harvard’s going to pay back the money,” President Trump said at a news conference on Tuesday.
Harvard, which has a $40 billion endowment, received $8 million in loan money. Shake Shack said this week that it would return its $10 million loan after a public uproar.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said it appeared that there was some ambiguity in the rules surrounding the loan program that made big companies think they were allowed to apply for the loans.
“The intent of this was for businesses that needed the money,” Mr. Mnuchin said. “The intent of this money was not for big public companies that have access to capital.”
Mr. Mnuchin said that the Treasury Department would release new guidance explaining the certification requirements for the loans and that companies that did not meet those requirements would have the opportunity to return the money. Those that fail to do so will face “severe consequences,” Mr. Mnuchin said without elaborating on what the penalties would entail.
General Motors shuts down Maven, its car-sharing service.
General Motors said on Tuesday that it was shutting down its four-year-old car-sharing service, Maven, the latest such venture to close its doors.
Maven, which allows customers to rent cars by the hour, has struggled to build a substantial following. It was forced to suspend services in March because of the coronavirus outbreak.
“We’ve gained extremely valuable insights from operating our own car-sharing business,” Pamela Fletcher, G.M.’s vice president for global innovation, said in a statement. “Our learnings and developments from Maven will go on to benefit and accelerate the growth of other areas of G.M. business.”
G.M. has used Maven to test several types of businesses. For a time, it tried parking fleets of cars at apartment buildings and making them available to residents for small fees. It also tried providing cars to drivers working for delivery services such as GrubHub.
Automakers had hoped car-sharing would evolve into a new line of business that provided transportation as a service, attracting an increasing number of younger consumers who prefer not to own cars themselves. The business was intended to compete with ride-hailing companies like Uber and Lyft, and more established car-sharing services such as ZipCar.
But efforts by auto manufacturers have failed to take off. BMW and Daimler both introduced their own car-sharing companies in the United States, then combined them, before closing the operations down last year. Ford operated a ride sharing service aimed at San Francisco area commuters but also gave up on the venture.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
An oil market meltdown like we’ve never seen is getting worse.
A bust in the oil market worsened on Tuesday as traders were gripped by fear that crude output remains far too high and storage is quickly running out.
On Monday, the futures contract for West Texas Intermediate crude to be delivered in May, fell into negative territory — a bizarre move that has never before happened. In other words, some traders were willing to pay buyers to take oil off their hands.
But other benchmarks of the price of crude had remained much higher (closer to $20 per barrel), suggesting that the negative price was partly a result of how oil is traded, with different prices set for crude that will be delivered at different points in time.
On Tuesday, the rest of the oil market also crashed. The West Texas Intermediate contract for June delivery fell 43 percent to $11.69 a barrel, and Brent crude, the international benchmark, was down about 21 percent.
Demand for oil is disappearing, and despite a deal by Saudi Arabia, Russia and other nations to cut production, the world is running out of places to put all the oil being pumped out — about 100 million barrels a day. At the start of the year, oil sold for more than $60 a barrel .
Refineries are unwilling to turn oil into gasoline, diesel and other products because so few people are commuting or taking airplane flights, and international trade has slowed sharply. Oil is already being stored on barges and in any nook and cranny companies can find. One of the better parts of the oil business these days is owning storage tankers.
“I’m just living a nightmare,” said Ben Sheppard, president of the Permian Basin Petroleum Association, which represents shale oil companies in the area of Texas and New Mexico that became the world’s largest oil field last year.
The sell-off in oil sharpened after the Texas Railroad Commission declined on Tuesday to force oil producers in the state to cut production. While one commissioner wanted to cut production by 20 percent, the other two members of the commission said they needed more legal advice before acting. The commission used to regularly manage oil production but hasn’t done so since the early 1970s.
Caught between investors and short-handed borrowers, mortgage firms get a reprieve.
A federal housing regulator announced a plan on Tuesday to provide financial relief to dozens of mortgage servicing firms worried about paying investors who own bonds backed by mortgages that are in forbearance.
The Federal Housing Finance Agency said the firms had to make just four months of cash payouts to bond investors in mortgages that homeowners have stopped paying. After that, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac — the government mortgage firms regulated by the agency — will assume that obligation, for up to eight more months, if necessary.
The industry has feared it could be on the hook for a full year of payments to bond investors, because the federal government’s $2 trillion economic relief package permits homeowners who lose their jobs during the coronavirus crisis to avoid making mortgage payments for 12 months.
The new plan broadens an arrangement already in place for mortgages guaranteed against default by Freddie Mac. But it could create a new round of problems for Fannie and Freddie if tens of millions of people do not pay their mortgages for many months.
The death of the department store: ‘Very few are likely to survive.’
American department stores , once all-powerful shopping meccas that anchored malls and Main Streets across the country, have been dealt blow after blow in the past decade. J.C. Penney and Sears were upended by hedge funds. Macy’s has been closing stores and cutting corporate staff. Barneys New York filed for bankruptcy last year.
But nothing compares to the shock the weakened industry has taken from the coronavirus pandemic. The sales of clothing and accessories fell by more than half in March, a trend that is expected to only get worse in April. The entire executive team at Lord & Taylor was let go this month. Nordstrom has canceled orders and put off paying its vendors. The Neiman Marcus Group, the most glittering of the American department store chains, is expected to declare bankruptcy in the coming days, the first major retailer felled during the coronavirus crisis.
It is not likely to be the last.
“The department stores, which have been failing slowly for a very long time, really don’t get over this,” said Mark A. Cohen, the director of retail studies at Columbia University’s Business School.
Here’s the latest earnings reports from big companies.
Snap, the maker of Snapchat, on Tuesday reported quarterly revenue of $462 million, up 44 percent from the same quarter last year. Its losses were $306 million. Snap relies on advertising for revenue, and some analysts expected that the company would be hurt by weakening ad demand. Because of economic volatility caused by the pandemic, Snap said it would not provide guidance for its second quarter.
Coca-Cola said on Tuesday that its global volume had fallen 25 percent this month, largely from a loss of demand at businesses.
IBM on Monday reported slightly lower revenue for the quarter compared with a year ago, in one of the first detailed looks at the pandemic’s impact on the tech sector.
Darden Restaurants said on Monday that sales at its restaurants, which include Olive Garden and LongHorn Steakhouse, are down nearly 45 percent compared with last year. Darden said it would try to raise money through a $400 million public offering of its stock.
Huawei’s sales growth slowed sharply in the first quarter, the company said on Tuesday , citing “tough challenges” facing it and its suppliers as they try to maintain production amid the pandemic. The Chinese smartphone and telecom equipment maker said that revenue in the first three months of 2020 increased by 1.4 percent compared with the same period last year, a decrease from the 19.1 percent annual growth it reported for 2019.
Catch up: Here’s what else is happening.
Netflix reported first-quarter earnings on Tuesday that showed a surge in demand for the service with stay-at-home orders in place around the world. The company said 15.7 million new customers signed up in the first three months of the year. Before the pandemic, Netflix expected about seven million.
Lyft said Tuesday that it was withdrawing its financial guidance for 2020. The ride-hailing company had said it expected revenue of $4.5 billion to $4.6 billion this year, but demand has plummeted since early March.
United Airlines plans to issue more than 39 million shares, the sale of which “will be used for general corporate purposes,” the company said in a statement on Tuesday. The announcement comes a day after the airline announced that it lost $2.1 billion in the first quarter.
The coronavirus outbreak caused the economy of Hubei Province, where it first emerged, to shrink by nearly 40 percent in the first three months of 2020 compared with a year ago, the local statistics bureau said on Tuesday — a grim forewarning of the economic toll that the pandemic is likely to exact on other hard-hit places around the world.
Virgin Australia announced on Tuesday that it had entered voluntary administration after the Australian government refused a bailout for the company of 1.4 billion Australian dollars. The airline, which is among the largest domestic and international carriers in Australia, said it hoped to recapitalize the business to emerge in a stronger position after the coronavirus crisis, but in the meantime would continue to operate scheduled flights transporting essential workers, moving freight and returning Australians home.
Reporting was contributed by Sapna Maheshwari, Vanessa Friedman, Alan Rappeport, Kate Conger, Raymond Zhong, Reed Abelson, Rachel Abrams, Matthew Goldstein, Robert Gebeloff, Jessica Silver-Greenberg, Vikas Bajaj, Edmund Lee, Livia Albeck-Ripka, Stanley Reed, Clifford Krauss, Vindu Goel and Mohammed Hadi.
