Monday's gains came despite comments from US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo over the weekend that stoked fears of further US-China conflict. He said there was "enormous evidence" that the coronavirus originated in a Chinese lab , though US intelligence officials and experts have said there's no evidence to prove such a theory .
"Such statements indicate that Sino-American relations are about to get worse," said Hussein Sayed, the chief market strategist at FXTM. "A close eye should be kept on how the situation between the two countries develops."
Not all parts of the market closed in positive territory. Major airline stocks fell after Warren Buffett announced during Berkshire Hathaway's annual shareholder meeting on Saturday that he'd sold all holdings in the industry's "big four." Delta Air Lines sank 5.8%, United Airlines fell 4.6%, American Airlines was down 7.9%, and Southwest Airlines declined 5.5%.
Read more: Legendary billionaire hedge fund manager Bill Ackman breaks down his 3-part investing methodology — and makes a case for 'a really cheap, interesting stock run by the best investor in the world'
Investors will be watching this week for further economic data showing the full impact of the coronavirus crisis on the US economy as some states relax lockdown measures. Last week, jobless claims came in at 3.8 million, bringing the six-week total to 30 million. This Friday, the April employment report is likely to show high unemployment and lost jobs.
Still, there may be relief ahead as some states begin to reopen their economies. Goldman Sachs thinks that the drop in economic activity has likely bottomed out and expects a recovery to take either a swift V shape or a softer U shape, depending on the timeline.
Investors will also continue to watch first-quarter earnings to see how companies fared in the earliest months of the coronavirus pandemic. So far, company earnings are poised to post their worst drop since 2009, according to Bank of America.
Tyson Foods slumped as much as 10% following its earnings miss before the bell. The insurance firm American International Group is scheduled to report results after the bell.
