I tell you this not just as an illustration of how fast renewable technology is changing - this particular innovation is not that new - but also as an example of how electrified our energy is set to become.
The expansion of electric vehicles is predicted to accelerate significantly , to a point when it will become the norm rather than the exception.
Battery technology still has far to go but many scientists and businesses are competing to find ways of storing electrical power that is lighter and longer-lasting. Already some electrically powered passenger aircraft are in production . How long before ships can be powered by batteries rather than fuel oil?
The obvious and much-contested question is when this renewable revolution will reach its peak and whether it will come in time to protect the planet from global warming. That is not something I am qualified to answer.
What interests me is a separate question: what impact might this new technology have, not on the world's climate, but its politics?
What happens to the global balance of political power when so many countries no longer need to buy so much oil and gas? This is a question that Adam Bowen and I have sought to answer in a documentary for the BBC World Service and Radio Four .
For more than a century, nations that had oil and gas had power, literally and politically. Wars were fought over the stuff.
It all began before the World War One when Winston Churchill - as First Lord of the Admiralty - converted the British navy from Welsh coal to imported oil.
To secure British access to that oil, the future British prime minister bought a controlling stake in the Anglo Persian oil company, the forerunner of BP, in what is now Iran.
From that moment, much of the history of the 20th Century can be seen through countries' pursuit of hydrocarbons, from Adolf Hitler's attempts to secure the Baku oil fields to Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait to last September's drone and missile attack on Saudi oil facilities.
Countries with oil and gas used their monopolies to sell the stuff for huge profits; those countries which relied on it spent much blood and treasure defending their access to it.
The question is how much the renewable revolution might change this geopolitical equation. How much influence will be lost by some of the world's big fossil fuel producers, in the Middle East, Africa and elsewhere?
Might there be more regional conflict as these countries fight over an ever-decreasing share of the hydrocarbon energy market? And what might happen to these countries internally if they lose their main source of revenue?
Often these are nations have huge state-led economies, with many workers employed by governments, with youthful populations accustomed to cheap fuel.
There is little consensus over when the transition from fossil fuels to clean energy will take place. There are many different predictions about when global demand for oil will peak and fall away but the planners at Shell recently forecast it could happen as early as 2025 .
So some oil-producing countries are playing safe and preparing for the moment when they can no longer rely on oil. They are looking to diversify their economies and find other sources of energy.
But other countries are more sceptical, trusting that demand for their oil and gas will last for some time.
Some of these countries stand accused of talking about diversification but doing little about it. The potential consequences of this are becoming an increasing source of concern.
This is what Prof Paul Stevens, distinguished fellow at the UK foreign affairs think tank Chatham House, told the BBC: "The oil producing government gets revenue; if that revenue falls or disappears, the government is no longer able to sustain the non-oil sector, which means you will have rising unemployment, you will no longer be able to pay subsidies to keep your population happy.
"Many of the large oil and gas exporters are what might politely be described as politically unstable. So the faster the transition [to renewables], the greater the fall in gas and oil revenues, the more disruptive it is going to be and so you are looking at potentially a large number of failed states."
