The US will likely be willing to cut oil production if the crude price remains below $35 or $30 because, for most US oil producers, the break-even price is higher than $40. A 10 million barrels per day production cut isn’t enough for the price to move higher than $35. What we need here is a strong message, and that is “whatever it takes.” If the US joins OPEC+ in the production cut, the message will be strong for the industry. Then, even a small production cut, something along the lines of 10 M B/D, could be enough to push the price higher. But without the US on board, a 15 million B/D production cut may not push the price higher than $40.
One thing is for certain—on Thursday we are going to get a production cut, which means higher oil prices. I think that the price has pretty much bottomed out for now, and any pullback remains an opportunity for investors to bag something cheap. Another follow-up report will investigate more details to answer the question of whether the bottom is in place.
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have a wealth of knowledge from trading in the financial markets which spans over 10 years and specialize in forex, commodities and equities. I frequently partake across all major tier one media channels such as CNBC and Bloomberg discussing investment strategies around major macroeconomic and political events. I have often participated in panel discussions on notable events across the globe. More recently, during the Brexit referendum, I predicted the crash in sterling against the dollar to a level of 1.18 in an interview with MarketWatch. I also called the bottom in Crude oil when it was trading near $25 with numerous print and digital financial media outlets. I have also worked  with top UK universities to give lectures and delivered an investment and trading course at the London School of Economics.
