(June 9): Asia stocks looked set to extend a global rally after their U.S. peers pushed back into the green for the year as easing lockdowns bolstered economic optimism. The dollar fell.
Equity futures pointed to modest gains in Japan, Australia and Hong Kong. S&P 500 futures dipped after the benchmark closed at a 15-week high, bringing its rally from the March low to almost 45%. The Nasdaq 100 rose to a record. The dollar posted its longest slide in almost a decade, while Treasuries advanced. Oil held onto a decline after Saudi Arabia said it wouldn’t continue its additional, deeper output curbs after June. The yen pushed higher.
Global equities have climbed back to their levels in February, when the coronavirus began spreading rapidly outside of China. But worries remain that economic growth may struggle to keep pace -- the World Bank warned the global economy will contract the most since World War II this year.
On the policy front, the Federal Reserve expanded its Main Street Lending Program, allowing more companies to participate and lessening the burden on banks that create the loans. The move came ahead of the Fed’s policy meeting Wednesday.
To Citigroup Inc. strategists including Tobias Levkovich, positioning in U.S. equities may now be overly extended. For his part, Stan Druckenmiller -- who last month warned about owning stocks -- said on Monday that he now believes he was “far too cautious” during the current market rally.
S&P Erases Loss and Ed Yardeni Doubts It Was Ever a Bear Market.
“As long as the data is improving and the market has the tailwind of liquidity at its back, it’s probably going to continue to rise,” Ed Campbell, portfolio manager and managing director at QMA, said of stocks. “I wouldn’t be betting against equities at this point.”
Elsewhere, South Korean assets will be in focus after North Korea said it’s determined to shut down all contact with its southern neighbor, according to state-news agency KCNA.
What to watch this week:
The Fed’s next policy decision is Wednesday. Officials are expected to leave rates above zero.
OECD releases its economic outlook Wednesday, a twice-yearly analysis of the economic prospects of member countries
Euro-area finance ministers meet Thursday to discuss the EU’s recovery package and Eurogroup presidency succession.
These are some of the main moves in markets:
S&P 500 futures slipped 0.1% as of 7:15 a.m. in Tokyo. The S&P 500 climbed 1.2%.
The offshore yuan was at 7.0588 per dollar.
The euro was flat at $1.1294.
The yield on 10-year Treasuries decreased two basis points to 0.87% Monday.
Gold was at $1,699.65 an ounce.
