TOKYO: Japanese shares closed firmer for a third session on Wednesday as Prime Minister Shinzo Abe ended market uncertainty by declaring a long-awaited emergency, which led investors to buy in shorted stocks of railway and department store operators.
The Nikkei share average closed 2.13 per cent firmer at 19,353.24, edging near its March 25 high of 19,564, while the broader Topix gained 1.59 per cent to 1,425.47.
Besides short-covering after the declaration of emergency, which will give authorities more power to press people to stay at home and businesses to close, hopes of a slowdown in the coronavirus-related deaths have also been propping up markets.
"Markets have known that it is coming and is welcoming the move," said Hiroshi Masushima, market analyst at Monex Securities.
With the number of domestic cases increasing in the past couple of weeks, many market players have anticipated and also called for such a move.
Post declaration, short-term players swiftly bought back the shares of companies they had sold heavily on expectations of huge damages from the emergency.
Railway operators soared, boosting the Tokyo Stock Exchange's land transport index to close 4.1 per cent firmer.
Tobu Railway rose 5.2 per cent, Odakyu Electric Railway gained 7 per cent, while Keio Corp climbed 5.4 per cent and East Japan Railway Co added 5.4 per cent.
Department stores also bounced back even as they announced store closures.
J.Front Retailing gained 6.6 per cent, while Takashimaya rose 6.1 per cent.
Airline shares also bounced back, with ANA Holdings rising 7.8 per cent and Japan Airlines up 8.8 per cent.
The air transport index rose 8.2 per cent to become the best performer among the Tokyo Stock Exchange's 33 industry sub-indexes, though it was still among the worst hit so far this year, with a drop of 35 per cent since the start of the year.
Some healthcare-related shares also maintained their recovery trend. M3 soared 11.8 per cent to a record high, though some analysts cautioned it is now trading at more than 100 times its earnings.
Drugmakers also did well, with Chugai Pharmaceutical gained 4.9 per cent to record high, while Daiichi Sankyo added 6.5 per cent. SoftBank Group Corp erased earlier losses to end 0.2 per cent higher, but underperformed in the overall market.
A WeWork board committee that negotiated a $3 billion tender offer with SoftBank sued the Japanese conglomerate on Tuesday for abandoning the deal, accusing it of succumbing to "buyer's remorse" amid the novel coronavirus outbreak.
The turnover in the Tokyo Stock Exchange's main board was 2.811 trillion yen ($25.82 billion), below the average over the past month.
