Nikkei 225 has seen a very aggressive and admittedly completely unexpected reversal back above the 200-day average and near-term resistance at 22350 and analysts at Credit Suisse now look for a period of consolidation below the 23185 high.
“The Nikkei has immediately and admittedly very surprisingly reversed its earlier breakdown below a whole cluster of key support levels including the 200-day average at 21765, as well as breaking back above gap resistance at 22350. This should remove the risk of a deeper setback and has almost certainly left positioning cleaner in both directions.”
“Next resistance now moves to 23185, which may now prove a tough barrier, particularly with the pre-pandemic gap just above at 23385 and with MACD also crossing below MACDA for the first time since March. This is consistent with a more neutral short-term trend and the potential for further near term consolidation. Post this though, an eventual break beyond here would open the way for a test of 23805 next.”
“Near-term supports move to 21900, then 21530. Below here would reassert the corrective potential, with next support seen at the late May breakup point at 20740/735, then the 38.2% retracement at 20585/575. Our attention would start to turn towards signs of a potential floor here if reached.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
