SGX Nifty down 20 points; here's what changed for market while you were sleeping
Nifty futures on the Singapore Exchange traded 18.50 points, or 0.18 per cent lower at 10,149.50 in signs that Dalal Street was headed for a muted start on Thursday.
Stronger appetite for riskier assets lifted Asian equities on Thursday.
After six days of continuous rally, domestic indices are showing signs of fatigue on technical charts and analysts believe some consolidation is on the cards. Positive global cues, however, may help limit any downside, they said.
Here’s breaking down the pre-market actions.
Nifty futures on the Singapore Exchange traded 18.50 points, or 0.18 per cent lower at 10,149.50 in signs that Dalal Street was headed for a muted start on Thursday.
Signs of fatigue were all over, as the index came off from the day's high of 10,176 level and ended up forming a small bearish candle on the daily chart -- the first time in six sessions. The index is trading above all of short-term moving averages and is nearing the overbought zone as suggested by the 14-day RSI of 67. Analysts said a profit-booking move looks due.
Stronger appetite for riskier assets lifted Asian equities on Thursday. Hong Kong's Hang Seng index rose 1.31 per cent, or 318.22 points, to 24,643.84. China's benchmark Shanghai Composite index added 0.29 per cent, or 8.53 points, to 2,931.90. Japan's Nikkei 225 index was up 1.29 per cent, or 290.66 points, at 22,904.42 in early trade.
US stocks finished noticeably higher on Wednesday as investors pored through a slew of economic data. The Dow Jones Industrial Average index jumped 527.24 points, or 2.05 per cent, to 26,269.89. The S&P 500 rose 42.05 points, or 1.36 per cent, to 3,122.87. The Nasdaq Composite index added 74.54 points, or 0.78 per cent, to 9,682.91.
DLF, NIIT and SRF: DLF, NIIT, PI industries, IL&FS Transport, SRF, Safari Industries, PNB Gilts, Igarashi Motors and TD Power are among a few companies which will announce their march quarter earnings today.
Oil prices fell on Thursday, reversing gains in the previous session, on concerns that supply will rise if major producers are unable to agree to extend the depth of output cuts that have supported recent gains. Brent crude futures fell 1 per cent, or 41 cents, to $39.38 a barrel. US WTI crude futures fell 1.6 per cent, or 61 cents, to $36.68 a barrel.
Net-net, foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) were buyers of domestic stocks to the tune of Rs 1,851 crore on Wednesday, data available with NSE suggested. DIIs were net sellers to the tune of Rs 782 crore, data suggests.
Rupee: The rupee surrendered its intra-day gains to close 11 paise lower at 75.47 against the US currency on Wednesday due to dollar buying by banks and oil importers.
10-year bonds: India 10-year bond yield fell 3.05 per cent to 5.81 after trading in 5.80-6.02 range.
Call rates: The overnight call money rate weighted average stood at 3.53 per cent, according to RBI data. It moved in a range of 1.50-4.15 per cent.
Saudi, Russia reach deal on oil cuts… Opec leader Saudi Arabia and non-Opec Russia have agreed a preliminary deal to extend existing record oil output cuts by one month while raising pressure on countries with poor compliance to deepen their cuts, Opec+ sources told Reuters. Opec+ agreed to cut output by a record 9.7 million barrels per day, or about 10 per cent of global output, in May and June to lift prices battered by plunging demand linked to lockdown measures aimed at stopping the spread of the coronavirus.
6-month grace on loan defaults... The Union Cabinet on Wednesday recommended promulgation of an ordinance to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and provide relief for loan defaults after March 25, initially for six months. Default in repayment of loans by companies — other than financial services ones — up to September-end, which can be extended by another six months, will not be counted as default under the IBC.
V-shaped demand recovery ... There’s a V-shaped demand recovery in major consumer goods segments but that V may not last long. Across phones, consumer durables, apparels, shoes — in both online and offline stores — demand is close or equal to pre-lockdown levels. In certain products, the buying-spree is remarkable. iPhone SE clocked the highest sales for an iPhone model on Flipkart. Chinese brand Realme launched TV on Tuesday and sold 15,000 units online in 10 minutes. But industry executives are not sure the buying surge will last long as pent-up demand may get exhausted.
Corp bond issues hit a high... The lockdown appears to have opened the floodgates for corporate bond issues in India. The first two months of FY21 have been the best in decades, with companies raising Rs 1.63 lakh crore — more than double the same period last year and nearly four times of April-May in FY19 — as rates plunged to a record low and banks went slow with loans. HDFC, L&T Group, PFC, the Tata Group and Reliance Industries led the giants that sold bonds worth Rs 1.63 lakh crore in April and May.
Preferential share norms may be eased... Sebi is actively considering a relaxation in pricing rules to make it easier for all companies to raise capital by making preferential equity sale to financial and strategic investors in the wake of the Covid-19 disruption. The proposal is to make the preferential allotment regulation more realistic not just for stressed companies, but for any listed entity struggling in the present environment.
Tatas to rejig business plans... The board of Tata Sons is scheduled to meet on June 5 to chart the next move for the $111-billion salt-to-software group whose businesses have been significantly impacted due to the pandemic. Among other things, the group will relook at its strategies covering a fund-raise, budget allocation to portfolio companies, debt leverage as well as revenue generation. It will also consider the compensation of its executive leadership, including chairman N Chandrasekaran, for fiscal 2021
Warning on arbitrage funds... Fund houses Edelweiss, Kotak and IDFC have warned investors of either near-term losses or poor returns in arbitrage schemes, with spreads turning negative and causing money-making opportunities to shrink. These schemes make money when stock futures trade above the cash market price. These funds buy shares and sell stock futures at the same time to benefit from price conversion. These funds manage assets worth about Rs 55,000 crore.
Govt slams Moody's downgrade... The Indian government has slammed Moody’s decision to downgrade India’s rating, saying ratings agencies are following double standards and need to change their methodology to remain relevant. Over 30 countries had been downgraded since the onset of the crisis and that is because governments have unveiled stimulus packages, a govt official said, adding that they were making selective downgrades, comparing India with Japan, which has a debt-to-GDP ratio of 250, for whom the denominator is not growing as fast as India's.
HC stays Templeton e-voting... In a relief to investors of Franklin Templeton Mutual Fund, the Gujarat High Court on Wednesday stayed the fund house’s plan to conduct e-voting and hold a unit holders' meeting on winding up six debt funds. Justice Gita Gopi issued a notice to Sebi and Franklin Templeton’s three companies in response to a petition filed by senior citizens.
40 drugs under price control... India’s drug pricing regulator on Tuesday capped the prices of 40 formulations, including statins and some other popular cardiovascular and diabetes drugs. The revised prices will have an impact on the manufacturers of these formulations, including Sun Pharma and Zydus Healthcare.
Service activity contracts in May… Business activity across India's service sector continued to contract in May as coronavirus led shutdowns impaired business operations, restricted consumer footfall and led to a demand collapse along with job cuts. The IHS Markit India Services Business Activity Index was 12.6 in May, up from April's record low of 5.4. A reading above 50 on the index indicates expansion while lower than that shows contraction. The data was collected from May 12-27 around 400 service sector companies.
Credit card spending falls 51% in April… Credit card spending tumbled 51 per cent in April amid the coronavirus lockdown, though categories like streaming platforms and online classes saw growth, a survey said. Credit card spending dropped initially by 10 per cent when the lockdown was announced in March and declined further by 51 per cent when it was in full swing April-onwards, according to the survey by digital platform CRED. The survey revealed that the drop in spending was due to offline retail and online marketplaces suspending operations during the lockdown.
