S&P 500: Futures struggle to refresh two-week top as virus, Hong Kong news heavy trading sentiment
S&P 500 Futures probe the four-day winning streak, recently weakened from 3,155.
The US registered largest daily increase in virus cases by any country on Thursday.
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, Hong Kong Activist Nathan Law attack China’s Communist Party (CCP).
Light calendar, US session off could restrict market moves.
S&P 500 Futures prints mild loss of 0.10% while declining to 3,126 during the initial hour of Tokyo session on Friday. In doing so, the risk barometer fails to extend the previous four-day winning streak. Though, the quote stays near a two-week high while keeping Monday’s recovery moves from 2,983.
Market sentiment turned sour off-late as the surge in the coronavirus (COVID-19) cases from the US dims hope of economic restart. The new cases from America surged over 53,000 on Thursday. This becomes the third daily record while also being the highest single-day rise across the globe.
Elsewhere, the US diplomat repeats fashion to criticize Chinese move to secure more power in Hong Kong. The action got additional strength from Hong Kong activist who urged global policymakers for help. However, North Korea becomes the savior for Beijing as the hermit kingdom’s Ambassador to China Ji Jae-ryong supported the Communist Party of China in their move.
It should also be noted that China’s threat to levy 12% tariffs on Australian beef and f ears of widespread job losses in the UK also weighed down the risk-tone sentiment.
Looking forward, a lack of major data, except for China’s Caixin Services PMI and UK’s second readings on the Services PMI, will offer a dull trading day ahead.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
