Economic Times | 16 Jun, 2020 | 06.01PM IST
The country's snacks and sweets industry would suffer an estimated revenue loss of Rs 35,000 crore in the current financial year due to the coronavirus pandemic, an industry official said on Monday. Sweets and namkeen (snacks) manufacturers have reduced the production capacity due to the shortage of labourers in the midst of a slowdown and health concerns, experts said.
Gujarat Industries Power Company Ltd (GIPCL) on Monday said its net profit dropped 61 per cent to Rs 61.92 crore in the March 2020 quarter. Its net profit was Rs 162.84 crore in the corresponding quarter a year ago, a regulatory filing said.
Nifty has had a jittery start to the week and Monday’s session turned out to the choppy on the expected lines. The index saw a negative start, oscillated in a wide range before closing with net losses.
Here’s who bought and sold what in some of the key bulk deals of the day. Smallcap Word Fund sold shares of Aarti Industries in two transactions each on NSE and BSE. The fund sold 15,97,950 shares of the specialty chemicals maker at Rs 854.71 each on the NSE, and 1,000,000 shares at Rs 855 each on the BSE. At the end of March quarter, the fund held 1.71 per cent stake in the company.
Regulator Sebi on Monday barred Vaibhav Dhadda, an employee of Fidelity International Ltd, his mother Alka and sister Arushi from the capital markets for indulging in ''front running'' activities. Sebi said that detailed investigation in the matter is in progress which may bring out additional roles of the entities, if any.
“We have greater confidence in our call for a V-shaped recovery, given recent upside surprises in growth data and policy action,” economists led by Chetan Ahya wrote in a mid-year outlook research note on June 14.
US stocks opened sharply lower on Monday as a resurgence in new coronavirus cases in China and parts of the United States dampened hopes of a swift economic revival that drove the Nasdaq to record highs last week. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 335.15 points, or 1.31 per cent, at the open to 25,270.39.
RIL partly paid shares jump 8% on debut day; end at Rs 698
Reliance Industries (RIL) partly paid shares gained 8 per cent in its debut on the bourses on Monday as heavy demand for them kept the counter ticking. The scrip opened at Rs 690 and climbed further to end the day at Rs 698. The last close price of Rs 646.05 was determined by adding the first installment of Rs 314.25 with the difference between Friday's closing price and rights price i.e. Rs 331.80.
RSI indicator suggests consolidation going on currently: Aditya Agarwala
“The RSI indicator suggested consolidation is going on currently with immediate support at 9,700-9,650 and resistance in the 9,940-10,030 zone,” said Aditya Agarwala at YES Securities.
Nifty has strong support at 9,544; use dips to buy stocks
Nifty started the week on a negative note on Monday, as it saw a gap-down start. The index started correcting from the word go and fell more than 200 points from its opening high of 9,943. The first half of the session was majorly dominated by the bears. However, there was some recovery in the later half. As a result, the index managed to conclude the session above the 9,800 mark and formed a bearish candle on the daily chart.
Traders should prefer hedged bets and avoid overleveraging: Ajit Mishra
"Considering the recent run up in benchmark indices, some consolidation cannot be ruled out in the near term as markets would await more data on how demand panning up post gradual re-opening of the economy. Going forward, due to lack of any major trigger except on-going earnings season, the markets would continue to take cues from global markets. Traders should prefer hedged bets and avoid overleveraging." said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking.
Nifty Smallcap was the only major index that ended the day in the green, snapping a two-day losing streak. The index added 0.37 per cent bucking the broader market trend. Vakrangee, Rallis India, IDFC First Bank, GNFC and KSCL provided the biggest thrust, jumping 5-9 per cent.
Tata Motors Q4 results: Automaker reports Rs 9,864 crore net loss; JLR loss at £501 million
Tata Motors on Monday posted consolidated net loss at Rs 9,863.75 crore for the quarter ended March 31. It had reported a net profit of Rs 1,108.66 crore in the same period last year. Analysts in an ETNow poll had projected a net loss of Rs 1,300 crore.
Analysts said Nifty may see further selling pressure should it fall below the 9,726 level. The index may resume an upside march on a breach of the 9,900 level on a closing basis, they said.
Reverse migration or the journey of migrant workers back to their hometowns from large cities due to the lockdown is expected to turn out as a boon for cement roofing companies as demand for roofing solutions is picking up before the monsoon begins. The stocks of the two major roofing companies HIL and Visaka Industries have gained 24.4% and 39.9% over the past month.
Second wave of Covid-19 weighing on investor sentiment: Ajit Mishra
"After a smart recovery on Friday, the bears were back in charge and dominated the move till the end. As a result, the benchmark opened on the weak note and shed over one and a half percent. The news of the second wave of the virus in other countries and rising cases in India were weighing on investors’ sentiment. In line with the benchmark, mostly sectoral indices struggled in today’s trade and ended in the red. However, the market breadth was almost flat, thanks to resilience in smallcap front." said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking.
CLOSING BELL: Sensex tanks 552 pts as virus fears intensify; Nifty holds above 9,800; Bank of India soars 20%, IndusInd drops 7%
S&P BSE Energy biggest sectoral gainer, up 0.90%
S&P BSE BANKEX biggest sectoral loser, down 3.53%
JM Financial said on Monday it has raised Rs 770 crore through the qualified institutions placement (QIP) route. The company said it has issued and allotted 11 crore equity shares of the face value of Re 1 each to qualified institutional buyers at an issue price of Rs 70 each, including a securities premium of Rs 69 per equity share. The issue was subscribed by global and domestic investors, said JM Financial.
