As Covid-19 cases around the globe exceed 8.5 million according to Johns Hopkins University statistics, DoorDash secured on Friday $400 million in equity capital through sales of shares to mutual funds like T. Rowe Price Group Inc. (NASDAQ:TROW) and Fidelity, boosting the food-delivery company's equity valuation to approximately $16 billion. According to data-research platform Edison Trends, DoorDash took a 45% market share of food-delivery transactions in April, besting Uber Inc. (NYSE:UBER) subsidiary UberEats' 28% market share.
Edison Trends also reported that food-delivery industry sales increased over 51% since March as governments worldwide enacted shelter-in-place orders to curtail the spread of the coronavirus.
As such, investors might seek opportunities in restaurants with food-delivery capabilities. The All-in-One Screener listed six restaurants that have outperformed the S&P 500 by at least 10% over the past six months.
Chipotle, a major holding of Bill Ackman ( Trades , Portfolio )'s Pershing Square, outperformed the S&P 500 by approximately 28.56% over the past six months.
The Newport Beach, California-based company operates fast-casual restaurants that serve burritos, tacos, bowls and salads. GuruFocus ranks Chipotle's profitability 8 out of 10 on several positive investing signs, which include a three-year revenue growth rate and a return on equity that it outperforming over 85% of global competitors.
Other gurus with holdings in Chipotle include Jim Simons (Trades, Portfolio)' Renaissance Technologies and Spiros Segalas (Trades, Portfolio).
Domino's Pizza has outperformed the S&P 500 by approximately 36.64% over the past six months.
The Ann Arbor, Michigan-based company franchises stores that engage in quick-service pizza. GuruFocus ranks the company's profitability 9 out of 10 on several positive investing signs, which include a high Piotroski F-score of 7, a three-star business predictability rank and profit margins that are outperforming over 90% of global competitors.
Papa John's has outperformed the S&P 500 by approximately 36.55% over the past six months.
Like Domino's, Papa John's also franchises pizza delivery and carryout restaurants. According to GuruFocus, the Louisville, Kentucky-based company has a moderately strong Piotroski F-score of 6 despite margins and returns underperforming over 52% of global competitors.
