Following World War II, the Soviet    Union emerged as a global superpower to rival the United    States.
But after the Soviet Union crumbled in the early 1990s, Russia had to reinvent its economy.
Markets Insider compiled 13 surprising facts about    Russia's economy.
Visit    MarketsInsider.com for more stories.
Following World War II, the Soviet  Union emerged as a global superpower to rival the United  States.
But when the Soviet Union crumbled in the early 1990s and  reemerged as Russia, it had to reinvent its economy. In the  decades that followed, the communist nation has experienced  plenty of economic struggles.
As Russia continues to try to reassert itself as a global power,  it faces a fluctuating currency, declining population, and an  economy that is in many ways dependent on oil and gas.
Here are 13 mind-blowing facts about Russia's economy:
The Russian population is  decreasing by approximately 700 people a  day , or more than  250,000 people annually, according to the Eurasia Daily  Monitor.
Some cities, like Murmansk, have  experienced population declines of more than 30% since the end of  the Soviet Union.
The decrease is due in part to  aging demographics, falling immigration rates, and a failure by  the government to enforce health and food regulations. Some  observers place the blame on Western  economic sanctions ,  which have contributed to Russian poverty and economic  uncertainty.
The decline could continue to  pose problems for Russia's economy for years to come.
Russia has more  than $460 billion in reserve , with a debt level of 29% of the  gross domestic product and 15.9 months of import cover.
These basic macroeconomic  statistics lead experts to believe Russia can withstand some  global shocks, even if its economic growth remains at its low  rate of approximately 1.5%.
Russia's economic output plummeted 45% in the decade after the Soviet Union broke up.
From 1989 to 1998, Russian output dropped 45% , as the economic reforms following  the Soviet collapse in 1991 took effect. By 2000, the nation's  GDP was between 30% and 50% of its pre-collapse output.
Several factors are attributed  for the post-transition recessions, all which made it a chaotic  time with poor economic policies.
Russia is rife with oil, and its  economy is heavily  dependent on the resource.
By the end of last year, Russian  oil production was at an all-time high, at 11.16 million barrels  a day, according to Reuters .
In 2017, gas made up 59% of  Russia's exports and 25% of its total revenue, according  to the World Bank .
Russian President Vladimir Putin  vowed in his state-of-the-nation  speech last year that he would halve Russian poverty, which  currently impacts more than 13% of the population. Official state  statistics at the time showed 19.3 million Russians living below  the poverty line, according to the Irish Times .
The speech highlighted an  investment of 25.7 trillion rubles - that's $380 billion - in  modernizing Russia's healthcare, education, infrastructure,  housing, and agriculture to help those in need and potentially  curb Russia's population decline.
Russian wealth inequality is high  and Moscow is often atop the list of global cities with the most  billionaires - Russia as a whole has more than 70 . Many of those  billionaires obtained their wealth during the 1990s, when  corruption swept through the country as it came out of a  communist economy.
Oligarchs have plenty of  influence in the Russian government and have started investing in  the West, including in sports teams like the NBA's Brooklyn Nets,  owned by billionaire Mikhail Prokhorov.
The Russian economy suffered a  significant financial crisis from 2014 to 2017, which saw the  ruble's value get cut in half .
Last year, the Central Bank of  Russia blamed US sanctions on the ruble hitting a two-year low of  69.40 against the dollar. In 2013, the ruble was at 33 per US  dollar.
The economic crisis, as a whole,  was caused by massive oil price declines in 2014 and  international sanctions imposed on Russia when it intervened  militarily in Ukraine.
Russia is ranked in the top 10  nations in terms of economic production. But despite the high GDP  compared to the rest of the world, the average monthly wage is $670 - or 42,413 rubles.
That has grown since nearly 50%  since 2016 - when it was $437.
Wages in Russian took a massive  hit with the recent ruble instability as Russians were able to  buy 40% more goods and services in 2013 than they could in  2018.
The Swedish superstore chain Ikea  opened its first store in the Russian capital of Moscow in 2000,  and the store quickly became one of the company's top  stores.
Over the next 18 years, Ikea  opened another two Moscow stores and a total of 14 stores across  the massive nation.
With Russians looking to stretch  their money further, Ikea now owns 20% of the Russian furniture market .
At the turn of the millennium,  Russians bought 214.6 million decaliters of vodka - or 567  million gallons.
By 2015, that number had dropped to below  100 million decaliters , while champagne consumption jumped  from 18.3 million decaliters to 23.6 million.
The BBC cites a westernization of  the Russian culture over the past two decades, with Russians  shifting more toward beer and wine.
Asbestos are the key export of  the aptly-named city of Asbest, Russia. Despite the  well-known health hazards of  asbestos, the city saw an increase in its asbestos output last  year, according to The New York Times .
The 315,000 tons of asbestos  produced from the city's mine last year was the first increase in  production the city had seen in years. A full 80% of that output  was sold abroad, including 67 tons to the United States.
Asbestos are banned in more than  60 countries.
During the Cold War, the US and  Soviet Union competed for influence in Asia, and now Russia has  turned its eye toward Africa. Both Russia and China have made  massive investments throughout the continent trying to cement  their influence.
Russia doesn't have the  historical roots of other European nations, nor the money China  holds, but its influence in Africa is largely affected by its  military exports and state natural resource companies.
As the Winter Olympics descended  on the Russian city of Sochi, the government spent more than $50 billion to get the city  ready. The investment  included not just the  construction of new sports venues and hotels, but roads, bridges,  low-pressure gas pipelines, and other infrastructure projects, as  well.
But the investment seems to be  working: Russian officials reported 6.5 million people visited  the resort town in 2017, injecting life into a local economy that  had once been known only for summer recreation.
In 2018, Russia hosted the FIFA World Cup , which reportedly cost more than $11 billion  in construction and preparation work.
