This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
The Russian ruble is likely to depreciate against the U.S. dollar according to J.P. Morgan currency strategists.
The currency drag has everything to do with domestic matters and Russian central bank intervention, and nothing to do with U.S. headlines about possible Russian meddling in U.S. politics. So far this year, the ruble has appreciated nearly 6% against the U.S. dollar, and it is stronger by more than 23% over the past 12 months. One U.S. dollar (USD) now equals 58.22 Russian rubles (RUB).
"We hold USD/RUB call spreads on a view of gradual ruble depreciation. Ruble has depreciated 2.7% vs. the dollar since its peak strength on 14th February, following increased verbal intervention by officials. Despite the recent bout of RUB weakness, RUB is still rich on our short-term and long-term models. We envisage a further gradual decline in ruble, holding USD/RUB call spreads to position for this. First, FX interventions are likely to be a greater drag on the spot rate going forward (the MinFin so far has bought RUB 94.7 billion worth of FX since the program began on 8th February), as seasonal support for the current account deteriorates heading into Q2. Second, there is scope for a further unwind of long RUB positions, which can weigh on the currency. The latest JPM Client Survey shows investors reduced their long RUB positions from multi-year highs, and further reductions are possible in our view given the still sizeable overweight investors hold ..."
Russia's economy is on the rebound from recession this year. But the central bank's "extremely hawkish posture" is likely to make its inflation targets difficult to reach, writes Capital Economics' William Jackson. As the ruble weakens, consumer prices -- inflation -- rises. Jackson adds:
"Inflation in Russia has fallen from a peak of almost 17% y/y in early 2015 to just 5.0% y/y in January of this year. In large part, this reflects the unwinding of the impact of previous falls in the currency. That’s helped to bring import inflation and the headline rate down. Despite the sharp fall in inflation, the central bank has been reluctant to lower interest rates. The benchmark one-week repo rate has only been lowered twice over the past eighteen months, and policymakers have frequently signalled their concern that the headline rate might not reach the 4% target. One result of this is that real interest rates are, with the exception of brief spikes in 2008 and 2014, now at their highest level in two
decades ... " While analysts are skeptical that the central bank can achieve its inflation target, "the outlook for inflation is far more benign" because of spare capacity in the economy, with an output gap that "might stand at around 3% of potential GDP ..."
Russian equities are lower today, with Sberbank ( SBRCY ) down 1.6%, Mechel ( MTL ) is down 1.8%, Lukoil ( LUKOY ) is down fractionally, and VimpelCom ( VIP ) is off by 1%. The VanEck Vectors Russia exchange-traded fund ( RSX ) is down 1%; the fund is down 4% so far this year, while the iShares MSCI Emerging Markets exchange-traded fund (EEM) is up 9%.
