Lexology GTDT Market Intelligence provides a unique perspective on evolving legal and regulatory landscapes. This interview is taken from the M&A volume featuring discussion and analysis of legal developments, keynote deals as well as an insight into typrical transactions within key jurisdictions worldwide.
1 What trends are you seeing in overall activity levels for mergers and acquisitions in your jurisdiction during the past year or so?
Although market conditions remain challenging in Russia due to the application of international sanctions on certain industries and market participants, market conditions slightly improved in 2018 and the first three quarters of 2019. In 2018, according to publicly available statistics, the overall number of M&A deals increased by almost 20 per cent (principally driven by major Russian state-backed players (such as Sberbank, VTB and the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF)) and Asian and Middle Eastern investors), although total deal value declined by 7 per cent (largely due to the absence of ‘big ticket’ M&A transactions) and the number of inbound deals fell by 21 per cent. This indicates that while M&A targets are available for participants familiar with the Russian market and ready to deploy capital, investors remain cautious of executing big ticket M&A and certain foreign investors have adopted a ‘wait and see’ approach, deferring M&A decisions into 2020.
Investor confidence and market activity are on the rise, with the Russian economy continuing its recovery from the 2016 recession and growing by 2.3 per cent in 2018, with further modest growth predicted in 2019 and 2020. Growing investor confidence is being supported by:
Russian government policy aimed at maintaining an export-friendly exchange rate;
efforts from the Central Bank of Russia to reform the banking and insurance sectors;
the fact that the Ukraine conflict has not escalated; and
the fact that certain international and domestic investors have increasingly adjusted to the realities of international sanctions and increased geopolitical risk.
With the rouble depreciating 15 per cent against the US dollar in 2018, production costs in Russia offer significant competitive advantages to investors localising production in Russia for export. These trends indicate that, notwithstanding ongoing geopolitical challenges, there are relatively robust fundamentals underpinning the Russian M&A market.
Overall, we view the outlook for 2020 and 2021 as increasingly positive, with several key market players (such as Sberbank and RDIF) having publicly stated their intention to execute substantial M&A deals in 2020. Further, several major Russian companies (such as Yandex.Taxi and Rambler Group) are touting possible initial public offerings (IPOs) in 2020 and 2021, pointing to increasing levels of general business confidence. However, it remains to be seen whether the pipeline of expected M&A deals will materialise in light of ongoing sanctions and other geopolitical factors.
2 Which sectors have been particularly active or stagnant? What are the underlying reasons for these activity levels? What size are typical transactions?
A key trend in 2018 and the first three quarters of 2019 has been the diversification of M&A activity across a broad range of sectors outside the traditional extractive industries, including banking and insurance, innovations and technology, consumer markets, communications and media, and healthcare, which all saw strong performance. The diversification of M&A activity reflects the increased availability of M&A targets in consumer-facing sectors, which has, in part, been driven by lower domestic production costs from the relatively weak rouble (which declined by 15 per cent against the US dollar in 2018), the shift in consumption towards domestically produced goods and a general increase in consumer and investor confidence. This trend has also been supported by the Russian government’s focus on diversifying the domestic economy and export base, which has traditionally been dominated by extractive industries, a policy priority that looks set to remain a key Russian government focus in the coming years.
The innovation and technology sector has been a standout performer in 2018 and the first three quarters of 2019. Notable deals include the acquisition of AliExpress Russia (a major e-commerce platform) by a group of investors consisting of MegaFon, Mail.Ru Group and RDIF at a valuation of US$2 billion and the signing of a letter of intent by Sberbank and Mail.Ru Group to establish (subject to regulatory approvals and the finalisation of legal documentation) a joint venture to create a US$1.58 billion online-to-offline services platform focused on food and transportation.
Sberbank (a major Russian state-backed bank), which was mandated by the Russian government to build a world-class digital ecosystem, has been very active in the innovation and technology sector. In 2018 and the first three quarters of 2019, Sberbank acquired substantial stakes in:
According to media reports, Sberbank is set to continue its acquisition spree in 2020 and is actively considering acquiring a large Russian online retailer, such as Ozon or Avito. As such, we expect that the innovation and technology sector will continue to be a standout performer in 2020.
3 What were the recent keynote deals? What made them so significant?
The key deals in 2018 and the first three quarters of 2019 have centred around three broad themes:
the ‘pivot east’, evidenced by the increase in inbound investments from Asian and Middle Eastern investors into Russia;
the diversification of private equity investments across a broader range of sectors, with particularly strong performance in the innovation and technology sector (see question 2); and
Throughout 2018 and the first three quarters of 2019, a number of significant inbound investments were executed by Asian and Middle Eastern investors. These included:
Other standout deals by foreign investors in this period include the acquisition by Emirates NBD Bank (a Dubai government-owned bank) of Denizbank (a Turkish bank) from Sberbank for US$2.8 billion (plus the redemption by Emirates NBD Bank of Denizbank’s subordinated US$1.2 billion debt to Sberbank and Denizbank’s repayment of US$1.1 billion in interbank loans to Sberbank) and the acquisition by Japan Tobacco of Donskoy Tabak (reportedly the fourth largest tobacco company in Russia) for US$1.6 billion.
In addition to the robust M&A activity by Sberbank and RDIF, VTB (a major Russian state-backed bank) has also made several major investments in 2018 and the first three quarters of 2019. For example, VTB increased its stake in PIK Group (a major Russian real-estate developer) from 7.57 per cent to 23.05 per cent, VTB acquired control of Rustranscom (reportedly the leader in rail transportation of grain in Russia and Kazakhstan and of timber and mineral fertilisers in Russia) and VTB, along with a consortium of investors, acquired International Restaurant Brands (which is the largest KFC franchisee in Russia and owns almost 25 per cent of all KFC restaurants in Russia).
Finally, consistent with historical trends, there were a number of standout deals in the extractive industries sector. The most notable deal in this sector was the decision by Novatek in 2019 to sell a 20 per cent stake in the US$25 billion Arctic LNG 2 project in Russia to two state-owned Chinese energy firms.
4 In your experience, what consideration do shareholders in a target tend to prefer? Are mergers and acquisitions in your jurisdiction primarily cash or share transactions? Are shareholders generally willing to accept shares issued by a foreign acquirer?
Cash remains overwhelmingly the preferred form of consideration in Russian M&A deals. Acquisitions involving the issue of shares by a Russian purchaser as an alternative (or in addition to) cash consideration are quite rare as shares in Russian companies (including listed securities) are perceived as relatively illiquid assets and may carry sanctions risks (for example, sanctions were imposed by the United States on the publicly traded EN+ Group in 2018 (although these sanctions were subsequently lifted in 2019)). Also, the restrictions on the issuing of new shares by Russian companies targeted by US and EU sanctions further hinders the use of Russian shares as consideration in M&A transactions. Accordingly, the expectation is that consideration shares will continue to appear less attractive in the eyes of investors – even where the issuer is not affected by US and EU sanctions.
However, some Russian shareholders are prepared to accept shares issued by foreign investors, especially if those shares are listed on foreign exchanges. Nonetheless, this is still uncommon and typically only seen where the foreign purchaser is an overseas holding company of a Russian group.
5 How has the legal and regulatory landscape for mergers and acquisitions changed during the past few years in your jurisdiction?
As recognised by the World Bank in its 2019 ‘Doing Business’ report, the Russian government has made efforts to reform the legal and business landscape in recent years to make Russia a more attractive market for overseas investors. Russia now sits in 31st place out of 190 countries in the World Bank’s 2018 rankings (up from 124th in 2010). However, US and EU sanctions targeting specific Russian market sectors or market participants have dampened growth and investment in certain sectors. Nevertheless, some M&A (private equity, in particular) has been aided by government-backed sponsors and financial institutions, set up to promote investment and M&A activity in Russia. Key names in this field include RDIF and RCIF (a partnership between RDIF and China Investment Corporation), which, as discussed in question 3, were very active in the market in 2018 and the first three quarters of 2019. Simultaneously, with making capital available through these institutions to co-fund acquisitions, the Russian government has put in place regulatory reforms to try to ensure that capital stays in (or returns to) Russia. The ‘deoffshorisation’ initiative is the centrepiece of these reforms. As part of this initiative, the Russian government introduced controlled foreign companies (CFC) legislation in 2015. Although broadly consistent with the approach of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the European Union, these rules remain widely untested in the Russian legal framework, especially in the courts.
The CFC legislation sets out rules in four areas of tax structuring. First, it addresses the taxation of profits received by foreign companies controlled by Russian residents but not yet received by the residents themselves. Second, it requires Russian residents holding shares in or controlling foreign companies or non-corporate entities to notify the Russian tax authorities of such shareholding or control. Third, it lays down the test for determining the tax residency of legal entities. Lastly, it introduces the concept of beneficial ownership of income for the purposes of double tax treaties.
The Russian government’s aim is to restrict the availability of double tax treaty benefits for recipients of Russian-sourced passive income where offshore structures are deliberately established to obtain tax treaty benefits for the ultimate beneficial owners of such income.
In the same trend, interest taxation rules have been heavily amended, with specific transfer pricing regulations introduced for interest in 2016 and thin capitalisation rules revised with effect from 2017. Amendments to the thin capitalisation rules restrict the deductibility of interest under loans extended by foreign sister companies. Finally, the Common Reporting Standard, launched in Russia at the end of 2017, is expected to significantly contribute to the ability of the Russian tax authorities to trace evasion schemes.
In parallel, Russian law has been updated in recent years to adapt legal instruments that are commonly used in Western jurisdictions (such as warranties, indemnities and option agreements) for the Russian market and to enable investors to implement certain typical Western-style corporate governance and shareholder arrangements in onshore Russian companies. While the scarcity of court decisions interpreting these new provisions and the uncertainty around which private law rules can be contractually excluded have resulted in market participants remaining cautious about implementing the new arrangements, overall there are signs of increasing momentum for a bigger role to be played by Russian law in M&A transactions.
Over the years, foreign participants in the Russian market have avoided investment structures that would lead to having significant corporate disputes adjudicated in the Russian courts and have preferred arbitration because of its perceived neutrality, efficiency, confidentiality and the enforceability of its awards. Recent reforms to Russian law have resolved long-standing uncertainty by establishing that disputes relating to the creation and management of, and participation in, Russian companies are arbitrable, provided that the arbitral institution is licensed by the Russian government and (in some cases) the seat of the arbitration is in Russia. This means that the majority of disputes arising out of shareholders’ agreements and share purchase agreements are arbitrable. Although foreign arbitration institutions can apply for a licence to administer Russian corporate disputes, at the time of writing only the Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre (HKIAC) and the Vienna International Arbitral Centre (VIAC) have obtained such a licence.
6 Describe recent developments in the commercial landscape. Are buyers from outside your jurisdiction common?
As explained above, investors from the Middle East and Asia, as well as some domestic state-backed players (such as Sberbank, VTB and RDIF), have predominantly been behind the major M&A deals of the past 12 to 18 months. We expect these players to continue to be active in the Russian market in the near future as they reportedly have significant capital to deploy and are growing in confidence and experience in the Russian market. This trend also reflects the ongoing concern with which Western investors view the Russian market due to continued geopolitical and US and EU sanctions risks.
7 Are shareholder activists part of the corporate scene? How have they influenced M&A?
Shareholder activism is much less common in Russia compared to the United States and the United Kingdom due to the prevalence of low free floats and large controlling shareholder stakes. That said, there were two notable examples of shareholder disputes in 2018 and 2019. Both of these disputes have negatively impacted foreign investor confidence and are being closely followed by many foreign investors.
The first example is the battle between Baring Vostok Capital Partners (a leading private equity firm based in Russia) (BVCP) and Russian businessman Mr Artyom Avetisyan over control of Vostochny Bank. Vostochny Bank is reportedly one of the 30 largest Russian banks by assets. The battle concerns (among other matters) whether Mr Avetisyan can exercise a call option against BVCP, which would result in him gaining control of Vostochny Bank, and involves litigation in the Russian courts, the London Court of International Arbitration and various offshore jurisdictions. This dispute attracted widespread international news coverage when Mr Michael Calvey (CEO of BVCP), and other senior employees of BVCP, were arrested and charged with criminal fraud in relation to their dealings with Mr Avetisyan. Commentators have contended that these criminal charges (which are ongoing) were unlawfully instigated at Mr Avetisyan’s request to pressure BVCP into handing over control of Vostochny Bank.
The second notable corporate dispute in 2018 was the battle between entities affiliated with Mr Vladimir Potanin, Mr Roman Abramovich and Mr Oleg Deripaska (three prominent Russian businessmen) over control of mining giant Norilsk Nickel. The battle culminated in an entity affiliated with Mr Deripaska successfully challenging in the High Court of England a transfer of shares in Norilsk Nickel from an entity affiliated with Mr Abramovich to an entity affiliated with Mr Potanin (this transfer would have tipped the balance of control of Norilsk Nickel in favour of Mr Potanin) on the basis that it violated an earlier settlement agreement between Mr Potanin and Mr Deripaska. In October 2018, the media reported that Mr Potanin had decided to suspend the dispute until there is more clarity around the international sanctions regime.
8 Take us through the typical stages of a transaction in your jurisdiction.
Although some deals are conducted through auction processes or intermediaries, the majority are sourced through direct contact between the prospective business partners. Once the deal is initiated, the process tends to follow those processes adopted in other markets with a period of due diligence ahead of the final negotiation of transaction documents. As in other markets, it is common for the parties to sign a non-binding term sheet setting out the key transaction terms before commencing due diligence.
Certain transactions involving Russian entities or those that may have an effect in Russia may require regulatory approval. Subject to certain exemptions, the acquisition of ‘control’ by foreign investors of Russian companies operating in ‘strategic business sectors’ requires government consent. ‘Strategic business sectors’ include the development of significant subsoil fields, telecommunications and print media, and the nuclear, military and aviation industries. Companies incorporated in Russia and operating in any of these strategic business sectors will be presumed to be ‘strategic companies’ and therefore within the remit of the Strategic Investment Law. ‘Control’ for these purposes is broadly defined and includes controlling the majority of votes at a shareholders’ meeting, having the power to appoint a majority of the board of directors, and being entitled to appoint the CEO of the company.
Separately, and in common with many other jurisdictions, anti-monopoly laws must be considered in relation to proposed M&A transactions in Russia. The consent of the Federal Antimonopoly Service (FAS) will be required for transactions that may affect competition in Russia where certain prescribed thresholds are met. As the thresholds are relatively low, it is often necessary to approach the FAS for consent to a transaction.
9 Are there any legal or commercial changes anticipated in the near future that will materially affect practice or activity in your jurisdiction?
Considering the current geopolitical climate, the expectation is that US and EU sanctions on certain industries and market participants in Russia will not be lifted and will remain in place in the near future. This is, accordingly, likely to continue to have a cooling impact on the size and volume of M&A transactions involving foreign investors (particularly Western investors), although as mentioned above, not all foreign investors are deterred. In particular, the pipeline of M&A deals involving Asian and Middle Eastern investors has remained relatively robust throughout 2018 and the first three quarters of 2019.
In addition to the tax reforms discussed in question 5, in 2017, members of international groups of companies became obliged to notify tax authorities that they are part of such groups and to disclose various kinds of information, such as the structure of ownership and control of the group, main indicators of activity, profits gained and losses incurred and taxes paid, if the consolidated revenue of a group exceeds certain limits. A breach of these obligations will be punishable by fines from 2020. Generally, the Russian government has shown a trend towards increasing the tax burden on business. In 2018, the VAT rate was increased from 18 to 20 per cent and amendments to the profit tax regime (which are mostly disadvantageous for taxpayers) were introduced in 2017–2018.
All these developments illustrate the continuing trend of Russian tax legislation becoming significantly more complex and nuanced. Alongside this, the Russian tax authorities are adopting an increasingly sophisticated and rigorous approach in their assessment of applications for double tax treaty relief. In the past 24 months, there has been a greater examination of the substance of ownership structures and the nature of the relationship between, and the functions of, the different entities in these structures. The risk is that where foreign companies or non-corporate entities are acting as mere conduits or agents for the ‘true’ beneficial owners of income, they may be disregarded for tax treaty purposes. Court practice on the matter is developing rapidly and most cases are not resolved in favour of taxpayers. Investors need to be alive to this issue in the context of their investment structures, and to seek detailed legal advice accordingly.
We expect a further hardening of tax and regulatory requirements in the coming years. The government’s focus on achieving greater transparency around offshore involvement in Russia-focused transactions is also seen in the new foreign investment laws, which were introduced on 30 July 2017 and apply greater scrutiny to transactions where a foreign partner acquires an asset in Russia or a Russian investor acquires an asset in Russia through a foreign vehicle, especially if the asset is classified as strategic and is located in Russia. That said, the use of foreign investment vehicles – in particular, companies situated in Cyprus, the British Virgin Islands or the Netherlands – is common in Russian M&A transactions and we do not expect the use of these vehicles to decline in the near future.
10 What does the future hold? What activity levels do you expect for the next year? Which sectors will be the most active? Do you foresee any particular geopolitical or macroeconomic developments that will affect deal sizes and activity?
As mentioned in question 1, market conditions are improving and there are relatively robust fundamentals underpinning the Russian M&A market. Chinese and Middle Eastern investors, and major Russian state-backed players, have been particularly active over the past 18 months and we anticipate that they will continue to make their presence felt in the coming 12 months. There are also opportunities for experienced local players to execute opportunistic M&A transactions.
We expect that the diversification of M&A activity across a broad variety of sectors is likely to continue and that the energy, retail, innovation and technology, and media and telecoms (particularly e-commerce) sectors will continue to be active areas of the Russian economy and provide opportunities for M&A deals in the remainder of 2019 and throughout 2020. We expect these trends to be supported by the Russian government’s localisation programme and low production costs in Russia (driven by the low relative value of the rouble), which offer significant competitive advantages to investors localising production in Russia for export, among other factors.
The continuing development of the government’s deoffshorisation programme has an impact on overall investment activity. This, in hand with changes to the Civil Code aimed at creating a more flexible onshore legal environment, has put further pressure on Russian corporates to return capital to Russia and to invest directly in Russian companies. That said, the traditional approach of structuring deals using overseas intermediaries has not fundamentally changed as a result of this deoffshorisation drive.
Current trends indicate that market conditions in Russia are improving and this trend looks set to continue into 2020. Major players in the Russian market will continue to watch global economic, political and regulatory changes, including sanctions, closely, as these will play a key role in determining whether Russia can continue to develop into a market with substantial scale, depth and liquidity in 2020 and beyond.
The Inside Track What factors make mergers and acquisitions practice in your jurisdiction unique?
The dominance of state-owned enterprises in the M&A market and the general political environment make Russia a challenging jurisdiction in which to do M&A transactions – particularly against the background of continuing geopolitical and sanctions risks. Novel legal issues are frequent when dealing with the interaction between the Russian legal regime (which is rapidly evolving and playing a more prominent role in M&A transactions in Russia) and international business practices. As a result, clients tend to rely heavily on their lawyers to help navigate the complexities of transacting in Russia and deliver legally robust and commercially appropriate outcomes.
What three things should a client consider when choosing counsel for a complex transaction in your jurisdiction?
Can counsel provide seamless advice on Russian legal, regulatory and tax practices and the legal, regulatory and tax issues across the range of other jurisdictions and governing laws involved?
What experience does counsel have in dealing with local counterparties and regulatory authorities?
Does counsel have experience in negotiating and bringing to fruition complex transactions based on practical experience across Russia and other markets?
What is the most interesting or unusual matter you have recently worked on, and why?
Corporate governance and shareholder arrangements for Russian co-investments always raise important issues. This is true now more than ever, as deoffshorisation and other legislative reforms have encouraged a number of international and local investors seeking to explore, under Russian law, Western-style arrangements in respect of Russian companies. In recent transactions, we have worked with our clients to resolve the structuring challenges that arise as a result of both the Russian legal framework being new and evolving, and certain standard Western protections (such as put and call options and certain anti-dilution protections and shareholder information rights) being either beyond the scope of Russian law or only recently available (and largely untested) under Russian law.
