The ruble rose in near tandem with US-Iranian tensions pushing Brent crude prices up by $2.5 per barrel last week on perceived risks of supply disruptions, as Washington and Tehran exchanged heated words in an escalating geopolitical tussle.
Subsequently, OPEC and its Russian-led non-OPEC crude producing partners indicated they would probably maintain production cuts which have helped support prices this year, following their ministerial monitoring committee meeting, known as the JMMC, on Sunday (May 19) in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
Market conjecture suggests the Russians want to ditch the ongoing production cuts that have resulted in 1.2 million barrels per day (bpd) of crude oil being take out of the global supply pool, but played along in Jeddah, at least until all parties meet again in Vienna, Austria on June 26.
While Russia thinks the job of market rebalancing is done and wants to raise production, OPEC's de-facto leader Saudi Arabia is worried about a possible price crash that a potential output increase might end up causing. End result is that Moscow has OPEC where it wants it. On paper, the Russians undertake just over a sixth (230,000 bpd) of headline 1.2 million bpd cut, and appear to be sticking to it .
The output cuts have helped oil prices to rise more than 30% this far into the current trading year but Brent, the global proxy benchmark, remains stubbornly range-bound oscillating in the $70-$75 per barrel bracket given demand concerns in the wake of the US-China trade tiff, European slowdown and Brexit chaos.
Moscow appears to be at peace with oil prices above $60 per barrel, and Russian Energy Minister Alexander Novak has made little secret of it. From time to time, Novak subtly dangles the threat of the Russians breaking ranks and upping production.
His words in Jeddah, as cited by CNBC , were in a similar vein. "We are supportive of continuing our cooperation with our colleagues from other countries. But this continuation could depend to various extents on how the [market] situation unfolds and what the forecasts for supply and demand will be on the market. If it turns out that there will be a shortfall in the market then we will be prepared to examine options linked with a possible increase in production."
Should Russia decide to go its own way, OPEC – which I have always said lacks an exit strategy for the ongoing cuts – will be in more than a spot of bother. It is already grappling with market share issues at it bids to support prices.
The end of OPEC/non-OPEC cooperation has to come at some point, sooner rather than later. But until then, ruble traders, quite used to short-term volatility, can look to the upside for the oil-linked currency.
I am a UK-based oil & gas sector analyst and business news editor/writer with over 20 years of experience in the financial and trade press. I have worked on all major
I am a UK-based oil & gas sector analyst and business news editor/writer with over 20 years of experience in the financial and trade press. I have worked on all major media platforms – print, newswire, web and broadcast. At various points in my career, I have been an OPEC, Bank of England and UK Office for National Statistics correspondent. Over the years, I have provided wide-ranging oil & gas sector commentary, including pricing, supply scenarios, E&P infrastructure, corporations' financials and exploration data. I am a lively commentator on 'crude' matters for publications and broadcasting outlets including CNBC Europe, BBC Radio, Asian and Middle Eastern networks, via my own website, Forbes and various other publications. My oil market commentary has a partial supply-side bias based on a belief that the risk premium is often given gratuitous, somewhat convenient, prominence by cheeky souls who handle quite a few paper barrels but have probably never been to a tanker terminal or the receiving end of a pipeline. Yet having done both, I pragmatically accept paper barrels [or should we say ‘e-barrels’] are not going anywhere, anytime soon!
