In-form Blackpool midfielder Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall believes the Seasiders are now beginning to get the rub of the green.
The 21-year-old scored his second goal in as many games at the weekend as Blackpool beat Ipswich Town 2-1 at Bloomfield Road.
That marked Blackpool’s first back-to-back league wins since November, having also beaten Bolton Wanderers by the same scoreline the previous week.
Sorry, there seem to be some issues. Please try again later.
Both of those games were won right at the death and that’s given the Seasiders a real shot of confidence according to the on-loan Leicester City man.
“Again, it’s a fantastic feeling to win it so late,” he told The Gazette.
“There’s not many better feelings in football than getting a late winner like that in front of your home crowd.
“It’s given us real confidence now. We’re really happy in the dressing room and we know that we can go on and beat teams now.
“We’re getting the rub of the green that we weren’t getting earlier, so we’re all really happy.
“Everyone knew we were in a bit of bad form before these wins, we weren’t getting the rub of the green or any luck.
“I think it might be changing now, as we seem to be getting the rub of the green now.
“That’s important as we are playing well, even though against Ipswich we probably didn’t play as well as we have played in previous weeks.
Dewsbury-Hall now has three goals for the Seasiders in his eight appearances having made the move from Leicester during the January transfer window.
But it’s also his all-round displays that have impressed Pool fans, and Dewsbury-Hall is keen to keep up the good work.
“I’m delighted to score once again, especially as both were good goals as well,” he added.
“My aim now is just to keep playing well and hopefully chip in with a couple more goals and see where it takes us.
“For the goal against Ipswich, I was a little bit surprised the keeper didn’t get down to it but seeing the size of him I knew it was going to be tough for him to get down low.
“He’s about 6ft 10 ins or something so I knew if I kept my shot low it would be tough for him to get down to it, so to see it creep into the bottom corner was a good feeling.”
