Coffee cover Thanksgiving turkey, prepared and styled by Shannon Kinsella, in the test kitchen on Thursday Oct. 31, 2019. (Abel Uribe / Chicago Tribune)
Roasting a beautiful, bronzed turkey is easy. It’s the rest of the meal that sets nerves on edge. For a successful, low-stress Thanksgiving, I post a menu, and an outline of things to prep in advance, on the fridge door. We set the table a few days ahead so the house looks ready even if the cook is in the weeds.
Speaking of the turkey, a whole golden roasted bird always makes a stunning presentation. Buy the best turkey you can afford. Read the labels: Natural birds do not contain additives and taste the most like turkey. Kosher turkeys are usually pre-salted and retain moisture nicely; a delicious option when available. Self-basting birds are injected with a solution by the manufacturer and are my least favorite because while they may come out moist, they tend to taste artificial and overly salty.
This year, I’m ordering a natural, never frozen, medium-size turkey from my local butcher. Rather than a wet brine — which requires lots of refrigerator space for a container large enough to hold the turkey and brine — I’m adding flavor with a dry rub applied several days in advance.
The rub, a combination of sea salt, dark coffee and sweet red chile, is reminiscent of a packaged blend we used when cooking on a recent trip to Maui. This terra cotta-colored rub gets applied to the turkey a day or two in advance of cooking for maximum flavor. The salt in the rub causes juices inside the meat to come to the surface; the salt dissolves in this exuded liquid which then gets reabsorbed into the meat. This means flavor in the meat and a beautifully bronzed exterior.
Always remove the seasoned turkey from the refrigerator about 1 hour before cooking. For roasting the bird, I choose a shallow pan which allows air circulation for maximum color and crispness of the skin. A bed of vegetables in the bottom of the pan adds aroma during roasting and flavor to the pan juices.
If I am short on oven space, I cook the turkey either in a countertop roaster or on my grill. Both have their advantages and downsides — the 18-quart Nesco roaster never fails to yield a moist bird but no crispy skin. I follow the manufacturer’s directions, but it’s wise to start checking for doneness at least 30 minutes before they say. The grill yields crisp skin and allows me to add smoked wood chips for flavor, but I won’t have pan drippings to flavor the gravy. When grilling the turkey, use an oven thermometer to keep the temperature just right — timing is nearly the same as in the oven unless it’s very cold outside.
I skip stuffing the turkey with dressing — primarily for speedy cooking, but also for safety. Tightly packed turkey cavities can fail to reach a safe internal temperature. Instead, I loosely fill the body cavity with a medley of onion, orange and fresh herbs. These ingredients add moisture and aroma to the turkey.
While the turkey rests on the cutting board, I make the gravy from the pan juices and some broth. A splash of golden rum adds a tropical flavor that pairs well with the coffee rub.
For the stuffing, or dressing as some folks call it, I make my own oven-toasted bread cubes from good whole grain bread. Then I soften celery and sweet onion in a skillet with pork sausage and smoky bacon. Marry the stuffing to the bird by moistening it with a homemade turkey broth made from the neck and giblets. Diced fresh pineapple adds a sweet surprise; so does a spoonful or two of the chile rub.
Around our house, cooking is a shared endeavor. With family and friends lending a hand in the kitchen or at the carving station, we are truly thankful.
The stuffing is flavored with some of the chile rub and spiked with chunks of fresh pineapple. (Abel Uribe/Chicago Tribune; Shannon Kinsella/food styling)
I don’t bother trussing the turkey; the legs will cook more evenly if they are not pinned close to the body. The coffee rub gives the turkey a deep mahogany color.
½ cup coffee and sweet paprika rub, see recipe
1 large sweet onion or Maui onion, roughly chopped
Several sprigs of fresh sage, parsley and thyme
¼ cup expeller-pressed canola oil, safflower or sunflower oil
1. Remove the giblets and neck packets from the cavities of the turkey. Pat turkey dry and place on a baking sheet.
2. Coat turkey on all sides with the coffee rub. Refrigerate turkey, loosely covered, up to 3 days.
3. For turkey broth, put the giblets (not the liver) and neck into a deep saucepan. Add cold water to cover by 2 inches, usually 1 ½ quarts. Simmer, adding water if needed, about 2 hours. Strain into a bowl (discarding solids). You should have about 4 cups broth. Refrigerate broth for up to 3 days.
4. Heat oven to 375 degrees. Tuck the turkey wings behind the back. Put half of the onion and all the orange pieces and herbs in the turkey cavity.
5. Put the turkey onto a rack set in a large shallow roasting pan, breast side up. Toss together the remaining onion plus the carrots, celery and 2 tablespoons of the oil. Place around turkey in the pan. Drizzle turkey with remaining 2 tablespoons oil.
6. Roast turkey at 375 for 30 minutes. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees. Continue roasting the turkey, basting every 30 minutes or so with the pan juices and turning the pan occasionally for even browning, until an instant-read thermometer inserted into the thickest part of the thigh registers about 160 degrees, about 2 ½ hours longer.
7. Transfer turkey to a cutting board and tent with foil. Let it stand about 15 minutes or so; the temperature will rise another 10 degrees. I think the turkey is deliciously juicy at 165 to 170 degrees — no more.
8. Meanwhile, set the roasting pan with the pan juices and vegetables directly over a stovetop burner. Heat the pan juices to a boil. Add the rum and boil hard 2 minutes. Stir in 3 cups turkey broth. Stir the arrowroot in ½ cup of the remaining broth until it dissolves. Whisk the dissolved starch into the simmering pan juices until boiling and thickened. Add more broth if needed to adjust consistency. Season with pepper and salt to taste. If desired, stir in a spoonful of gravy darkener for a richer color. Remove from heat and strain into a serving dish. You should have a generous 4 cups.
9. Use a spoon to remove the vegetable mixture and herbs from the turkey cavities and discard. Carve turkey with a very sharp knife. Serve carved turkey with pan gravy. Garnish with fresh herbs.
Nutrition information per serving (for 14 servings): 427 calories, 16 g fat, 4 g saturated fat, 220 mg cholesterol, 7 g carbohydrates, 3 g sugar, 60 g protein, 525 mg sodium, 1 g fiber
The Spice House sells an excellent espresso powder that I use in everything from savory rubs to chocolate brownies and cake. Alternatively, try Davidoff Espresso 57 or Medaglia D’Oro instant espresso powder. If your instand coffee is coarse, crush it into a powder with a mallet or the back of a spoon.
In a small bowl, thoroughly mix together 1/3 cup packed dark brown sugar, ¼ cup (about 1 ounce) sweet paprika, preferably imported Hungarian, ¼ cup (about ½ ounce) instant espresso powder, 1 ½ tablespoons fine salt, 1 ½ teaspoons ground coriander, 1 teaspoon garlic powder and ¼ teaspoon each ground cloves and allspice. Keeps in an airtight container up to several weeks. Makes: about ¾ cup
I like Whole Foods Seeduction bread with whole grain flour, honey and molasses for this stuffing. Use the heartiest whole grain bread you can find. Gluten-free breads and stuffing mix can be used, too; you’ll need about 16 ounces bread cubes. I buy the peeled pineapple from the produce section to save time.
1 loaf (16 to 20 ounces) seedy whole grain crusty bread, cut into 1-inch pieces
½ pound thickly sliced smoky bacon, cut into small dice
1 large sweet onion or Maui onion, diced
3 to 4 cloves garlic, finely chopped
3 cups cubed pineapple in ½-inch pieces (from 1 medium pineapple, peeled, cored, chopped)
2 tablespoons coffee and sweet paprika rub, see recipe, optional
1. Heat oven to 375 degrees. Use 1 tablespoon of the butter to coat the bottom and sides of a 13-by-9-inch baking dish.
2. Spread bread pieces in a single layer on two baking sheets. Bake, turning once or twice, until lightly crisped, about 20 minutes. Cool. (Wrap cooled bread in foil up to 1 day in advance.) You will have about 16 cups.
3. Meanwhile, cook sausage, bacon and sweet onion in very large skillet over medium heat. Use a spatula to chop sausage into small bits while it cooks through and turns golden, 20 to 30 minutes. Remove from heat.
4. Mix celery, green onions, garlic and sage in a large bowl. Stir in sausage mixture. Add bread cubes and mix well. Stir in broth to nicely moisten everything. Stir in pineapple, parsley, coffee rub if using, thyme and pepper. Taste and season with salt.
5. Transfer the mixture to the buttered pan. Dot the top with bits of the remaining 2 tablespoons butter. Let stand at room temperature up to 1 hour or refrigerated covered up to 1 day.
6. Bake uncovered at 350 degrees until heated through and edges are crispy, 50 to 60 minutes (slightly longer if mixture was refrigerated). Serve hot.
Nutrition information per serving (for 14 servings): 232 calories, 11 g fat, 4 g saturated fat, 22 mg cholesterol, 24 g carbohydrates, 8 g sugar, 11 g protein, 768 mg sodium, 4 g fiber
