- The Indian Rupee is performing best in the Asian currency block with the Malaysian Ringgit steadier.
Latest data from China has reported further cases in Wuhan, although there have been very few new cases reported outside the province, boosting confidence that the outbreak has been contained, and China is making further attempts to normalise conditions.
There has, however, been a jump in global fear as the number of cases outside China has increased and the spread has widened sharply.
There has been a particularly virulent outbreak in Northern Italy with over 300 cases and 11 deaths while the number of cases in South Korea and Iran has also increased further to 1,261 and 139 respectively.
The increase in cases has driven fears of a global pandemic and comments from the US Centre for Disease control and Prevention triggered further selling across markets.
Anne Schuchat, principal deputy director of the CDC, told reporters at a news briefing. “It’s not so much a question of if this will happen anymore, but rather more a question of when this will happen and how many people in this country will become infected and how many of those will develop severe or more complicated disease”.
Equity markets have declined very sharply over the past two days and commodity prices have remained under pressure. WTI is trading at 13-month lows and copper close to 3-year lows.
“Markets had been under-estimating the risk of coronavirus but I think that phase is over by now,” said Tatsuya Chiba, manager of forex at Mitsubishi Trust Bank.
There has, however, also been a shift in US interest rate expectations with Fed Funds futures indicating over a 30% chance of a rate cut at the March meeting and 90% chance of a cut by the end of July. The 10-year yield has also declined to record lows near 1.30%.
In a tweet, Marc-André Fongern, head of research at MAF Global Forex, commented that:
The virus is now increasingly becoming an almost incalculable global risk, i.e. in case the rate of new infections in the US actually rises noticeably, the Fed may be forced to consider lowering interest rates in order to alleviate the downside risks for the domestic economy.
The shift in US yields and expectations of Fed Funds rate cuts will offer an element of protection to major and emerging-market currencies against the US dollar.
Which Currencies are Most Impacted by Global Panic-Selling?
Commodity currencies have still been subjected to fresh selling with the Australian dollar inevitably a focus and AUD/USD has declined to fresh 10-year lows at 0.6570.
The biggest losers have been concentrated in emerging markets, especially those countries which are oil exporters.
Within Europe, the Norwegian krone has been the biggest loser with a 2.1% retreat.
With the Japanese yen securing a reprice, the Australian dollar has declined 2.4% against the Japanese yen.
Currency analysts at Scotiabank summarise by saying, "the USD is mixed on the day; the CHF is a modest out-performer and the EUR is holding up well again; we think the EUR’s recent form has been driven mainly by short-covering as EUR-funded carry trades are unwound amid the spike in market volatility."
"The GBP is under-performing on the session on little new news. Asia FX is mixed; the INR is out-performing on the session and the MYR is steadier.
"The CNH is flat but the KRW has weakened again, dropping 0.5% on the day. Weak risk appetite is keeping the MXN tone soft, with USDMXN holding just below its 200- day MA (19.21) still. There are no major data reports today so markets will continue to eye equities as the weathervane for risk appetite and the FX market’s direction.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Tim is an economist and has been involved in financial markets for over 20 years as an analyst. He...
