So in this article, we’ll cover all that is history and also the possible future prospects of the cryptocurrencies in the country of Russia.
The Russian government has welcomed the blockchain technology but the authorities have turned down cryptocurrencies due to the non-transparent nature of the cryptocurrency transactions. The Russian Rouble is considered as the only means of payment in Russia and the issuance of any other currencies is prohibited.
The country’s perception towards the cryptocurrencies and blockchain was not clear as the cryptocurrencies which were to be once regulated in Russia now can face a ban. While Russia’s Ministry of Finance was trying to regularize cryptocurrencies in the country, the Central Bank of Russia wants to ban them. Russia is bringing a bill which could put a blanket ban on Cryptocurrency issuance and sale will be passed in the second half of 2020.
For many years, the Russian authorities paid attention to the potential use of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies. The focus was mainly on the measures taken to prevent money laundering, corruption and other illegal activities. The Central Bank of Russia and the Ministry of Finance are the key regulators of cryptocurrencies.
The Russian Cryptocurrency market is on the verge to witness a change as the country is about to adopt new rules and regulations for cryptocurrencies by drafting a bill. Due to the Coronavirus pandemic, the legislation procedure has slowed down and the bill will be adopted until the end of spring.
Alexey Guznov, head of legal department, Russia’s Central Bank addressing the risks involved in cryptocurrencies stated,
“We believe there are big risks of legalizing the operations with the cryptocurrencies, from the standpoint of financial stability, money-laundering prevention, and consumer protection.”
Adding to this he further says,
“We oppose the fact that there are institutions that organize the release of cryptocurrency and facilitate its circulation. The coming bill directly formulates the ban on the issue, as well as on the organization of the circulation of cryptocurrency, and introduces liability for the violation of this ban.”
According to the bill, owning cryptocurrencies is not an offence only if they have made their deal under the jurisdiction which does not prohibit.
Cryptocurrencies are not considered as legal tenders in Russia and hence there are no taxes at present. But the country is working in terms of regulating them and also bringing the crypto activities under the taxes.
Russia’s Prime Minister, Mikhail Mishustin is a former taxman and a supporter of cryptocurrency. He is presently working on the tax laws with all the operations with the cryptocurrencies.
“I am convinced that it is necessary to tax such operations and to correctly assess any economic consequences of using cryptocurrencies,” Mishustin stated.
Cryptocurrency mining is one of the profitable businesses in Russia. Siberia is one of the flourishing regions for mining. As it has made the resources available at a reasonable price and the natural cold climate is an added advantage to keep temperatures cool. The huge old abandoned factories are being converted into a mining farm.
Although Russia has come up with a new draft bill which intends to regularize cryptocurrencies, there is no mention of mining in the bill. This could raise new speculations about the government’s intention towards mining. That whether they are in favour of it or no. As the bill has been delayed, it would be interesting to watch if mining also would be regularized or not.
Russia has introduced a bill on ‘Digital Financial Assets’ which was drafted in May 2018.  The bill termed cryptocurrencies as a digital financial asset which is no legitimate means of payment within the territory of Russia.
The bill requires the crypto exchanges to go through the KYC process of customers for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing purpose. Earlier the upper limit for the investors was set up to 50,000 rubles ($900) as the maximum amount of investment, but now the maximum limit would be defined by the Central Bank of Russia.
However the bill was sent back to the authors in December 2018, where-in all crypto and token related terminology was replaced with the term ‘Digital Rights’ and the definition of Cryptocurrency Mining was deleted from the bill.
Russia’s cryptocurrency legislation, the draft bill “On Digital Financial Assets,” has been sent back to the first reading stage for significant changes. https://t.co/QNXHMkIV1M #government #russia #cryptocurrency #bill #blockchain
— Katalyse.io (@katalyse_io) December 4, 2018
The document was published on the official website of the President of Russia in February 2019.
Under the newly updated bill, both the sale and purchase of cryptocurrencies would be termed as suspicious activity.
03-04-2020:- The Chairman of the Russian State Duma Committee on Financial Markets confirmed the completion of the much-awaited Digital Asset Bill which would regulate cryptocurrency. However, the delay was due to global coronavirus pandemic.
— CoinGeek (@RealCoinGeek) April 2, 2020
18-02-2020:- The Central Bank of Russia(CBR) announced in Feb 2020, the successful completion of the pilot platform that allows users to tokenize assets, including equities and currencies.
