Currency.com is the first truly regulated tokenized securities exchange, which makes it a safe choice.
Currency.com offers leverage from 1:2 up to 1:100.
Usually do not offer any leverage.
A limited number of crypto exchanges comply with all AML and KYC procedures.
A wide range of assets to trade places Currency.com above rival platforms.
Limited number of tokens to trade.
Apart from BTC trading, Currency.com supports top-traded equities, commodities, indices and plans to include bonds and other assets.
Often provide only one single asset class.
Currency.com has an unparalleled matching engine, which ensures a split-second order execution.
by the speed of a blockchain, which makes them more prone to risk.
This platform was launched in April 2019 so it is definitely not too early to tell if it is a scam or not. However, they have been authorized to perform crypto trading activities based on Decree of President of The Republic of Belarus No.8, on Development of Digital Economy far back as 21st December 2017.
They are transparent about their name, address and it’s hard to find an exchange with full, proper regulation, given the nature of cryptocurrencies. What is clear so far is that we haven’t heard of any scam allegations YET.
The website is translated into 10 different languages, making information easily accessible.
Currency.com has a nice balance between functionality and ease including the use of a Demo account.
Currency.com offers a wide range of financial instruments that traders can use to leverage their crypto possession on traditional markets. These markets are summarised below;
Stock indices otherwise called indexes forms a fundamental part of the traditional financial markets. Some notable ones include the Dow Jones, NASDAQ, FTSE 100, and the S & P 500. A stock index measures the price-performance of a group of shares from a particular exchange.
One of the most interesting markets to measure and engage in is the stock market. Traders use it to speculate on stock prices of the largest companies.
This platform offers tokenized shares of companies such as Uber, Fiverr, NVIDIA, AT & T, Visa, Netflix, Tesla, Apple, Slack Technologies and many others.
Currency.com enables traders to use their cryptocurrency to engage with some of the world’s largest markets. Users can speculate on the price of gold, natural gas, crude oil, palladium, silver and lots more.
These are well-known debt instruments issued by the government of a country so as to finance both short-term and long-term spending.
Tokenized securities are tokens that represent the price of assets such as commodities, securities, or bonds. Tokenized securities are analogous to financial instruments (bonds, commodities, equities etc) whether the outcome of an investor is a profit or loss.
The platform is poised to issue over 10,000 tokens which are pegged to the market prices of various asset classes. They will include companies such as Coca-Cola, Amazon, and Apple; indices such as the Dow Jones 30, Nasdaq 100, and the S&P 500; as well as commodities such as Brent Crude oil, gold, and silver.
When a client places a trade, a token is received, this token tracks the price of the selected instrument allowing investors to diversify their portfolios without having to convert their crypto to fiat.
The prices are transparent and accessible via blockchain-based technology in order to guarantee the best possible prices.
What Tools Does This Platform Offer?
There are a large number of technical analysis tools available on this platform, but these are the summaries of the most important ones that you need to know.
The Price movement channel allows you to create a zone of fluctuations in the asset value during a specific period of time.
Head and shoulders pattern is a reversal chart, and it can be used to enter the bearish position after the bullish trend.
This pattern is created from different lines on other platforms, but you can use the whole of it on Currency.com.
Triangle pattern is two merging trend lines, where the price fluctuates from one to another.
Gann Fans include a progression of straight lines, drawn at various angles with the pivot point basis. When prices approach it, each of these lines indicates possible support or resistance levels.
This is when you can define possible aims, which the market price can reach, with the help of Fibonacci retracement levels. The system consists of two fields: corrective and objective.
Varieties of indicators are available on this platform, they can help both novice traders and professionals to guide them with the choice of a trading strategy. We are going to take a look at the most popular ones.
MACD is used to check the strength and path of the tren and also used to determine pivot points.
Accumulation / Distribution compares the closing price with the middle of the trading range.
Moving Average is useful in that it helps to determine the direction of the asset or market price movement and identify the current trend.
Price Volume Trend provides a price and volume change percentage, which confirms the strength or divergence of the price trend, and also warns about the price movement weakness.
This platform is well-made and enables crypto-currency users to be exposed to the price movements of various cryptocurrencies and traditional assets. This allows clients to engage in those markets without converting their cryptocurrency, and also ensures that they are able to receive their profits directly in Crypto.
For individuals who love taking risks, it offers margin trading opportunities.
Also, with a wide range of tools available, currency.com has established itself as one of the best exchange platforms coupled with its easy to navigate interface. I would strongly recommend that you start using currency.com.
