Currency forecast - What will happen to the ruble, euro and dollar in 2020?
A look at what lies ahead for the ruble, euro and dollar this year
participants are braced for the turbulent 2020 year for obvious reasons.
economy that could spill over to other parts of the world.
officials try to reassure the markets and downplay the risks of a recession.
Nevertheless, investors take such remarks with a pinch of salt. Indeed, there
is a slim chance of a downturn in the US economy.
can say this chance is virtually nil. This scenario provides a clue to further
turmoil in the US for a simple reason. The American financial sector is the
largest investor in the global economy.
US slips into financial troubles, its banks, investment, and pension funds
usually act following the same solution. In fact, they rush to close all their
positions in overseas financial markets.
massive inflow of foreign capital to the US, thus boosting demand for the US
likelihood of a recession in the domestic economy.
the US dollar's advance during the whole 2020.
weighty argument for the US dollar's strength is the Federal Reserve's policy.
indicate that the time is ripe for a rate hike.
mounting risks of an overproduction crisis. Another factor to bear in mind is
first sings of an economic crisis.
US central bank prefers a cautious approach. It will hardly take drastic
measures at least until the early Autumn. The regulator is going to act as
coaster usually ruins investors' confidence, so that the US dollar could
effect in such situations that has always happened during the market turmoil.
Eventually, the US currency is sure to recover for the above-said reasons.
participants are betting on the US dollar's strength. On the other hand, the
outlook for the euro is not so clear-cut. In view of the large-scale financial
market in the US as well as the Fed's crucial impact, the single European
currency will have to join other global currencies. In other words, the euro is
the EU economy is rather advanced, thus being able to resist headwinds from the
normalization of its monetary policy.
also made negative. This scenario arouses concerns among investors.
economy and the shared currency. The landslide victory of the Conservative
party in Great Britain opened the door to the UK's departure from the EU.
through reinforcement of the German capital in parallel.
companies enlarge their market share, they will boost their profits, thus
economy will enable the whole euro area to gain momentum.
certainly support the single European currency. Of course, this support is not
enough to cushion the euro from protracted weakness. Nevertheless, the euro
will offer better investment opportunities than other global currencies.
currency is a cardinal change in the ECB rhetoric. If ECB President Christine
Lagarde ventures to increase interest rates, the single European currency will
ruble is set to face a challenge in the coming year. The main bearish factor
for the ruble will be the monetary policy of the Bank of Russia.
interest rate gap is going to taper slowly but surely, taking the shine off the
ruble. However, this factor will not produce an immediate effect. This is the
case when the effect will manifest itself in the late year, having accumulated
in the course of time.
supporting the ruble's value, though there is something in its arsenal.
Russia could intervene in the currency market. However, experience of global central banks proves that forex interventions put
off the effect of the national currency depreciation, though intensifying the
economy. Bearing in mind policy moves of the Bank of Russia in recent years,
the regulator will hardly resort to any of such measures.
likelihood, it will let the ruble follow the downward trajectory. As a result,
no jolts are expected at least until the Autumn. The most probable scenario is
that the ruble is likely to drift lower with occasional leaps in value.
and the cumulative effect of monetary easing by the Bank of Russia. All in all,
the ruble has gloomy prospects for 2020.
This article was submitted by Alexander Davydov and Mikhail Makarov, InstaForex analysts.
