How is a Foot Rub Different from a Certified Reflexology Treatment?
Reflexology has become mainstream; people are curious about how reflexology can help them. Unfortunately, too many people confused about therapeutic reflexology with a foot massage. I want to clarify there is no comparison between a foot massage and a certified reflexology session.
Foot massage is just that, a foot rub; while a reflexology session with a certified Reflexologist trained on foot anatomy and physiology will know how to palpitate vital reflex points on the feet, hands, and ears to encourage energy flow to promote healing.
In the USA, a foot reflexology certificate training requires a minimal of 300 hours of training comprising of classroom studies, hands-on reflexology sessions, clinical work, and a written thesis. Some states require a combined massage and reflexology licensing.
From our research, foot massage parlors technicians are not trained reflexologists. Technicians are trained by the parlor owner in a show-like atmosphere with an emphasis on circulating energy flow and rubbing the feet. If the customers have questions about the treatments, many of the technicians do not speak English and can't answer.
If you would like to learn how reflexology can help you, schedule a consultation with a certified reflexologis t. How do you know if they are certified? The first question to ask is, "How many hours of training have you had?" The answer is between 200-300 hours (the 300 hours became standard circa 2015.)
If you would like to schedule a consultation with the Healing Place to learn more how Reflexology can help you, pick up the phone and call 508 359-6463 or click on the consultation tab on our website, www.healingplacemedfield.com
Helen Chin Lui is a Certified Reflexologist, Certified Energy Medicine Practitioner, Reiki Master, and teacher. She is the owner of the Healing Place LLC and Healingl Place Energy School LLC
Healing Place LLC specializes in helping people of all ages to break pain cycles of chronic pain, chronic digestive problems, and balance hormones naturally. If you would like to learn how Reflexology can support your health, please schedule a FREE consultation on the HealingPlaceMedfield.com website or call 508.359.6463.
Want to learn how to better care for yourself and your loved one with holistic medicine? Become a member of the HealingPlaceEnergySchool.com . We offer an array of Energy Medicine, Mindful, Reflexology, Meditations, and Self-Awareness courses that you can take from the privacy of your home. These are empowering self-care and self-help classes that teach lifelong skills.
