Emerging market stocks were set to post their biggest one-day drop in six weeks on Monday, as a string of dismal manufacturing data and a flare up in tensions between the United States and China dented risk sentiment.
MSCI’s index of emerging market shares slipped 2.8%, after rising almost 9% last month on hopes for a potential treatment for the COVID-19 pandemic as some countries planned exits from lockdowns which have severely curbed economic activity.
Indian shares  were set for their sharpest daily decline in six weeks as a survey showed factory activity in the country slumped to a record low in April, a day after a nationwide lockdown was extended by two weeks to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus.
The PMI for South Korea, a global manufacturing powerhouse, skidded to its lowest in more than decade. The won weakened 0.1%, against a perky dollar. “No one knows with a high degree of certainty how the COVID-19 curve will play out… especially with lockdown periods coming to an end,” said Hussein Sayed, chief market strategist at FXTM.
“If cases begin to grow and the curve steepens, the chances are high of returning to another phase of complete shutdown. That would put economies on freeze again and the only direction for stocks to head then is down.”
As oil prices slid, crude producer Russia’s rouble fell slightly, while Turkey’s lira touched its lowest level in more than 1-1/2 years, having surpassed a psychologically relevant 7 per dollar in holiday trade on Friday.
The currency traded largely flat on Monday. Data on the one hand showed annual inflation fell below 11% in April, on slumping oil prices and subdued activity, while separate data showed manufacturing output falling at a record rate.
U.S.-China tensions flared up over the spread of COVID-19 pandemic after U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said on Sunday there was “a significant amount of evidence” that the virus emerged from a laboratory in the central Chinese city of Wuhan.
This further dented the global sentiment after President Donald Trump threatened last week to impose fresh tariffs on China for its handling of the virus.
This sets a dour tone for future trade negotiations between the world’s two biggest economies, with a an initial agreement serving only as a phase 1 truce in a trade dispute that had begun to slow global economic growth before the pandemic.
“(The) backdrop is not conducive for any realistic hopes of a U.S.-China trade deal. Quite the opposite. At this stage the only question is how far relations deteriorate and how much damage is done,” said Michael Every, global strategist at Rabobank.
The offshore Chinese yuan traded flat.
For GRAPHIC on emerging market FX performance 2020, see http://tmsnrt.rs/2egbfVh For GRAPHIC on MSCI emerging index performance 2020, see https://tmsnrt.rs/2OusNdX
For CENTRAL EUROPE market report, see
For RUSSIAN market report, see (Reporting by Susan Mathew in Bengaluru; Editing by Rashmi Aich)
