If you don’t own stock in the company that makes Rub ‘n Buff, you should. Susie Davis’s purchases alone will make you wealthy.
In this month’s project, Susie — by now a familiar name to readers — uses Rub ‘n Buff and other homemade concoctions to transform three sets of “big box” utility shelving into artfully aged and rusted home office shelving, a stylish backdrop for the Zoom meetings that are now a fixture of many of our lives. Susie, an AP History teacher, styled hers with all the accoutrements of the job, Susie Style, but more on that in a minute.
Acknowledging her “champagne wishes and quarantine budget,” Susie searched online for shelving that was sturdy and functional, yet affordable and DIYable. Though she found the former, they ranged in price from $600 to $2,000. So, she asked herself, “What is more functional than garage shelves?” Another online search turned up a very few folks who shared her desire to transform this type of shelving but, in Susie’s estimation, they didn’t take if far enough.
She purchased three sets of 48 x 72 x 24” units with five shelves each for a total of $210. Having carefully measured — noting that “planning ahead is new for me” — once assembled they fit perfectly side-by-side across one wall of her office. They are heavy, so she recommends measuring carefully to avoid a return and, though they require no tools to assemble, “a mallet is your friend.”
With years of experience, Susie knew she could make them look rustic, but she wanted them to look rusty, like they had been sitting outside. And that stumped her. But not for long. With a mad scientist’s zeal, she started mixing together paint — ultimately, two different shades of brown — and who-would-have-ever-thought: cinnamon! Though her kids were wildly disappointed to discover Susie had not been baking as the aroma suffused their home, she was thrilled with the murky, chunky and, yes, rusty appearance and texture of her concoction.
She applied the mixture to the metal framing of the shelving units using a well-worn chip brush, rags, and her fingers. But she also used “whatever I had in the garage,” including various stains, plaster of Paris for texture, gilded wax, and her endless supply of Rub ‘n Buff. Nothing about Susie’s DIY approach is orthodox, so she mixed brands and colors with impunity, even a turquoise for a bit of a punched up verde gris patina. The “chunkier and pastier” the better.
The shelves that came with the units are made out of chipboard which she stained, placed on the frames, styled, received lots of positive feedback, but then decided she hated them. Off came all of her teaching materials, from traditional books to kitschy globes and other objects, as she devised another approach. Having recently ripped vinyl peel-and-stick wood-look planks off her walls — she hated that project too — she repurposed the planks for the shelves. Though the material can be cut with scissors or a box cutter, she used a miter saw to trim the panels to fit and wood glued them in place. Ah, much better.
