It's weird how we worry about taking money overseas.
You Don't Have To Do This!
When I was in Cambodia, I wanted to get a few riel as a souvenir. So I went to the front desk at my hotel, gave the clerk a couple dollars. He opened a safe and pulled out Cambodian money. In other words, he had the local currency locked up, but the dollars were ubiquitous.
Going to Russia, I wondered about money. Should I get it from my local bank in New York (where the rate would be pretty bad)? Or perhaps from my credit-card company? What about an ATM at the airport in St. Petersburg? I knew I didn't want to change money at the hotel.
So rather than make a big deal about things, before I left I simply went to my bank's online account, ordered a relatively small amount of rubles, and picked them up a few days later at the branch, right near my home.
I had Googled Russia and “rubles” and learned that it was illegal for Russians to do business in dollars. Still, knowing what I had heard from friends who had been in Russia, I decided to take dollars as well.  On our very first day we were on our own and hadn't yet met our guide. So we walked to a nearby flea market. The English-speaking vendors asked, “Dollars? Euros? Pounds?” I think they took anything except Monopoly money. So a thought: bring along dollars, especially singles for tips, and lots of fives if you take cabs.
That was another aspect of travel in Russia that is unlike, say, Western Europe. Even though many of the taxis have meters, we still negotiated a fare in advance. And just as we did at the flea market, we didn’t say “yes” to their first price request. It was remarkably easy to bargain--in dollars. We didn't have to speak, or count in, Russian.
St. Petersburg is a terrific walking city. So in the evenings, when we didn't have our guide, we were quite comfortable. We strolled the canals, took in the remarkable candy shops, even went into a supermarket or two. They’ll take Visa or MasterCard in the big shops and stores, but virtually no one, except at the hotel, takes American Express. And be prepared to have to pay cash at the smaller restaurants. In fact, several of them posted signs showing the classic logos for Visa, MasterCard and Amex — with an “X” through them. The cash I used...dollars.
Speaking of food, every meal everywhere we ate was tasty — even at the coffee shops adjacent to museums and palaces. But be aware there is also a pricey 18 percent VAT, so when you leave a tip, you may want to base it on the cost of the meal without that surcharge.
Overall, it was a much easier experience buying things with good old American dollars. You looked at an item and you were able to see its worth in numbers that didn't have to make you calculate. And you don't have to worry about returning to the States with a mess of rubles on which you'll get a poor exchange rate or have to pay a service charge. Yes, I had a few rubles left over. But they make great gifts for the grandchildren--or a nice subject to talk about when you take one out of your wallet and show friends.
I have had a rollicking 44-year ride as a reporter (sports) for The New York Times—that included 8,000 bylines, second-highest in the paper’s history. Along the way, I
I have had a rollicking 44-year ride as a reporter (sports) for The New York Times—that included 8,000 bylines, second-highest in the paper’s history. Along the way, I was lucky to have my wife, Roz, and three kids often share in the experience, schlepping them to many of the 20 Super Bowls and four Olympics I wrote about. I also have written 16 books, on topics from radio to journalism. Muhammad Ali told me I’m not as dumb as I look. I’ve written about many issues beyond sports, including the women’s rise in athletics, and money and agents. My travel stories range from playing golf in the shadow of the Pyramids, to fishing for piranha in the Amazon, to traveling in a covered wagon in the French Alps. City College of New York—where I was a literature major—has honored me with its highest graduate award.
