USD VS EM UPDATE #2: The US Dollar remained largely on the receiving end of a broad market sell-off into the latter half of Monday's European session with the DXY trading at its lowest in almost three months.
After initially sliding against the Turkish Lira following a huge bearish gap open, the US Dollar to TRY exchange rate eventually closed the gap and was last seen trading flat against the daily open as post-election euphoria fades to be replaced with uncertainty over Turkey's political and economic future.
Focus for the EM vs USD sphere is centred on the upcoming Group of 20 summit with US-China trade likely to arrest attention as President's Trump and Xi Jinping meet on the sidelines in a bid to de-escalate the trade war.
"Fed Funds futures have “only” priced in around 30bps of easing over the next 3 months but may have to adjust further if trade talks make no obvious progress at the G20 Osaka Summit this weekend," wrote Scotiabank analysts implying further losses for the Greenback should the leaders of the world's largest economies fail to come to an agreement.
USD VS EM UPDATE: The US Dollar commenced the weekly session broadly softer against a basket of EMs with the Fed's dovish turn helping to alleviate pressure on emerging market currencies while hopes of steps towards a US-Sine trade war de-escalation heading into the Group of 20 summit in Osaka supported global market sentiment.
Losses for the US Dollar were particularly substantial versus the Turkish Lira with the Greenback last seen trading down 1.35% from last week's close at L5.73728.
Market focus for the Dollar versus EM sphere is expected to remain on the Fed and the G20 summit with both holding considerable bearing for the USD's near, medium and longer-term outlooks.
"Key inputs into this story this week will be: i) Powell has a speech on policy at 19CET tomorrow night, ii) Friday’s US PCE deflator (another low 1.5% year-on-year reading may worry the Fed) and iii) Friday’s G20 meeting and any details emerging from a Trump-Xi meeting," wrote ING head of EMEA and LATAM research, Chris Turner, adding "We expect the soft side of the dollar to be explored this week and note that strong commodity (and cryptocurrency) prices, plus sharply falling USD hedging costs (3m USD Libor now off 50bp from the highs) should keep DXY on the soft side."
Over the weekend, the 34th ASEAN Summit in Bangkok saw Asian nation leaders band together to further the ASEAN outlook on the Indo-Pacific, a plan to coalesce efforts to further the economic clout of the region as a whole - a development which while not directly resultant of US-Sino trade tensions could help to somewhat insulate the region from the impact thereof.
"The summit agreed with Thailand's initiative to reinforce ASEAN's leading role in the conduct of relations with external partners in the region," said Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha of Thailand, adding "ASEAN now has a common approach on the issue."
While 2018 saw Fed-induced US Dollar strength maintain a stranglehold on the EM sphere, hopes for a rebound as the Federal Reserve commence their cutting cycle could be misplaced according to Nordea analysts with geopolitical risks around global trade and the potential for fresh military intervention in the middle-east, coupled with and contributing to lacklustre Chinese economic growth expected to keep EMs subdued, supporting a defensive view towards emerging markets.
The overall defensive stance on EMs is supported by a a number of current and expected risk factors including tightening financial conditions in the US, a continued slow down in global trade and growth, rising geopolitical uncertainty and a slowdown in China.
Despite the dovish turn from the Fed this week, putting rate cuts all-but certainly on the agenda and leaving analysts wondering when and what the magnitude of the cuts is likely to be rather than 'if', and while it seems counter-intuitive to expects EMs to suffer amid a Fed easing cycle, Nordea analysts expect financial conditions to actually tighten, removing a leg of EM support.
Moreover, any US Dollar weakness is expected to be transient based on historic price action with the Greenback tending to weaken in the run up to and six months following the Fed's initial cut before strengthening as other central banks follow suit.
"Overall, our model indicates that US financial conditions will tighten both in the short run and over the next 9-12 months, in line with previous Fed easing cycles and periods of slowing growth," wrote Nordea analysts, adding "This normally spells trouble for EM FX. This trouble can be exacerbated if the Fed, in fact, does not exercise its put option by delivering several cuts in a timely manner. In that case, financial conditions could tighten rapidly and act a toxic driver for EM FX, much like the situation in 2018."
Coupled with expected tighter US financial conditions, weaker global demand, rising geopolitical risks and fresh barriers to trade are also expected to limit EM appeal into H2.
First and foremost, the US-China trade war - despite recent signs towards reconciliation - remains a key risk for the whole global economy and while a number of analysts continue to hold out hope for a deal later in 2019, the persistent reminders of the trade war via news-headline and President Trump's twitter tirades should keep risk appetite on shaky ground.
Moreover, even if a trade deal is reached between the US and China, Trump's expected to sight his trade-tariff hiking regime elsewhere with Europe and Japan likely to come into the cross-hairs or any other country with which the US has a current account deficit.
Furthermore, on top of the protracted trade war, political uncertainty continues to hamper global sentiment with Breixt and flaring US-Iran tensions but two of the more prominent risks.
"In recent years, political uncertainty has negatively correlated with EM FX – a pattern that we expect to persist," wrote Nordea analysts.
Rounding off the factors spurring the defensive EM approach, Nordea analysts cited an expected slowdown in China with the CNY coming under pressure reflecting a distinct EM risk.
While both the US and China have touted numerous ways in which they can mitigate the economic impact of the continued trade war, it's nonetheless having a clear impact on the real economies (of both nations).
Despite having the know-how and sufficient fiscal and monetary policy artillery to avoid a rapid slowdown, Chinese growth stimulus comes at the cost of adding to the world's second largest economy's already worrisome debt. Moreover, any positive results arising from action taken by the Chinese government of PBoC will likely take several months to feed through to the real economy.
With the US Dollar to Chinese Yuan (USD/CNY) exchange rate back in the vicinity of ¥7.0, Nordea analysts also note the risks should the cross breach the key psychological level.
"Chinese assets may also come under pressure if USD/CNY breaches the psychologically important level of 7.0. Such an event could lead to a capital flight reminiscent of the 2015-16 situation, adding more downward pressure on growth," wrote the analysts, adding "So far, the Chinese authorities have tried to combat any FX speculation, but if the trade war escalates, we could envisage a shift of level in USD/CNY, thereby leading to a new round of risk aversion."
Despite the clear and apparent downside risks facing the Chinese economy, authorities are expected to step in to bolster the currency in a bid to avoid a breach of the ¥7.0 level should it be necessary.
With the US-China trade war at a critical juncture between reconciliation or further exacerbation, next week's Group of 20 summit in Osaka is being touted as a make or break event for trade talks - reminiscent of the 2018 G20 summit in Buenos Aires.
"The downward pressure on the CNY has been increasing in June owing to a combination of trade war worries and disappointing growth numbers. We do not expect USD/CNY to breach the 7.00 level ahead of the G20 meeting, which will be a make or break moment for trade talks," wrote Nordea analysts.
Currently trading at ¥6.8709, Nordea forecast the Dollar-to-Yuan cross to remain elevated (¥6.95) over the three month horizon before a softer USD spurs a decline to ¥6.8 by year-end and through H1 2020 before sliding further to see out 2020 around ¥6.75.
"We keep our USD/CNY forecasts unchanged, as we still expect the uncertainties related to the trade war to push down the pair for now, but not beyond 7.00," wrote the analysts, adding "A near agreement and extra government stimulus should strengthen the yuan again towards the end of the year."
With the RUB's outlook oil-coupled, a continued recovery in prices amid supply side concerns should help to keep the RUB supported with Nordea analysts retaining a bullish outlook on the Russian currency to year-end.
"We keep our bullish forecasts for the RUB unchanged, and see continued portfolio inflows as the key support factor, similar to the 2017 scenario," wrote Nordea analyst Morten Lund, adding "Given the muted inflation dynamics, two rate cuts from the CBR are now looking possible before the end of the year, hence we change our previous forecast of only one more cut this year."
Nordea's updated forecasts for the Greenback-to-Rouble see the cross lower (63.5) at the three-month mark, extending USD-led losses to 62.5 by year-end before reversing to 64.0 by mid 2020 and 65.50 by the end of next year.
The Argentinian Peso (ARS), Korean Won (KRW) and Turkish Lira (TRY) could face considerable challenges in the current trade environment according to Nordea's latest analyses.
"the performances of ARS and TRY are negatively correlated with increasing trade. This by no means indicates resilience in times of slowing global growth; instead, it suggests that these two currencies suffer from long-term structural problems, as they also take a beating in times of slowing growth."
Furthermore, USD-debt dependent currencies such as the Indian Rupee, Brazilian Real and Mexican Peso are expected to depreciate amid the current global trade slowdown - based on historic precedent.
"Digging into periods with global trade slowdowns, the PLN is one of the currencies that suffers the most, along with USD-debt dependent currencies such as the BRL, INR and MXN," wrote Nordea's Lund, adding "The results are less grim when adjusted for carry; however, in a material slowdown scenario (such as in 2008), the carry will not save many EM currencies."
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
After graduating with a 1st in psychology (BSc Hons), Elaine specialised in the areas of trader psychology...
