USD VS EM UPDATE: The market mood in the EM space was left a little frostier into Thursday's session after it was revealed the US administrations looks set to potentially 'blacklist' more technology companies from China.
On a positive for the EM sphere, the latest Federal Open market Committee (FOMC) Monetary Poilicy Meeting minutes signalled the potential for dovish moves from the central bank with policymakers expected to lower the reverse repo rate after the unexpected decision to lower the rate on excess reserves.
For the Chinese Yuan, risks to the downside are expected to be prevalent given the continued deterioration in US-China relations.
"The recent deterioration of the trade talks between the US and China have provided China a window in which to let the CNY depreciate. But recent actions suggest that they still see the USDCNY 7.0 level as a ceiling to avoid," wrote chief economist, Robert Carnell of ING, implying Beijing may intervene to limit the Yuan's losses.
Meanwhile for the Indian Rupee, the USD to INR was last seen trading at R69.674, down a shade from open ahead of the results of Indian national elections.
ING economist Prakash Sakpal wrote "The strong INR and stock market rally at the start of this week after the exit poll showed Modi retaining power has petered out subsequently, though it left market performance up on the week."
Confirmation of the exit polls should lend the Rupee support while the longer-term outlook is hinged on whether or not, and the pace at which, the re-elected Narednra Modi can roll out his pro-economic reforms.
Recent weeks have seen EMs and the wider sphere of risk-assets hampered by the unexpected escalation of US-China tensions. While there have been some tentative steps to allaying market concerns, both the US and China are continuing to play the blame game, with each side attributing the collapse in negotiations to actions by the other.
In the most recent commentary from the Chinese side, the Chinese Ambassador to Washington, Cui Tiankai said that China remains ready to continue talks. Speaking to Fox news, Cui said "China remains ready to continue our talks with our American colleagues to reach a conclusion. Our door is still open."
Nevertheless, Cui went on to attribute the current stalemate to US actions. "It’s quite clear it is the U.S. side that more than once changed its mind overnight and broke the tentative deal already reached,” Cui said, adding "So we are still committed to whatever we agree to do, but it is the U.S. side that changed its mind so often.”
Whatever the resolution, for now it appears that planned tariff hikes remain on track with risk-appetite expected to remain relatively muted until an overarching resolution emerges. While the next round of talks has yet to be scheduled since the stalemate on May 10th, the potential for a Trump-Xi face-off at the June G20 summit in Japan could reignite the process.
Under such a risk-averse environment, the outlook for the majority of EMs is understandably muted.
As a testament to the impact of the current conditions - i.e., not nearly as bad as it could get under a full-blown trade war - Asian EMs universally reported lower Q1 GDP growth in 2019 compared to Q4 2018 with demand for exports the pirmary culprit in the slackening pace of growth.
Currency-wise, the US Dollar's safe-haven appeal has pushed it higher almost universally versus the EM sphere with analysts expecting further Greenback gains as investor jitters dominate.
"The trade dispute won’t be resolved easily, so the risk-off mood won’t come off all of a sudden, said Ayako Sera, market strategist at Sumitomo Mitsui Trust Bank. “I think market sentiment will rather improve one small step at a time.”
Despite an abundance of risk-aversion, the Indian Rupee has nonetheless proved resilient to the current EM sell-off with the INR's firmness largely attributed to the outcome of the recent elections.
While India's economic footing isn't overwhelmingly spectacular, expectations of reform-implementation in the wake of Narendra Modi's re-election should raise the nation's economic profile.
"Modinomics is expected to continue making market-friendly reforms in the next five years, albeit likely at a slower pace owing to bureaucracy," wrote Nordea chief analyst Amy Yuan Zhuang, adding " Thus, India is not expected to see a sharp growth acceleration anytime soon, which limits the room for large gains in the rupee. A few years down the line, a more liberalised economy will likely attract more foreign capital and boost the INR's long-term potential."
The key factor determining Rupee gains moving forward is expected the pace at which reforms are rolled out with the near-term INR outlook limited by expectations of a slower (relative to Modi's previous term) pace of reforms.
Zhuang added "the Indian rupee will likely gain versus the dollar in the coming few months as election uncertainties evaporate, its upside potential on a two-year horizon is limited as the pace of reforms is not expected to exceed that of the past five years."
In line with Nordea's outlook, Scotibanak analysts also put the Indian Rupee higher in the near-term. According to chief currency strategist, Qi Gao, the US Dollar to Indian Rupee exchange rate is expected to fall to as low as R67 (last seen at R69.68) by the end of June as markets front-run the expected longer-term positives from Modi reforms.
Compared with market consensus, Nordea and Scotiabank forecasters were largely the exceptions with a recent Bloomberg survey of analysts putting the USD/INR higher, in favour of the US$, at R70.13 by the end of Q2.
Hopes of a US-China trade resolution following the late 2018 G20 decision to delay US tariff hikes as both sides sought a mutually acceptable deal boded well for the Chinese Yuan in the early stages of 2019. tentative signs of emerging green shoots also helped to allay concerns over a worsening of the global slowdown, prompting a stronger CNY versus USD.
However, renewed concerns over a full-blown US-China trade war saw the Yuan more-than-reverse it's early 2019 gains with the USD to CNY exchange rate last seen at ¥6.9019.
Moving forward, the overarching issue of US China trade is expected to remain the key driver for the cross with limited hopes of a near-term resolution tipped to weigh on the Chinese Yuan.
Despite the bleak outlook, analysts expect Beijing will be compelled to intervene in order to limit CNY losses versus the Greenback.
"We nudge up our 3M USD/CNY forecast to 6.85 on the expectation that renewed trade uncertainty will linger for some time. Our cautious view is further supported by the fragile state of the growth stabilisation," wrote Nordea's Zhuang, adding "The yuan weakness is likely limited by possible government intervention to keep currency expectations well-anchored and capital flows in check. We see room for gains in the yuan later this year on better growth and easing trade tensions."
The unexpected escalation in tensions between US and China caught markets largely off-guard, rocking EMs and risk-related assets lower across the board. The notable exceptions to the rout on risk-assets thus far have been the Russian Rouble and the Thai Baht, both of which have - somewhat counter-intuitively in the risk environment - gained versus the US Dollar.
As it stands, the RUB is currently the best performing EM currency in 2019 with analysts expecting the trend to continue as the Rouble displays remarkable risk-resilience to both the overarching global trade theme as well as US-imposed sanctions.
Seasonal factors have also contributed to the RUB's recent performance with Q1 appreciation the norm thanks to a seasonally high current account surplus. While this seasonal boost is expected to fade moving forward, analysts see the support garnered from continued demand for Russian sovereign debt as offsetting the removal of seasonal RUB drivers.
"We keep our bullish forecasts for the RUB unchanged, and see continued portfolio inflows as the key support factor, similar to the 2017 scenario," wrote chief Russia economist Tatiana Evdokimova of Nordea, adding "A much more muted price reaction to the VAT hike than expected, a strong RUB performance and weakness in internal demand have prompted the CBR to open the door for a rate cut in June 2019, considerably ahead of market consensus (Q4 2019)."
Nordea's latest USD/RUB exchange rate forecasts put the cross lower, at R63.5 in three months before seeing out the year around R62.5 and reversing RUB gains through 2020.
Somewhat in concurrence although in contention over timing, ING economists expected the RUB to remain supported in the very immediate term before depreciating over the forthcoming months.
"It looks like the Russian Finance Ministry is taking advantage of the current favourable sentiment and front-loading a lot of OFZ issuance. Today sees another unlimited auction of 2024 and 2030 OFZs," wrote global head of strategy, Chris Turner, adding "Foreign appetite has been good and while these flows may temporarily support the rouble, we stick to the view that a less favourable balance of payments environment over coming months could send USD/RUB to 66."
Overall, while the key theme of US China trade and the subsequent drag on global demand remains the dominant risk and market-driving factor in the EM sphere, a number of idiosyncratic drivers could set specific emerging market currencies apart - for example, the Thai Baht, Russian Rouble and Indian Rupee to name but a few.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
After graduating with a 1st in psychology (BSc Hons), Elaine specialised in the areas of trader psychology...
