The first week of July means some major holidays in North America, including Canada Day and Independence Day, which means lots of cooking meats to celebrate these holidays.
When you are coming up with your party grill menu, you can bring the "fall off the bone" BBQ Ribs from Portside BBQ on Royal Caribbean's Oasis of the Seas to your home with this easy recipe.
Royal Caribbean Vice President Food & Beverage, Linken D'Souza, shared how to make these super tasty ribs and home, which means you can not only get a great meal for your family, but also bring back some cruise memories from onboard.
Step 1: Put all dry rub ingredients into a bowl and mix well with a spatula.
Step 2: Time to prepare the ribs. Flip the ribs over to the back side.
Step 3: Take a sharp knife from one side and run it all the way down the center.
Step 4: Use your fingers to get underneath the membrane. Peel back until completely removed.
Step 5: Time to rub the ribs. Bring the ribs to room temperature, and then generously sprinkle the seasoning over the ribs and use your hands to rub into the meat.
Step 6: Flip the ribs and repeat the sprinkling and rubbing until the rubs are completely covered.
Step 1: Take half of each wood flavor and soak in water for 20 minutes.
Step 2: Take remaining dry wood flavors and mix together.
Step 3: Place half of the dry wood mix on 2 pieces of aluminum foil.
Step 4: Mix the soaked wood and dry wood on the aluminum foil sheets.
Step 5: Place the wood in the middle of the foil and fold each side to the middle. Make sure it is tightly wrapped and flip over.
Step 6: Use a knife to poke 6-8 one-inch holes to allow smoke through.
Step 1: Remove one of the grates while grill is still cold.
Step 2: Place one wood pouch with holes facing up on the side with the grate removed.
Step 3: Turn on grill only, heating up the side with the pouch and close the lid.
Step 4: Turn down the grill down to low once you reach 300°F and the wood starts to smoke.
Step 1: Place the ribs on the side where the heat is off and close the lid.
Step 2: After 1.5 hours, place the 2nd pouch of wood over the heat. Let cook for 3 hours.
Step 3: To get the ribs to  "fall of the bone", remove the cooked rubs and place on a foil sheet.
Step 4: Add one chopped white onion around the ribs.
Step 5: Take 1/4 cup of BBQ sauce mixed with 1/4 cup of water and pour over the ribs and evenly baste.
Step 6: Wrap the ribs in foil and place over the grate.
Step 7: Turn the heat under the rub to medium and continue to cook for 1 - 1.5 hours.
Step 1: Remove the rubs from the foil and place over medium high heat.
Step 2: Use your favorite BBQ sauce glaze to glaze the ribs with as little, or as much, sauce as you like to caramelize.
Step 3: Remove from grill after 3-5 minutes.
Enjoy the ribs and have a great holiday weekend!
Other Posts You May Enjoy:
