Most readers of this article have probably never seen a Russian ruble, but the dramatic decline in the Russian currency in December was all the talk among investors interested in emerging markets.
The trouble with the ruble is primarily centered on the spectacular decline of crude oil and not so much on the Ukrainian conflict or sanctions. The halving of crude oil futures from their ISIS-driven highs this past summer is the major factor for the coming recession of the Russian economy, possibly surpassing the effect of sanctions by a factor of three times.
There have been numerous speculations that the oil price drop is not a factor of market forces but deliberate strategy by Saudi Arabia encouraged by the U.S. With lower oil, the Saudis aim to achieve multiple objectives, namely: weaken Iran and Russia at the same time and slow high-cost U.S. shale production. The U.S. in that scenario is fine with the lower oil price despite the cost to shale producers, as it weakens Russia right in the middle of the biggest confrontation between the two countries since the end of the Cold War.
The Russian economy's leverage to oil prices is legendary and unprecedented globally. Such leverage, compounded by its geopolitical issues, does not jibe well with a free-floating currency prone to a financial panic. The Russian central bank spent $200 billion defending the ruble in late 2008 and early 2009, but the conclusion the Russians reached this time is that they should not defend the "rubble" but rather let the market determine its value. This was — as it has now become painfully obvious — the wrong conclusion.
Paper money — or their bigger, more important electronic credit counterpart in any financial system — has no intrinsic value. Paper money can work fabulously well if trade is in equilibrium, the economy grows fast based on savings and investment (not rising in financial leverage as we see now in China), and if the geopolitical situation is favorable. If any of the above is problematic, the currency can go into a tailspin.
I would be the first to say that the U.S. dollar has problems with over-indebtedness, too much financial leverage, and trade and fiscal deficits. But there has been progress on many of these fronts, and with the winding down of the so-far-successful gigantic QE central bank operation causing the U.S. economy to accelerate, the U.S. dollar has been rapidly rising since July. (Take this as a statement on the current state of affairs and not as an endorsement of QE-type policies aimed at re-leveraging the economy).
Unlike the dollar, the Russian ruble has seen a massive deterioration on all above-mentioned fronts in an extremely short (by macro standards) order. Keep in mind that the Russian budget gets more than 50% of its revenue from oil. The Russian budget for 2015 was based on $100 oil, and we saw February 2015 WTI futures trade below $45/bbl. While Brent crude is more relevant for Russia, the situation is equally dire as the Brent/WTI premium has been shrinking as the various oil grades have collapsed.
I have been aware of this oil-price leverage for several years, and I am surprised that the Russians did not do more to diversify their economy, particularly after their 2008 hard landing.
The conclusion of a 2009 paper "The Impact of Oil Price Volatility on Macroeconomic Activity in Russia" sheds some light on this challenge:
In this paper, using co-integration analysis and impulse-response functions, we have attempted empirically to assess to what extent oil-price increases affect real effective exchange rate and real GDP in Russia. The analysis leads to the finding that a 1% increase (decrease) in oil prices contributes to the depreciation (appreciation) of the exchange rate by 0.17% in the long run, whereas it leads to a 0.46% GDP growth (decline). Likewise, we find that in the short run (eight quarters) rising oil prices cause not only the GDP growth and the exchange-rate depreciation, but also a marginal increase in inflation rate.
Overall, these results lead to the conclusion that the Russian economy is greatly vulnerable to oil-price volatility. Given the economic damage in case of falling oil price, it seems reasonable to suppose that the country needs to diversify its key industries and enhance the competitiveness of non-energy sectors by increasing foreign direct investment (FDI) from the rest of the world, driven by the improvement of investment environment through the World Trade Organization (WTO) accession. Notwithstanding the data limitations, this study may provide some insight into the relationship between oil price and macroeconomic variables in Russia.
When the ruble lost 40 on the USD/RUB rate, the decline accelerated notably; in the 2008-2009 global financial crisis the $200 billion the Russian central bank sent managed to halt the decline just below that level. This time, the USD/RUB cross rate moved between 40 and nearly 80 in less than three months.
It was a mistake of the Russian central bank (who had the money) not to institute a currency board at 40, or more heavily intervene. It is a mistake because it is the currency decline that is causing inflation to rise, compounding the problem by destabilizing the economy further. The oil price was almost $15 per barrel cheaper in the worst days of the 2008 crisis, when the ruble and the Russian economy were in better shape.
The Russian RTS dollar-denominated index for all intents and purposes has now crashed. It is peculiar to note that the ruble-denominated Micex index is doing fine and is in the middle of its 52-week range. Such calm in this ruble-denominated index feels like the eye of the storm rather than anything else. The dollar-denominated Russian stock-market proxies, the Market Vectors Russia ETF RSX,
