Fargo teacher contract talks have dragged on for months. What's the rub?
Jan 7th 2020 - 5am.
Teachers look on May 13 in the Fargo School Board meeting room as negotiations for teacher contracts continue. Forum file photo
FARGO — The contract for Fargo teachers expired June 30, and teachers have been working under those terms as current contract talks remain deadlocked on the issue of pay.
The next step is a hearing by a state fact-finding commission set for Wednesday, Jan. 8.
If the fact-finding process doesn’t result in an agreement, the school board could unilaterally issue contracts, which happened in 2017.
Below is a summary of what both sides see as major issues in the contract talks:
While pay remains a sticking point, teachers say too much energy was consumed reaching agreement on items like teacher prep time and whether teachers could use sick time if they became injured at work. "Things that should have been automatic have been a struggle," said David Marquardt, who recently stepped down as a negotiator for the Fargo teachers union.
When it comes to pay, Marquardt said the Fargo School Board could change budget priorities and come up with the amount necessary to reach an agreement, but "they chose not to."
Marquardt said an enrollment dip the district points to as a revenue setback shrinks in importance when one considers projected enrollment growth school officials say will require building new schools. "If you can’t afford the staff you have right now, why are you looking at more schools?" Marquardt said.
Whether a teacher is near the top of the pay scale at about $83,000, or closer to starting pay of about $41,000 for a third-year teacher, Marquardt said a majority have seen their take-home pay shrink because of growing deductions for things like health insurance. "They don’t see their salary moving forward," he said.
According to Marquardt, starting pay in Fargo is not competitive with other districts in the state. But boosting starting pay by a greater percentage than what other pay lanes receive poses a political challenge. The board has said the union could concentrate pay increases as it saw fit, but the union declined. "It shouldn’t be up to us how they want to spend the money, you’re setting us up to make someone pretty mad," Marquardt said.
The Fargo School Board is offering teachers an increase to their overall pay matrix of about 3% the first year of the two-year contract and about 3.4% the second year of the contract.
If approved, the same increases would likely be granted to other staff members district wide, and that would mean a budget deficit of about $700,000 each year of the contract.
According to Robin Nelson, chairwoman of the school board, about $500,000 of that $700,000 annual deficit would be due to a recent "bombshell" revelation from the state, which told the school district it will be getting less revenue than it budgeted for, largely due to a recent enrollment dip.
The Fargo teachers union has endorsed adopting recommendations of a mediation panel that suggested a compromise. Nelson said that proposal would result in about $1.6 million in deficit spending the first year of the contract and $1.7 million in deficit spending the second year of the contract — a $1 million annual gap between the board’s offer and what teachers say they would accept.
The school district has an annual budget of about $160 million and reserves of about $30 million. Nelson said a certain level of reserves are necessary for cash flow and a good bond rating for the district. "You only have so much cushion," Nelson said.
