1. Preheat the oven to 200°C. Grease a 24cm pie dish.
2. Combine strawberries, cornflour, pepper, sugar and lemon zest in a large saucepan over medium-high heat and stir until sugar dissolves. Bring to a simmer and cook, stirring occasionally, for 2-3 minutes or until strawberries start to release their juices but have not lost their shape. Pour strawberry mixture into prepared dish.
3. Combine shortbread and butter in a bowl and scatter over strawberry mixture. Bake for 15-20 minutes or until golden and bubbling.
4. Meanwhile, place marshmallows and 2 tsp water in a saucepan over low heat. Cook, stirring, for 3 minutes or until melted and smooth. Keep warm until needed.
5. Dollop hot crumble with marshmallow mixture, then use a blowtorch to toast until golden. Sprinkle with extra pepper and serve immediately.
1/2 cup (75g) self-raising flour, sifted
1. Preheat the oven to 180°C. Grease 2 x 500ml (2-cup) ovenproof dishes or one larger dish. In addition, grease a baking tray and line with baking paper.
2. For the crumble, place flour in a bowl. Using your fingers, rub in butter until it resembles coarse crumbs. Add baking powder, sugar, oats and coconut, and stir to combine. Using your fingers, roughly clump mixture together, then chill for 30 minutes or until firm.
3. Spread crumble over prepared tray and bake for 20 minutes or until golden. Set aside. Reduce oven to 160°C.
4. For the sticky lemon, place sugar and ¼ cup (60ml) water in a saucepan over medium heat and cook, stirring, until sugar dissolves. Bring to the boil, then reduce heat to medium. Add the lemon and cook, turning halfway, for 10 minutes or until rind is slightly translucent and golden. Using tongs, remove from pan and set aside.
5. To make the puddings, place egg yolks and 1/3 cup (75g) sugar in a stand mixer fitted with the whisk attachment and whisk until thick and pale. Add milk, cream and lemon zest and juice, and whisk until smooth. Fold in flour. In a clean bowl, whisk eggwhites until soft peaks. Add cream of tartar and remaining 2 tbs sugar, then whisk until smooth and glossy.
6. Fold one-third of the eggwhite mixture into the lemon mixture to loosen, then fold in remaining eggwhite mixture. Divide between prepared dishes. Place dishes in a deep baking tray and place tray in oven. Carefully add boiling water to tray until halfway up pudding dishes. Bake for 15 minutes or until tops are just set.
7. Scatter puddings with toasted crumble and top with sticky lemon to serve.
