We continue to observe relatively better behaved moves in FX markets, with periods of US dollar upside (albeit still in place) being more moderate and accompanied by less FX volatility. Yesterday’s price action provides a case in point as the meaningful fall in stock markets didn’t translate into abrupt USD gains. Although the global economic outlook remains dim (sharply rising Covid-19 cases in the US, concerns about bankruptcies, examples of the re-emergence of lockdowns in China) the fiscal and monetary measures already taken globally, as well as better access to USD liquidity, all make the periods of dollar upside more orderly and help to avoid panic selling. This should help to stabilise the bond markets. For FX, the downside risks to cyclical and emerging market currencies remain, though admittedly many of these currencies show a profound undervaluation (Norwegian krone and Australian dollar in the G10 space, and Brazil's real, Colombian peso, Turkish lira and Russian rouble in the EM space). The improvement in USD funding and the very stretched valuation has already started to manifest itself in NOK, which has rallied sharply so far this week.
EUR/USD is stabilising around the 1.1000 level and with volatility declining and the Federal Reserve embarking on an ultra-loose monetary stance, the downside to the pair should be limited and orderly. We see higher EUR/USD into the summer, towards the 1.1500 level.
Sterling's trading behaviour has changed, with the currency no longer meaningfully suffering in a risk-off environment (i.e. lower stock prices, stronger USD - as per price action yesterday). This reflects the improvement on the USD funding front (which also led to an across the board decline in FX volatility, GBP included), which makes the external funding needs-dependent GBP less vulnerable and leads to lower currency downside. EUR/GBP currently testing the 0.8800 level is a case in point.
The minutes of the Reserve Bank of Australia's March emergency meeting signalled very low appetite for a move to negative rates, which likely paves the way to a ramp-up in the Bank’s quantitative easing. Indeed, the RBA has started to broaden its government bond purchases (so far, amounting to AUD30 billion) to longer maturities, triggering a bull flattening and possibly suggesting a shift to a de-facto yield curve control. With the government about to boost bond issuance to fund a fiscal package worth c.16% of GDP, the RBA may have to increase its balance sheet at an even faster pace in the near future. This notion - in tandem with lingering weak risk appetite, plummeting global trade flows and depressed commodity prices - is incompatible with AUD/USD trading sustainably above 0.60 through the second quarter, in our view.
