The long-awaited completion of the phase one agreement had a limited impact on FX markets yesterday as such an outcome has long been expected and priced in. The de-escalation of the trade conflict and stabilising global growth point to a market friendly environment for emerging market FX for the coming months. However, with the spot gains in many EM currencies already quite meaningful since early December, the focus should turn to those currencies which offer carry potential. Elsewhere, the South African Reserve Bank meets to set interest rates today. Only three of 19 analysts are expecting a cut. We doubt that the SARB is prepared to ease policy ahead of the Moody’s sovereign ratings decision in late February, where the loss of investment grade status for local currency debt is a distinct possibility.
The EUR/USD tight range trade continues and the cross’s upside should remain bound by the 1.1180 level this week given the limited data drivers.
We don’t see the Russian government reshuffle (Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev replaced by Mikhail Mishustin) as overly negative for the rouble at this point. The orderly nature of the reshuffle suggests limited scope for political risk premium being priced into the rouble, while concerns about possible irresponsible fiscal easing (which could reintroduce a credit risk premium into the currency) are not justified at this point. The currency still benefits from one of the highest real rates in the EM FX world and remains undervalued within our BEER valuation framework. At this point, one of the biggest risks to RUB is a possible reversal in the foreign holdings of OFZs (which grew meaningfully last year). However, for this to happen, the market needs to first see evidence that possible fiscal stimulus would be of a magnitude to meaningfully change growth and inflation dynamics. At this point, this is not the case in our view. Our bias remains for a higher USD/RUB in coming months (back into the 62-64 range) due to the combination of a shrinking current account surplus and stable or growing FX interventions.
After the meaningful easing over the past two quarters (1,200 basis points since July), our economists look for the Central Bank of Turkey to remain on hold today as the decline in the (ex-post) real policy rate due to large rate cuts and the recent rise in inflation entails a risk to the Turkish lira's stability. A measured cut cannot be completely ruled out given the ongoing growth priority. The decision to pause would be positive for TRY as it would stabilise the declining real rate, with USD/TRY moving towards 5.8000.
