Recreational runners weren’t the norm in 1962 when Lydiard encouraged a group of 30 unfit, overweight businessmen into jogging in Auckland's Cornwall Park.
The Auckland Joggers Club grew out of this exercise. The same group were responsible for setting up the Round the Bays charity run. It was the subject of Garth’s book Running for  Our Lives, published on the 50th anniversary of the club, in 2012.
Gilmour was very much a part of the movement. He gave up smoking and drinking and went on to run five marathons.
Arthur Lydiard, the athletics trainer and jogging pioneer, collaborated with Gilmour on several training manuals and jogging books.
He and Lydiard write more than a dozen training manuals together, including Running with Lydiard and books about jogging, many of which went on to be published internationally and translated into several languages, and remain in print today.
Gilmour recalled with some amusement seeing an item in a Soviet giveaway magazine that referred to his two bestsellers – Russian editions of Jogging with Lydiard and Running with Lydiard. "I fell about laughing – top selling, lowest paid. I haven’t had a rouble from them yet."
He also wrote biographies of Olympic gold medallists Peter Snell and Murray Halberg, paraplegic world champion Eve Rimmer and ultra-marathon runner Sandy Barwick. Snell died in December 2019, and Lydiard almost exactly 15 years earlier.
It was tremendously satisfying telling these great New Zealand athletes’ life stories, and to have them recorded permanently, he said.
Olympic gold medallist Peter Snell’s statue in Opunake, his birthplace. Gilmour wrote biographies of Snell and of Murray Halberg.
After some 20-odd years of trying Garth finally persuaded Arthur Lydiard to write his memoirs. The pair collaborated on the top-selling biography, Arthur Lydiard: Master Coach, published in 2004.
Gilmour always wanted to be a journalist. He had had a plan since aged 12, as a student at Otago Boys' High School.
By the age of 15 he had started work with the Otago Daily Times. He moved on to the Taranaki Herald, and after seven years he was off to Auckland where joined the staff at the Auckland Star.
He found the editorial office at the Star brash and exciting, a noisy, cigarette-filled office, packed with 30 or 40 journalists, tight deadlines and the Occidental pub just up the road. Like Garth, many of his new colleagues were from the South Island so it made for a close-knit mob.
Gilmour became well-known for his rugby reporting during the 1950s. His long-standing column Coming Through the Wry, published in the Star, reflected his personal charm and wit.
Garth is survived by his wife Kay Gilmour, family and the books he wrote, many of which have become classics in the science of running and training.
