GHMC Commissioner M.Dana Kishore has issued express instructions for laying of approach roads on both sides of the Railway Under Bridge (RUB) in East Anandbagh.
Mr. Dana Kishore has inspected the RUB construction works in Malkajgiri Circle on Wednesday, and said the works have been continuing for the last six to seven years, owing to reluctance of a few property owners to surrender their properties for laying of service roads.
The commissioner has asked the officials to proceed with approach roads, pending land acquisition. He asked the officials concerned from various departments such as TSTransco, water board, to shift the utilities on war footing.
The South Central Railway has completed the Box Drain portion in March with an expenditure of ₹15 crore, Mr. Dana Kishore said and asked the Roads & Buildings officials to immediately start the work for approach roads, without waiting for property acquisition.
He was accompanied by zonal commissioner J. Shankaraiah, R&B Chief Engineer Sateesh, and officials from Revenue department, water board, TSTransco and Police.
The Commissioner also inspected the Safilguda lake for arrangements for Ganesh Immersion, and issued necessary instructions.
A total of 26 immersion ponds have been readied by GHMC for Ganesh immersion festivities to take place on September 12. In addition to cleaning up of the existing 23 ponds, three more ponds under construction will be completed and brought into use, a statement from GHMC informed.
You have reached your limit for free articles this month.
Start your 14 days trial now. Sign Up
Find mobile-friendly version of articles from the day's newspaper in one easy-to-read list.
Enjoy reading as many articles as you wish without any limitations.
A select list of articles that match your interests and tastes.
Move smoothly between articles as our pages load instantly.
A one-stop-shop for seeing the latest updates, and managing your preferences.
We brief you on the latest and most important developments, three times a day.
Not convinced? Know why you should pay for news.
*Our Digital Subscription plans do not currently include the e-paper ,crossword, iPhone, iPad mobile applications and print. Our plans enhance your reading experience.
We have been keeping you up-to-date with information on the developments in India and the world that have a bearing on our health and wellbeing, our lives and livelihoods, during these difficult times. To enable wide dissemination of news that is in public interest, we have increased the number of articles that can be read free, and extended free trial periods. However, we have a request for those who can afford to subscribe: please do. As we fight disinformation and misinformation, and keep apace with the happenings, we need to commit greater resources to news gathering operations. We promise to deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Your support for our journalism is invaluable. It’s a support for truth and fairness in journalism. It has helped us keep apace with events and happenings.
The Hindu has always stood for journalism that is in the public interest. At this difficult time, it becomes even more important that we have access to information that has a bearing on our health and well-being, our lives, and livelihoods. As a subscriber, you are not only a beneficiary of our work but also its enabler.
We also reiterate here the promise that our team of reporters, copy editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers will deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Please enter a valid email address.
var data = {"email" : email, "category" : "newsletter"};
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 768px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
box-shadow: 0 0 4px 0 rgba(0, 0, 0, .328);
@media ( max-width : 320px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
