Like all holidays thus far in 2020, this Fourth of July will be different. Local fireworks displays might be canceled, but we can celebrate American optimism, good friends and better times ahead in the open air in small groups. Naturally, I’m thinking celebration food. Of course, the grills must be lit!
For six to 10 guests, cut-up chicken pieces prove economical and relatively quick to grill, usually less than 30 minutes. Chicken also is my choice when I’m transporting the grilled food to a picnic site or friend’s house. It tastes great at room temperature, especially when slathered with barbecue sauce.
For holiday indulgence with two to six guests on my own patio, I pull out all the stops and grill a couple of slabs of pork ribs coated in a spicy herb mixture. I pass small bowls of warmed barbecue sauce for dunking. To accompany our Fourth of July ribs, we’ll feast on homemade baked beans, warm and crusty cornbread, creamy coleslaw, and a fresh green bean salad. For dessert, lemon popsicles. No last-minute fussing required.
Ribs are rubbed with a mixture of herbs, black pepper, chile flakes and garlic and allowed to rest for a day or two before grilling. (Abel Uribe/Chicago Tribune; Shannon Kinsella/food styling)
My No. 1 tip: Always, always season ribs (or chicken pieces) well in advance of grilling. I like to generously apply salt and pepper or a grill rub one or two days ahead, then let everything develop flavor in the refrigerator.
The herby rib rub recipe that follows is my riff on a blend from Dai Due Butcher Shop in Austin, Texas. I bought a jar of the rub after enjoying an inspiring midday feast full of Texas goodness. The herbaceous mixture is so good, and just a touch sweet, that we enjoy the ribs without a barbecue sauce glaze. Instead, I set out a bowl of my favorite barbecue sauce (warmed slightly) for diners to drizzle on the ribs as they like.
The rub proves excellent with grilled chicken and pork chops. For meatless meals, rub thick slabs of eggplant or portobella mushroom caps with oil then sprinkle with the rub before grilling.
Baby back pork ribs, cut from the loin, while naturally tender, require about 1 ¼ hours of indirect cooking on a moderately hot (325 degrees) gas or charcoal grill. Cook the ribs in whole slabs, or, for portion control and ease of grilling, cut the slabs into halves or thirds. I serve half a slab of ribs to hearty eaters, one-third works when there are plenty of other side dishes.
Pork spareribs, from below the loin near the belly, have less meat than back ribs, but offer great flavor for less money. Before cooking, use a sharp paring knife to carefully remove the tough membrane that covers the underside of the rack of ribs. Then, cut the slabs in half and place in simmering salted water to cover over very low heat (do not allow the water to boil vigorously) for 20 minutes. Drain the ribs, pat dry and season with salt and pepper or a rib rub. Refrigerate up to two days. Grill the ribs over indirect heat until fork tender, about 1 to 1 ½ hours.
A gift of sliced black pepper bacon from New Braunfels Smokehouse in Texas influences this summer’s baked beans. First, the bacon yielded a delicious breakfast treat of crispy rashers. Then, I added the rendered bacon fat to a pot of simmering white beans — spice and flavor that pair perfectly with some brown sugar and barbecue sauce. The beans can be made several days ahead and reheated. Serve them with a ladle into individual bowls.
Skillet cornbread looks fantastic served straight from the pan. Add cheese, green onions, corn kernels as desired. Be sure to serve it with plenty of softened butter. It’s a holiday after all.
1. Pat ribs dry. If desired, cut each slab in half or into 3 sections. Season generously on all sides with some of the rib rub. Refrigerate loosely covered for up to 2 days. Remove from refrigerator while you prepare the grill so the ribs start to come to room temperature.
2. Soak wood chunks in water to cover for at least 30 minutes.
3. Prepare a charcoal grill or heat a gas grill to high. When the coals are covered with a gray ash, arrange them on two sides of the grill leaving the center empty. Place a drip pan on the bottom of the grill and place the cooking grate on top. If using a gas grill, turn off the burners in the center of the grill and turn the other burners to medium.
4. Just before you put the meat on the grill, nestle a few drained wood chunks amongst the hot coals. If using a gas grill, wrap the wood chunks in aluminum foil and puncture the package with several holes. Place it under the cooking grate, close to the flames. Put ribs on grill over the drip pan (not directly over the heat). Cover grill and cook, turning once, until fork-tender and juices run clear, about 1 ¼ hours.
5. Remove from grill; let rest 5 minutes before serving.
Herby rib rub: Mix 2 ½ tablespoons granulated sugar and 2 tablespoons coarse (kosher) salt in a mortar and pestle (or in a small dish). Add 2 teaspoons each dried thyme leaves and dried oregano leaves, 1 teaspoon each dried rosemary leaves and crushed red pepper flakes, ½ teaspoon each freshly ground black pepper, garlic powder and dried lavender (optional). Use the pestle to grind everything together to release the oils in the dried herbs. If working in a bowl, use the handle end of a wooden spoon, or a cocktail muddler, to crush the herbs into the salt and sugar. Store in a jar with a tight-fitting lid. Makes: ½ cup.
Baked beans get deep flavor from barbecue sauce and bacon fat. Blue cornmeal imparts its hue to the skillet-baked cornbread. Adapt it as you like with corn kernels, cheese, green onions or chiles. (Abel Uribe/Chicago Tribune; Shannon Kinsella/food styling)
I make this recipe a day or two in advance; the beans taste even better when reheated. If you cannot find black pepper bacon, use regular bacon and add 2 teaspoons ground black pepper to the beans. I save any remaining bean cooking liquid to use as the base for soups and stews.
¼ cup bacon fat from black pepper bacon OR 4 strips black pepper bacon, diced
3 to 4 ounces diced boneless pork shoulder or smoked ham, optional
1. Rinse beans in a colander and inspect for small pebbles. Put beans in a large saucepan or Dutch oven. Add bacon fat (or diced bacon) and half of the onion and garlic. Add cold water to cover everything by 2 inches. Heat to a boil over high heat. Reduce heat to very low; partly cover the pan and simmer over the lowest heat until beans are tender, about 2 hours. (Add more water if needed during cooking to keep beans submerged.) Let cool. Beans can be refrigerated in their liquid for up to 3 days.
2. Heat oven to 350 degrees. Strain beans over a large bowl to catch the liquid. Return beans to a Dutch oven or ceramic baking dish with a lid. Add remaining chopped onion and garlic, plus the pork shoulder, celery, brown sugar, barbecue sauce, mustard and salt. Stir in 1 cup of the reserved bean cooking liquid.
3. Put a piece of parchment paper over the pot, then cover tightly with the lid. Bake, stirring once or twice, 1 ½ hours. Uncover and stir beans. Return to the oven and bake uncovered, stirring once or twice to concentrate the flavors, about 1 hour. Serve warm.
Notes: Alternatively for step 1 you can cook the beans, bacon fat, onion and garlic in a stovetop or electric pressure cooker following manufacturer’s directions for adding water and cooking times.
