Deutsche Bank’s matched trades may have facilitated money laundering by Russian clients, regulator says
People walk past a branch of Deutsche Bank on January 17, 2014 in Berlin, Germany.
That’s the upshot of what U.S. and U.K. regulators announced in a series of settlements on Tuesday.
This scheme occurred while the bank  was on notice of serious and widespread anti-money laundering compliance issues dating back a decade, said New York Department of Financial Services Superintendent Maria T. Vullo in the agency’s press release . “The offsetting trades here lacked economic purpose and could have been used to facilitate money laundering or enable other illicit conduct, said Vullo.
The U.K. Financial Conduct Authority went further, saying the trades were “highly suggestive of financial crime” and used to move money to overseas bank accounts in Cyprus, Estonia and Latvia.
says the approximately $628 million in settlements announced Monday and Tuesday are “already materially reflected” in existing litigation reserves and that it is cooperating with other investigations into the Russia trades. Deutsche Bank also points out the U.K. regulator called it “exceptionally cooperative” and that it has committed resources to bolstering anti-money-laundering controls.
The relatively simple plot, the regulators say, involved having traders in the bank’s Moscow, London and New York offices making matching trades, often with one trader taking both sides of the transaction. The compliance weaknesses allowed the Moscow front office traders to execute more than 2,400 pairs of trades that mirrored each other, according to the U.K.’s Financial Conduct Authority.
At least 12 closely related entities were involved in the suspicious trading activities, many of them linked by common beneficial owners, management or agents. Those companies first entered orders with the Moscow desk to purchase Russian blue chip stocks, always paying in Russian rubles. The “mirror trade” occurred when a related company, typically registered in an offshore territory, would sell the identical Russian blue chip stock in the same quantity and at the same price through Deutsche Bank’s London branch. This often occurred on the same day and the seller was paid for its shares in U.S. dollars. All of the trades were cleared through the bank’s Deutsche Bank U.S. unit.
According to the NYDFS order, the money laundering scheme disguised as equities trading activity was led by the bank’s Moscow branch traders and ran from 2011 to early 2015.
Following the global financial crisis in 2008, the Russian business unit saw revenues cut in half, according to NYDFS. Traders, pressured to increase revenue, saw an opportunity to help local companies and to increase commission revenue. The Financial Conduct Authority says Deutsche Bank earned more than £9.1 ($11.4 million) in commissions from the suspicious trading. That revenue has been forfeited as part of the settlement with that regulator.
None of the trades demonstrated any legitimate economic rationale, says the NYDFS. It was not important which security was bought or sold just that there was a matching trade available. In one instance, the NYDFS order says, one company representative, buying and selling the identical shares for a related counterparties, told a DB Moscow trader, “I have a billion rouble today . ... Will you be able to find a security for this size?” In another case, a representative immediately switched the order from one Russian company to another when told the first trade was not available.
In July of 2015 , the New York Department of Financial Services asked Deutsche Bank to provide details of a suspected bribe offered to one of its employees in Moscow. Tuesday’s order says that a supervisor on the Moscow desk “appears to have been paid a bribe or other undisclosed compensation to facilitate the schemes.”
The investigation found that the bank missed numerous opportunities to detect, investigate and stop the scheme because of seriously weak legal and regulatory compliance. An attorney who lacked any compliance background served as the Moscow branch’s head of compliance, head of legal, and as its anti-money laundering officer – all at the same time. One Moscow employee responsible for the bank’s “know your customer” activities in Moscow was also actively involved in the scheme. Staff reportedly experienced hostility and threats on several occasions when they hesitated in completing transactions.
Deutsche Bank’s announced in September 2015 it would shut down its domestic trading and investment-banking business in Russia in 2015. Deutsche Bank and its New York branch will also hire an independent monitor as part of the agreed-upon consent order for its violations of New York anti-money laundering laws.
A Justice Department investigation into the Russian trades has been ongoing, and it is unclear if or when a settlement might be reached, according to a report in the Wall Street Journal.
Jason Furman, a Harvard economics professor and former economic adviser to President Barack Obama, has a very simple plan to both stimulate the economy and slow the spread of coronavirus.
