Homemade hand sanitizer to battle coronavirus? Don’t use denatured alcohol -- or vodka
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Denatured alcohol can be used to strip floors and make shellac, but don’t put it in your homemade hand sanitizer to fight the COVID-19 coronavirus.
The Internet has exploded with homemade sanitizer recipes as it becomes harder to find Purell and other hand sanitizer brands, even in Ohio, where there are no confirmed cases of the illness. Akron-based GOJO Industries, which makes Purell, is ramping up production to try and meet demand as people stock up ahead because of coronavirus worries.
Isopropyl alcohol is becoming harder to find as well, especially at higher alcohol content. But turning to other types of commercial alcohol is a bad idea, especially denatured alcohol.
Denatured alcohol contains ethanol, which could lead you to think it might be a worthwhile substitute. But ingredients are added to the bottles of denatured alcohol for effectiveness and to make it poisonous, so people can’t drink it. Those ingredients can be dangerous if absorbed through the skin and can also irritate your hands.
Health experts, both at the Cleveland Clinic and University Hospitals, don’t advise making your own hand sanitizer at all.
“The best approach to prevention is simple hand washing -- washing your hands for 20 seconds with soap and water,” said Dr. Alan Taege, an infectious disease specialist at Cleveland Clinic.
Hand sanitizers are helpful if soap and water aren’t available. To be effective, they should contain at least 60 percent alcohol.
But if you’re still convinced you need to make your own hand sanitizer, here’s what you need to know.
So you’ve found a recipe online...
The most standard formula recommended online involves mixing together 91 percent isopropyl alcohol with aloe vera gel, and then adding a dash of essential oils for cooling or calming properties.
Making homemade hand sanitizer that complies with CDC guidelines isn’t as simple as adding together fractions. The chemistry and math involved is complicated, and there’s no guarantee that any of these recipes will end with the right alcohol percentage.
The ratio of rubbing alcohol to aloe vera is 2/3 cup to 1/3 cup, which could work out to about 62 percent alcohol, John Protaciewicz, chair of Case Western Reserve University’s Chemistry Department, said. That’s above the CDC guidelines.
That’s not a foolproof recipe though. Protaciewicz said that calculation doesn’t take into account the interaction between a gel and a liquid, which could lead to the alcohol being diluted differently. It would also depend on ingredients in both the rubbing alcohol and the aloe vera gel.
And, if you’re using an rubbing alcohol with a lower percentage, you’re out of luck.
Hand-washing is simpler and guaranteed to be more effective.
What about raiding the liquor cabinet?
Vodka isn’t going to meet the alcohol percentage required to meet CDC guidelines. For example, if you see an 80 proof bottle of Tito’s Vodka, it’s going to work out to about 40 percent alcohol -- already ineffective.
The Austin-based alcohol brand is actually going on Twitter to try and dissuade customers from using its products to fight illnesses.
Per the CDC, hand sanitizer needs to contain at least 60% alcohol. Tito's Handmade Vodka is 40% alcohol, and therefore does not meet the current recommendation of the CDC. Please see attached for more information. pic.twitter.com/J5ifkV3Jah
— TitosVodka (@TitosVodka) March 5, 2020
It wouldn’t be easy to find an alcohol with a high enough proof to make effective hand sanitizer. Even if you did try experimenting with a bottle of Everclear, it will be difficult to do the math when diluting it to make it effective.
