by Nikita Dsilva | July 2, 2020, 22:15 IST
"The ongoing public health crisis has put cleanliness at the top of our priorities. It's the most effective way to shield us not only from the current COVID-19 virus but also various kinds of common infections."
It is common knowledge that germs spread through touch, air and contaminated surfaces. You can easily contract an infection if you consume food or water without washing your hands. The best way to wash your hands' effectively has been discussed widely in these past few months and we thought who better than the World Health Organisation as a source for the most efficient instructions to wash hands properly?
It is imperative that we take this simple step to protect our health and those around us. While constantly washing your hands can seem like a bit of a pain, it is the simplest precaution you can practise to keep you and the people around you safe. Here, WHO breaks it up into 11 easy steps.
Step 0: Wet hands with water thoroughly.
Step 3: Place your right palm over your left and thoroughly rub between your fingers. Repeat for your right hand.
Step 4: Rub your nails against the centre of your palm as depicted, repeat on the other palm.
Step 6: Squeeze your fingers together and use it to rub the centre of your palm. Repeat on the other hand.
Did you just realise that you've been washing your hands improperly all along? Us too! This WHO-approved way ensures that we get rid of 99.99% of germs.
If you can't get your hands on soap and water, especially while you're travelling, sanitiser is your best bet. Opt for an alcohol-based sanitiser that has at least 70% alcohol. It's important to remember that sanitisers might not get rid of all germs; however, here's the best way you can use sanitisers. The sanitisers might not be effective if your hands are too greasy and dirty.
How To Use A Sanitiser:
Step 1: Squirt a drop in the centre of your palm.
Step 2: Rub palms vigorously and repeat the steps shown above for 20 seconds until completely dry.
Q. Why do you need to wash your hands with soap and water?
Soap and water are extremely effective because it works to dislodge the sticky virus that clings to the skin. It is known to be more effective than sanitisers .
Q. When do you need to wash your hands with soap and water?
You do need to keep your hands germ-free even while you are at home. Here are all the times you should be washing your hands.
