Inner-thigh chafing is an uncomfortable reality for so many of us, but that doesn’t have to be the case.
As people in the UK prepare to take full advantage of the heatwave, trousers have been replaced in favour of breezy skirts, shorts and dresses.
But as we walk, friction between the thighs and the heat of the day often results in the inevitable: dreaded chafing.
When the skin on the inner thighs rubs together, it can create an uncomfortable patch of skin which, if not treated correctly, can become quite sore and irritated.
But what can you do? Wear tights all summer long? No thanks.
While various specialist products and undergarments have been created, there is actually a much simpler solution that involves using a product that's likely to already be lurking in your bathroom cabinet: roll-on deodorant.
Rolling deodorant on to the inner upper thighs acts as a lubricant, meaning your thighs will simply glide past each other.
Plus, this method apparently continues to work even after the deodorant has fully dried.
The hack has been praised on social media, with one Twitter user has calling the solution for chafing a “miracle,” while another has described the technique as “like being reborn again”.
“Roll-on deodorant is a total game-changer,” 25-year-old Londoner Martha told The Independent.
“Chafing was honestly the bane of my life before I learned this trick. It's the best life hack I've ever experienced.”
There are a number of other methods people use to tackle chafing, including spraying dry shampoo between the thighs and rubbing in Vaseline to minimise friction.
“Chafing can happen all year round, but the current sustained summer heatwave hasn’t helped reduce thigh friction!” says Sam Eley, marketing analyst at Wowcher, which typically experiences a rise in anti-chafing product sales at this time of year.
“During peak trading hours we are selling as many as one pair of anti-chafing bands per minute.
“Aiming to reduce any pain from rubbing, the bands slip on easily to protect your skin and provide extra support too.”
Other popular solutions include Lush’s Silky Underwear Dusting Powder and BodyGlide’s For Her Anti-Chafing Balm , both of which prevent sweat and keep chafing at bay.
