How to add coffee to your meat rubs for grilling steaks, brisket, pork and more
1of9The payoff with a coffee-infused rub comes in both flavor and function; it produces a black crust that surrounds the meat like a flavor blanket.Photo: Marvin Pfeiffer, San Antonio Express-News / Staff Photographer
2of9A grilled sirloin steak coated with a coffee and chile rub served with a side of squash and garnished with coffee beans.Photo: Marvin Pfeiffer, San Antonio Express-News / Staff Photographer
3of9Coffee beans, top, a coffee and chile rub, left, and a coffee rub that uses brown sugar are used to pair with grilled meats.Photo: Marvin Pfeiffer, San Antonio Express-News / Staff Photographer
4of9Pork loin grilled with a coffee rub served with a side of squash and garnished with coffee beans.Photo: Marvin Pfeiffer, San Antonio Express-News / Staff Photographer
5of9The finished pork loin that is covered with a special coffee rub.Photo: Marvin Pfeiffer, San Antonio Express-News / Staff Photographer
6of9Freshly ground beans will produce better flavor. Plain medium roast is the best choice.Photo: Marvin Pfeiffer, San Antonio Express-News / Staff Photographer
7of9Chuck Blount sprinkles a coffee and chile rub on steaks prior to putting them on the grill.Photo: Marvin Pfeiffer, San Antonio Express-News / Staff Photographer
8of9The finished pork loin that is covered with a special coffee rub.Photo: Marvin Pfeiffer, San Antonio Express-News / Staff Photographer
9of9Pork loin grilled with a coffee rub served with a side of squash and garnished with coffee beans.Photo: Marvin Pfeiffer, San Antonio Express-News / Staff Photographer
Like beer or wine, coffee offers a wide variety of flavor options, from dark bold blends to beans with light, citrus notes. Though coffee is still most appreciated as an eye-opener to start your day, those same flavorful grounds can be put to work as a powerful secret ingredient in meat and barbecue rubs.
“It adds a richness and helps deliver those super earthy flavors to the meat that I just love,” said Jess Pryles, a Texas-based meat authority and author of “ Hardcore Carnivore: Cook Meat Like You Mean It .”
If you haven’t thought to use coffee grounds as a rub ingredient, you’re not alone. Commercial rubs with coffee as an ingredient have only recently hit the market, and coffee rubs still are fairly rare on the competition-barbecue circuit.
Coffee is an awesome ingredient for  rub mixes, provided you pay attention to a few key details and proper ratios when making a blend.
For starters, coffee grounds are more Robin than Batman — they work a lot better in a supporting role than as the star of the dry-rub show. If you go too heavy on the coffee, it’s more likely to  produce bitter meat, so limit it to about  a tablespoon in your mix.
Pryles’ coffee rub, which she uses mostly on beef and other red meats (including a recipe for kangaroo fillets, which is in her book), is balanced with chile powder, cayenne pepper, cumin, kosher salt, black pepper and a handful of other ingredients. Other popular pairings include brown sugar, paprika and ground thyme.
The type of coffee used also makes a difference. Ground packaged coffees work, but freshly ground beans will produce better flavor. Plain medium roast is your best bet.
“Flavored coffees can often have a sort of artificial taste to them, and I think it steers the rub off course,” Pryles said. “The only exception for me would be the pecan coffees, which can add an element of wood-smoke taste, which would be something to consider if you were cooking the meats in the oven.”
The texture of the ground coffee should also be consistent with the other ingredients in the rub. Ground too finely, it can turn into a blackened sludge, but if too coarse, the grounds can uncomfortably jam into teeth crevices.
A good rule of thumb is to start with kosher salt and coarse ground black pepper (since these are standard ingredients in  nearly all rubs) and grind the coffee to a similar size. Another cheat is to purchase a  commercial rub blend and simply add 1 or 2 tablespoons of coffee grounds to the mixture as a flavor experiment.
The finished product should be a very bold blend that pairs exceptionally well with steaks sizzled over a hot grill to low-and-slow briskets. It also delivers great results with large pork cuts such as loin roasts and rib racks.
Because the rub is fairly coarse, it’s also a good idea to apply a coat of olive oil to all the meats so the blend sticks better to it throughout the cooking process.
The big payoff with the coffee infusion comes with both flavor and function, producing a terrific black crust that surrounds the meat like a flavor blanket.
And if you are looking for the perfect beverage to finish the dining experience, a hot espresso has the ability to bring it all home.
