Divya Chaudhry, Priyanka Tomar and Pallavi Joshi, Deconstructing India’s External Foreign Direct Investment (Oxfam Discussion Papers, March 2018),  p.23
Following the decision in July regarding the Vladivostok program, rapid steps followed to pave the way for agreements embedded in the Modi government’s procedures that are beneficial and acceptable to both Russia and India. To discuss the general issues surrounding MOUs, a meeting of the Indo-Russian Strategic Economic Dialogue took place in the same month.  In August 2019, Indian Commerce Minister Piyush Goyal and a delegation of chief ministers visited Russian provinces. Official statements supported Indian armed forces purchase of MIG 29 an Sukhoi 30 fighters, [57] in what would be a gesture to the powerful military industrial complex close to President Putin.
Implications of India’s “arrival” in the Russian Far East in this context were charted out in the fanfare for the Modi visit to Vladivostok, and the MOUs that were signed. Here, at a high level, overarching MOUs were signed between ministries, with one case of a general agreement between a private concern and a major Russian corporation –Shiv Khemka’s Sungroup and Zarubezhneft. All official understandings were settled broadly, and both sides agreed to establish the fine print at a later time. Agreements ranged from letters of intent between ministries on collaboration between Chennai and Vladivostok port, joint audiovisual production, and vigilance over customs issues.
More commercially driven agreements took place between public corporations and Russian entities. These included those between the Yakovlev Design Bureau and Bharat Earth Movers to produce/assemble primary aircraft in India, and six others between the Far East Mining Company and, separately, State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. STC, Minerals and Metals Trading Corpn of India Ltd MMTC, Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL), the National Mineral Development Corporation, NLC India Ltd., and, finally, Khanij Bidesh Ltd., the company set up by the Mineral Exploration Corporation, National Aluminium Company NALCO and HCL to explore and develop assets abroad. Indian private actors came into Russia in education, with Amity University, the Indian School of Business Management, Khemka’s Educational Foundation and Hindu cultural organisations linking with the premium Skolkovo Foundation and educational bodies in the RFE.  A US$ 1-billion Indian Line of Credit for the RFE was also announced.
Commitments to the RFE energy enclaves were reinforced by promise of commitment to the extractive industry enclaves, extending private inputs by Tatas and Khemkas. The possible presence in the Khabarovsk Primore hub was indicated, reinforcing the Kothari involvement in the area at a diamond polishing unit established recently.
The steps have left unattended Indian officials’ poor awareness of the Russian business environment. [59] Indian state involvement in the RFE is that of an investor – a role that the PRC has been reluctant to play except within the framework of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). PM Modi’s “Look Far East” may manifest problems if oriented through the RFE, with Moscow fully in control of the management of the enterprises that take shape. From the Russian position, much may be agreed, but little done by India.
At Vladivostok, understanding of the ambiguities of Indian participation in the RFE led to the Joint Statement at the India Russia summit, on the sidelines of the EEF, strictly limiting expectations from the set of MOUs. This statement underplays the importance of the “Vladivostok moment” as it does any specific Indian contribution/gain from what will occur as a consequence. The summit statement [60] stresses a state commitment on the part of both governments to an overarching economic development program, involving holistic approaches to Indian and Russian economies without an RFE focus. This commitment involves an extension of early joint ventures in arms production and nuclear technology cooperation to larger international initiatives on the model of the NPP venture in Bangladesh. It also involves support for large-scale national development projects that pivot on “strategic” application of technology and human resources, with reference to the Strategic Economic Dialogue and Indian participation at the St. Petersburg Economic Forum. The notion of settling accounts in national currencies and enhancement of the arrangement is noted.
The statement only briefly situates collaboration in the development of the Russian Far East within this framework. This mention in turn occupies the same space as other themes across accepted subjects: collaboration in non-nuclear energy supplies, space research, education, culture, terrorism, UN reform and BRICS, RIC, and SCO.
Technically, the “Vladivostok moment” in Indo-Russian relations comes out as a tentative attempt to operationalise the Strategic Economic Dialogue between the two sides on a “transactional” basis: one that leaves the holistic bilateral relationship as a distinct domain, independent of outcomes of Indian participation in the EEF. Points of overlap between the two domains remain, however: in space cooperation that links to the Vostochny Cosmodrome, energy cooperation that links to future plans for Sakhalin and the space of the Arctic, [61] and strategic links to defence production at Konsomolsk on Amur. Also worth mentioning are RFE links to India’s global stake in the diamond industry. Building on this, the RFE may signify more to Indo-Russian relations than is apparent at present,  given the under-explored state of the RFE economy – which is accessible both as personal experience and statistical format outside Moscow sources. [62]
Also significant is the visit of Minister of  Petroleum and Natural Gas and Minister of Steel Dharmendra Pradhan in January 2020 to take forward EEF commitments, along with a delegation of prominent Indian entrepreneurs. [63] India’s participation was confirmed in the new Vostok Oil that will source Arctic oil by way of the RFE via the NSR, linking to the Taymur peninsula. A term agreement on imports of crude oil from Rosneft was signed in the following month. [64] Again, in spite of COVID-19, the RFE administration has posted a gateway to potential customers to order items of necessity from India. [65] These rapid outcomes of India’s inclusion in the EEF imply a new dimension to Indo-Russian relations, and perhaps more.
Prof. Hari Vasudevan joined ORF Kolkata in mid-2019 as a Visiting Distinguished Fellow. His passing has left an indelible mark in all of us not only because of his academic stature as a scholar of Indo-Russia relations, but his very presence too. Throughout his distinguished career of more than four decades, Prof. Vasudevan displayed a keen interest in varied disciplines and offered an unconventional perspective. At ORF, he spoke at length about the overlaps between India’s ‘Look East’ and ‘Look Far East’ policies, and the unfolding dynamics between the Greater Eurasia precepts of the Russian and the Chinese establishments.
Foremost, Prof. Vasudevan was an affable colleague and an extremely popular teacher who inspired generations of students. We will remember him for his warm smile and enquiring instinct, and for his interventions that enlivened our conference halls.
Hari Shankar Vasudevan was a renowned specialist on Russian history and politics, and on Central Asia, as well as one of India’s most reputed teachers of European history. He possessed a globalistic vision that is rare even in this age of globalisation.  Although he began his career in Ramjas College in Delhi, and briefly served at the Jamia Millia Islamia University, he remained at the Department of History in Calcutta University for the better part of his four-decade long professional life.  He also served as Director of the Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of Asian Studies (MAKAIAS), and as Chairman of NCERT committee on textbook revision for the social sciences.  Upon his retirement from the University, he was appointed Chairman of the Institute of Development Studies, Kolkata and was also part of the Observer Research Foundation in Kolkata as a Distinguished Visiting Fellow.  In each of these roles, Prof. Vasudevan performed with distinction, leaving a mark no matter how brief his association.  Above all he was a kind, generous and liberal-minded man with a phenomenally curious mind who was at home in the world.
Born in Kerala, Prof. Vasudevan spent the better part of his childhood in British-era Kenya, where he had his schooling under the aegis of teachers of British descent.  He went to Cambridge for his college education and eventually did his doctoral work on local self-government in Imperial Russia in late 19th century, under the fairly controversial Scottish historian of the Eastern Front (of World War I) Norman Stone.  While at Cambridge, he also opted for a course with one of the doyens of the Cambridge school of intellectual history, Quentin Skinner, who emphasised on the significance of the context in the shaping of any text.  The values – ethical, moral and academic – that he imbibed from his European masters at Kenya and then Cambridge remained with him throughout his life, which made quite a few people think of him as a pukka sahib and have everyone recognise him for what he was, a true gentleman.
Curiously, Prof. Vaseudevan’s reputation as a ‘Russianist’ was not on account of his doctoral work, nor indeed his first book on Imperial Russia.  Returning to India, after a brief stint at Ramjas College in Delhi, Vasudevan joined the history department of Calcutta University in 1978.  There he quickly established his reputation as a teacher of European (and in particular, Russian) history – both political, economic and intellectual.  He built on this reputation in the 1980s by establishing himself as an astute observer of Russian affairs, providing a lucid and comprehensive analysis in newspapers and journals about the crisis that gripped the USSR in its closing years.
Thereafter, once the Soviet archives were thrown open to scholars in the early 1990s, Prof. Vasudevan (in association with two other veteran scholars, Purabi Roy and Shobhanlal Duttagupta) brought out a valuable two-volume compendium of Soviet archival documents dealing with Russia’s relations with Indian political movements and personalities for the period 1917-47.  At around the same time, he was chosen to be part of the Indian government’s Ministry of Commerce delegation to Russia, briefed with the task of resuscitating New Delhi’s economic ties with Moscow.  He used his experience of the delegation to later produce an account of Indo-Russian relations after 1991, under the title, ‘Shadows of Substance’.
Having moved gradually into a study of India’s relations with Russia, Prof. Vasudevan then embarked on what was to become the project closest to his heart, In the Footsteps of Afanasii Nikitin, documenting and then retracing the 15th-century Russian traveller’s journey through Central Asia and Persia to the Indian subcontinent. It took him more than 15 painstaking years to complete the book.
In 2007 Prof. Vasudevan was appointed the Director of MAKAIAS, under the Ministry of Culture, Government of India – an institute which had made its name for Central Asian Studies.  During his tenure in MAKAIAS, the quality of scholarship and publications of the Institute attained new heights, benefitting particularly from the range of his personal contacts with Russia.  More importantly, by the time he left MAKAIAS to return to Calcutta University in 2010, Prof. Vasudevan developed a new interest in China in connection with outreach activities of the Institute with the Yunnan region, generally known as the K2K (Kolkata to Kunming) Initiative.
Returning to Calcutta University, Prof. Vasudevan continued to explore his interests in Europe and Russia at the Department of History and the Institute of Foreign Policy Studies of the University.  Additionally, he was appointed the Director of the Area Studies outfit for the study of China and its neighbourhood. During his Directorial tenure there, he continued with his newfound interest in China, by associating the China Centre with the K2K initiative, working on building a closer relationship between India and China.  He also seized on an opening with Myanmar in 2012, by trying to build a bridge between Calcutta University and Dagon University in Myanmar.  By the time he retired from service in 2017, he proved to be an astute observer of both these countries in India’s neighbourhood.
Even after retirement, Prof. Vasudevan continued on his academic journey. After serving two years as an UGC Emeritus Professor at his home department, Vasudevan joined the Observer Research Foundation at Kolkata as a consultant in what turned out to be the last year of his life.  At ORF-K, Prof. Vasudevan successfully combined his life-long interest in Russia and Indo-Russia relations with his newfound interest in China – the idea that he had just begun to explore involved Russian desire to tap the mineral and other resources in its Far East, and how India and China are participating in that venture in their own ways.  Shortly before succumbing to COVID-19 pneumonia, he also began to closely reflect on the nature of responses from all around him, and those from the larger world, to the pandemic.
Throughout his life, Prof. Vasudevan had been a cosmopolitan man with a global perspective.  The devotee of Lord Guruvayur, who chose to settle down with his “European” values in the city of Calcutta, was keenly perceptive of global currents and the differential impacts these had on local situations. His collaboration with the renowned scholar Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak on a project called “Radiating Globalities” towards the final years of his life largely encapsulated his globalist vision after the experience of a lifetime.  The intellectual horizon of the Calcutta academia has shrunk a little with the passing of this man with an extremely curious mind.
– Kingshuk Chatterjee (Professor of History, Calcutta University)
[1] Pavel A. Minakir, “Tikhookeanaia Rossiia: vyzovy I vozmozhnisti ekonomicheskoi kooperatsiei s severino vostochnoi Aziei,” Prostranstvennaia Ekonomka, no.4 (2005). Minakir presents a comment on the decisive position of the “big three” in one of the best analyses of the problems of development in the RFE.  The ups and downs in  Japanese and Korean policy are dealt with in Anatoly Buryi  and Sergei Greizik, “The Abe Plan and new possibilities for Russia-Japanese cooperation in the Far East,” Erina Report Plus,  no. 143 (August 2018).
See also  Antony V. Rinna, “Moscow’s ‘turn to the east’ and challenges to Russia-South Korea economic collaboration under the New Northern Policy,” Journal of Eurasian Studies, 10, no. 2 (June 2019).  Problems with PRC  policy are in Gilbert Rozman, “East Asian Regionalism and Sinocentrism,” Japanese Journal of Political Science, 13, no.1 (March 2012).
[2] Aseema Sinha, Globalizing India, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016) for an account of accumulation of authority behind the state in India as a broker of globalization, .
[3] Judith Thorntonand Charles Ziegler (Eds.), Russia’s Far East. A Region at Risk, Seattle/Washington: The National Bureau of Asian Research / University of Washington Press, 2002) AlsoNadezhda Stepanova et al., “Sustainable Development in  Sparsely Populated Territories:  Case of the Russian Arctic and Far East,” Sustainablity, 12, no. 6 (March 2020).
[4] Hari Vasudevan,, Shadows of Substance: Indo-Russian trade and military technical cooperation since 1991 (New Delhi: Manohar, 2010) for an account of Khemka’s Sun Group’s Russian operations.
[5] Silviu Petre and Ella Magdalena Ciuperca,  “Transactional International relations: Producers and Consumers of Security Hierarchies,” RCIC International Conference, (May 2018) for a bibliography setting out use of the category of “transactional” outside economics, following the contribution of William J. Aceves, “Economic Analysis of International Law: Transaction cost economics and the concept of state practice,” Journal of International Economic Law, 17, no. 4 (Winter 1996).
[6] Harsh V. Pant and Kabir Taneja (eds.) “Looking back, looking ahead: foreign policy in transition under Modi,” ORF Special Report, 93, (July 2019).
[8] Sudha Ramachandran, “ What’s India doing in Russia’s Far East ”, The Diplomat, accessed March 1, 2020.
[9] Alexei Zakharov, “ Exploring new drivers in India-Russia relation ”, ORF Occasional Paper, 124 (October  2017) . See also Nivedita Kapoor, “The long road ahead: Russia and its ambitions in the Far East,” ORF, accessed March 2, 2020.
[10] The appropriate title of a discussion at ORF, New Delhi on 20th February 2020.
[11] This refers to the Eastern Economic Forum 2019 and the Business Programme for the Fifth Eastern Economic Forum. Related  information concerning participation in the EEF, lectures and behaviour of delegates obtained through viewing daily proceedings at website through forumvostok.ru and info@roscongress.org.
[13] Indian perspectives were shaped from the start by a low estimation of the RFE purveyed by Western experts who generated a literature on these lines, stressing shortage, indifference and corruption. On resources, see Michael J. Bradshaw and Peter Kirkow, “The Energy Crisis in the Russian Far East: Origins and Possible Solutions,” Europe-Asia Studies, 50, No. 6 (Sept. 1998). Also, Michael  J. Bradshaw, (eds.), The Russian Far East and Pacific Asia:  Unfulfilled Potential, (London: Curzon,  2001). Broader surveys followed a similar route. See the classicJohn J. Stephan, The Russian Far East, (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1994) and laterSue Davis, The Russian Far East: The last frontier? (London and New York: Routledge, 2003).
[14] A.V. Lavrent’ev, “Razvitie transporta na Dal’nom Vostoke Rossio v usloviakh obshchestvennogo reformirovaniia: seredina 80-x godov – nachalo XXI veka,” (Avtoreferat Kand. Diss., Dal’nii Vostochnyi Universitet, 2017).
[15] Compare Atlas Avtomobilnykh Dorog SSSR,Glavnoe Upravlenie geodezii I kartografii pri sovete ministrov SSSR, (Moscow 1976) and Samyi Podrobnyi  Atlas Avtodorog, Rossiia, Strany SNG I Baltii (Moscow 2006), which taken together show long term continuity in this regard.
[16] Iu.V.Andreeeva et al.,  “Perspektivy Vliianiia Severnogo Morskogo Puti na Tovarooborot mezhdu Kitaem I Evropoi,” Mezhdunarodnyi Zhurnal Prikladnykh I Fundamental’nykh Issledovanii, 8, (2015).
[17] See Tsuneo Akaha and Anna Vassilievna (eds.), Crossing National Borders:  Human Migration Issues in Northeast Asia, (New York: United Nations University Press, 2005) and Olga Alexeeva, “Chinese Migration in the Russian Far East,” China Perspectives, no. 3( 2008).
[19] Allen Clark and Gennady Sekisov, “Mineral Development potential of the Russian Far East,” in CIS Minerals and Economic Development. Prospects, Problems and opportunities for international cooperation, ed.  J P. Dorian et al.,  (Springer, 1993). Also see, A .V. Volkov et al., “Perspektivy razvitiia dobychi zokora v Chukotskom avtonomnom okruge,” The Arctic: ecology and economy, (2017).
[20] Chzhou Tiankhe, “Khozaistvennaia deiatel’’nost kitaiskikh predprinimatel’ei na Dal’nom Vostoke Rossii kitaiskikh migrantov v 90e gg.XXv,” Rossiia I ATR, no. 3 (2019) . Also, Chao Huasheng, Sino-Russian Economic Cooperation in the Far East and Central Asia since 2012, (Hokkaido: Slavic Centre, 2015) .
[21] K.M. Belikova et al, “Cooperation of China and Russia in the framework of the Asian Super Grid: Political and Legal aspects,” International Journal of Economics and Business Administration, no. 1 (2019).
[22] Peggy Falkenheim Meyer,  “The Russian Far East’s integration with north east Asia. Problems and prospects,” Pacific Affairs, (1999) and Tsuneo Akaha (ed.), Politics and economics the Russian Far East (New York: Routledge, 1997). See also Hyam Aba, “Framing energy security between Russia and South Korea”, Asian Survey, no. 50(2010) and  Yoshinobu Yamamoto (Ed.), Globalism, Regionalism and Nationalism: Asia in search of a Role in the 21st Century (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1999) for Japanese debate on regionalism.
[23] Joseph Nye, Jr. et al.,Global Cooperation after the Cold War: a reassessment of Trilateralism, (New York: The Trilateral Commission, 1991)
[24] This has especially been underscored in a balanced manner in Tsuneo Akaha, “A Paradigm Shift in Russo-Japanese relations,” Demokratizatsiia, (July 1999).
[26] Jae Ho Chung et al., “Assessing the ‘Revive the Northeast’ (zhenxing dongbei): Origins, Policies and Implementation,” The China Quarterly, (2009). John Weiss, “Development in North east People’s Republic of China,” ADBI Research Policy Brief ,No.19 (2006)
[27] Tena Marie Hollzinger, “The Russo-Chinese Strategic Partnership. Oil and gas dimensions,” Connections, no. 9(2010).
[29] “ Alrosa and MMTC cooperation following Russian/Indian WTO Accord “, IDEX, accessed February 23, 2020.
[30] For the basic perspective, Helge Blakkisrud and Elana Wilson Rowe (eds.), Russia’s Turn to the East: Domestic Policy Making and Regional Cooperation (Palgrave Macmillan, 2017). Also, Stephen Blank, “Russia’s pivot to Asia:  the Multilateral Dimension,” National Bureau of Asian Research and the Centre for Energy Governance and Security, Working Paper(2019) and Gilbert Rozman, and Sergei Radchenko (eds.), International Relations and Asia’s Northern Tier: Sino-Russia Relations, North Korea, and Mongolia (Palgrave Macmillan, 2018). For various views Gordon C Chung,., “China and Russia. An axis of weak states,” World Affairs, 176, (2014);., Andrew C. Kuchins, “Russia and the CIS in 2013. Russia’s pivot to Asia,” Asian Survey, 54, (2013) and Alexei Malashenko, “What the North Caucasus means to Russia,”Russia/NIS Centre, IFRI, (July 2011).
[31] Iu.A Pavlov, “Dal’nii Vostok Rossii:  Desiat’ let peremen (2005-2015),” Sotsial’nyeI Gumanitarnye Nauki na Dal’nom Vostoke, 14, no. 2), 2017. Natasha Kuhrt, “The Russian Far East in Russia’s Asia Policy: Dual Integration or Double Periphery,” Europe-Asia Studies, (May 2012).
[33] V.D.,Nikiforova et al., , Rossiikaia Ekonommika I ee Instituty. Proshloe I Hastoiashchee (St. Petersburg: Nestor-Istoriia,  2013).
[34] Maria Shagina, “Sanctions in Japan-Russia economic relations. Impact and Adaption,” Forum Asia, (June 2019). “We are Tomodachi: Japan and Russia Edition 2017,” Government of Japan, 2017. Sung Hoon Jeh and Boogyun Kang, “Putin Administration’s Far East Development plans and the Future of Russia-Korea Cooperation,” World Economy Update, (June 2013).
[35] For  good accounts of sanctions and their impact, Amit Bhandari et al.,  “US sanctions on Russia and its impact on India,” Gateway House Research Paper No.14, (September 2018) and Matej Belinda and Jan Hanousek,  “Making Sanctions Bite. The EU-Russia sanctions of 2014,” in VOX, CEPR Policy Portal,  (April 2019).
[36] See Stephen Blank, Russia’s pivot to Asia, for a straightforward account of apparent Russian economic weakness. The complexity of the situation, that permits Russian manoeuvring is to be seen from combined reading of  Ilya Viktorov and Alexander   Abramov, “The 2014-15 financial crisis in Russia and the foundations of weak monetary power autonomy in the International economy,” New Political Economy (May 2019) and “ Russia’s economy is isolated from the global rout “, The Economist, accessed March 13, 2020.
[38] For a thorough account of the Russia PRC collaboration, Gaye Christofferson, “Chinese North East- Russian Far East Regional Cooperation: Old and New Programs,” Asia Dialogue, (June 2019) and Ivan Zvenko, “ Chinese-Russian Program ends with a Whimper “, Carnegie Moscow Centre, accessed March 4, 2020.
[39] Ma Bo “Strategiia Rossii Povorot na Vostok: Vosmozhnosti I vyzovy sopriazhenuia c kitaiiskkami transregionalnymi proektami,” Sravnitel’naia Politika, no. 2 (2017).  Anastasis Solomentszon, “The ‘rise’ of China in the eyes of Russia,” Connections, no. 14, (2014) andRozman, Sinocentrism.
[40] For the history of this area, see Toshiro Matsumoto, From Manchukuo to Communist China – the industrial reconstruction of north east China observed through the iron and steel industry at Anshan, 1940–1954 (Nagoya University Press, 2000) and Allan Rodgers,“The Manchurian Iron and Steel industry and its resource base,” Georgraphical Review, 48, (January 1948).  Bruce A. Elleman and Stephen Kotkin (eds.) Manchurian Railways and the Opening of China:  An International History (London: M.E. Sharpe, 2010).
[41] Wu Xin Chan, “The effects of ideological differences in north east Asian countries on the regional cooperation” Journal of Anhui Institute of Education, No.2, (2006). Zha Xianping and Li Tian Zi, “Interaction and collaboration between China’s north east strategy and Russia’s development strategy under a new situation,” North East Asia Forum, No 3, (2009). Zhan Fang, “Unpromising trend of north east regional cooperation and some thoughts on Jilin province’s strategy of foreign economy and trade,” North East Forum, No.6, (2010).
[42] Meizhen Gao, “Current Situation and Future Prospects of the Trans-GTR Corridors (Segments in PRC),” Erina Report No. 111, (May 2013).
[43] China has rapidly grown in terms of value-added products and by increasing exports of domestically produced goods. It has also grown in terms of high-end technology and this has resulted in China’s exports to Russia seeing an increase of domestic value added products. This leaves Russia with limited prospects for value addition.
[45] Corey Wallace, , “Leaving (north east) Asia? Japan’s Southern Strategy,” International Affairs, 94 no. 2,  (2018). Takayuki Tanaka, “ Japan-Russia gas pipeline mostly a pipedream “, Nikkei Asia Review. See also Boogyun Kang et al., “Russia’s Economic Modernization Plans and implications for cooperation between Korea and Russia” ,World Economy Update, (Jan. 2016).
[46] Rinna,“Moscow’s turn to the east.”. Liudmila Zakharova, “Economic relations between Russia and South Korea in the new Northern Policy,” Korean Economic Institute of America Academic Paper Series, (December 2019).
[47] Far Eastern Natural Resources Ltd. Tender for Krutogorovskoe Mining Project, Kamchatka
