Is the ruble undervalued yet?
Russia's currency briefly surpassed the Ukrainian Hryvnia as the  world's worst performing currency year-to-date this week, but it  isn't clear whether the ruble is undervalued.
The ruble weakened to 80 per U.S. dollar on Tuesday despite the  Central Bank of Russia's effort to shore up the embattled  currency with a 650 basis-point rate hike to 17 percent early  that morning, briefly making it the world's worst-performing  currency.
Declining oil prices coupled with a series of Western sanctions  on Russia over its activities in Ukraine have dogged the  currency. The ruble is strongly correlated with the price of oil,  Russia's most important export, which accounted for 14 percent of  gross domestic product in 2012, according to World Bank data.  Brent crude oil has fallen from above $115 per barrel in mid-June  to around $59.42 a barrel in Asian trade Friday.
Russia's Finance Ministry said on Wednesday it was starting to  sell its leftover foreign-currency stock and that it considered  the ruble to be "extremely undervalued." The ruble has since  strengthened, with the dollar fetching around 61.60 rubles on  Friday.
But not everyone believes the decline is overdone.
"We are not convinced by the Russian finance ministry's  claim… on Wednesday morning that the ruble is 'extremely  undervalued.' After all, Russia has undergone an enormous  deterioration in its terms of trade as a consequence of the slide  in the price oil, which seems unlikely to unwind any time soon,"  Capital Economics wrote in a note on Wednesday.
While Capital Economics notes the Finance Ministry's claim was  made when the ruble was above 70 per dollar and that it has since  strengthened to around 60 per dollar, it believes Russian  authorities "would continue to assert that the ruble was  mispriced."
Read More Russia's ruble rout: Why it shouldn't surprise you
"The devastating consequences that the current oil price will  have on Russia's economy and its financial system suggest calm  may not be restored any time soon, keeping the ruble under  pressure," it said.
However, it does not rule out a further recovery in the ruble if  oil prices rebound or if Russian authorities take further  supportive measures.
Others also think Russia's central bank isn't offering the best  call on the value of the ruble.
While oil is one of the main triggers of the ruble sell-off, it's  not solely responsible, Mizuho Bank said in a note on Wednesday,  suggesting ruble weakness is justified.
"[The] sell-off is not solely from oil. Rather, [the ruble]  tumble is exacerbated by, and predicated on, geo-politics as well  as doubts about consequent ability and willingness to meet  external debt," it said.
"If [the] sanction impact worsens (acting via real or financial  channels) or from a further and sharp tumble in oil prices, it  could tip the [ruble] into a 1998-style crisis," it added,  referring to the financial crisis in Russia that saw the ruble  plummet and the country default on its debt.
But some think the currency could be at a turning point.
It's a very difficult time to jump into Russia given the  tremendous correlations with oil prices, but if you think that  oil is going to go sideways from here, you can buy, Tim Seymour,  CIO at Triogem Asset Management told CNBC.
"I think the ruble will probably trade within a 55-60 band –  that's appropriate," Seymour said. "Remember when we got near 75  and touched almost 80, that was implying Russia's version of  crude trading somewhere around $25 per barrel. If that's where  you think it's going, that's where the ruble will go. But I think  the ruble should be 55 to 60 in a $65 Brent environment."  Investors typically monitor Brent crude oil to price Russia's  export blend.
Seymour believes that soft capital controls - roadblocks put in  place by a government to restrict the flow of money out of or  into its country- are likely, which will pressure the  multinationals and the oil exporters who are selling in dollars  to convert to rubles.
"To the extent that the central bank still has a lot of  firepower, I think Russia is not going to default anytime soon,"  he added. "Russia is probably better off than people think."
