The market reacted Thursday to the central bank's decision not to back stop the ruble, and concerns that all is not well in Moscow.
Russia's central banker Elvira Nabiullina already told markets this week that she would not rifle through the $368 billion in reserves to prop up the ruble. It is unclear whether investors overreacted to Nabiullina's statement today or if it was the cancelled trip to Davos that has investors smelling a rat. The ruble fell to 83.06 to the dollar, down 2.3% on Thursday. Meanwhile, oil rose 1.15% today. If the Russian rat ends up being a tiny mouse, the ruble will strengthen and go back to tracking oil.
Keeping the ruble linked to oil has helped keep the government's oil revenue consistent, at least, which is good news for the current accounts of the Russian government.
It is safer to assume that the ruble is "finished" only if oil is finished. The currency is still quite glued to it. All one has to do is look at the correlation between the USDRUB and the iPath Crude Oil (OIL) exchange traded fund to see these two are mirror images of themselves. That is going to continue, barring any surprises by currency regulators in Moscow.
Capital flight not the main reason for ruble depreciation. (Chart courtesy of EPFR Global)
Over the last three weeks, fund flows into Russia-dedicated funds have been positive. Over $87 million of fresh money rolled into Russian equities between Dec. 23 and Jan. 6, even as oil was going from $35 to $30. Only in the week ending January 13 has their been outflows of $12.9 million, according to fund tracking firm EPFR Global in Cambridge, Mass.
The December 2014 currency crisis led to a multibillion-dollar bank run in Russia as the ruble became totally free-float, going from around 35 rubles to 71 rubles in less than five weeks. The currency remained in a trading band between the high 50s and 60s for much of 2015, only slipping once it became clear that oil was not going to hold at $40 a barrel.
A weaker ruble is a sign of oil's demise and not necessarily a sign of capital leaving Russia. Capital flight is often taken as a sign that investors are losing confidence in an economy.
Russia is known as the Wild East among fund managers like Browder and even among the apolitical managers out there. They know Russia is prone to capital flight. Many of its billionaires have bank accounts in Cyprus, an offshore banking haven for Russia's one-percent. From the week-ending Dec. 9 through Dec. 23, investors withdrew $124 million from Russian-dedicated funds, according to EPFR Global. The number is not a perfect picture of true capital leaving Russia as it only measures flows into U.S. domiciled funds investing in Russian securities.
I've spent 20 years as a reporter for the best in the business, including as a Brazil-based staffer for WSJ. Since 2011, I focus on business and investing in the big
I've spent 20 years as a reporter for the best in the business, including as a Brazil-based staffer for WSJ. Since 2011, I focus on business and investing in the big emerging markets exclusively for Forbes.
My work has appeared in The Boston Globe, The Nation, Salon and USA Today. Occasional BBC guest. Former holder of the FINRA Series 7 and 66. Doesn't follow the herd.
