An outdoor polling station in Novosibirsk. Photograph: Kirill Kukhmar/Tass
The referendum is both momentous and absurd. Russians can endorse (or oppose) a plan to let Putin run for two more terms, potentially prolonging his rule beyond that of Stalin, and then win a washing machine or a hairdryer.
“It looks like a gameshow but I’m telling everybody I know to take this seriously, it’s enough to make you lose your mind,” said Oleg Kharlamov, a laboratory technician from Moscow who said he intended to vote against the amendments. The vote would help determine “who’s in charge for the next generation, and if we complain, they will say … ‘you voted for it’,” he said.
Boris Yeltsin sacks his cabinet and appoints Putin, a political neophyte who headed the main successor to the KGB, as his acting prime minister and heir apparent.
Yeltsin stuns Russia and the world by using his traditional new year message to announce his resignation and hand his sweeping powers, including the nuclear suitcase, to Putin.
Putin wins a surprisingly narrow majority in his first presidential election, taking 53% of the vote and avoiding a second round run-off.
Putin consolidates his centralised control of power by cruising to a second term as president with 71% of the vote, having limited press access to his opponents and harassing their campaigns.
Putin is prevented by the constitution from running for a third term as president. The First deputy prime minister Dmitry Medvedev is elected in his stead. One of his earliest moves is to appoint Putin as prime minister, leaving little doubt that the two men plan, at the very least, to run Russia in tandem.
Amid widespread allegations of vote-rigging, Putin returns to the role of president, taking 63.6%. Medvedev becomes his prime minister. "Putin has named himself the emperor of Russia for the next 12 years," says  protest leader Alexei Navalny.
Putin is re-elected until 2024 with 77% of the vote, amid high tensions between London and Moscow over the Salisbury nerve agent attack. Opposition activists highlight a number of cases of vote-rigging and statistical anomalies.
Russia holds a yes/no referendum on various topics including a proposal to amend the constitution to allow Putin to seek another two terms in the Kremlin. The resolution passes , potentially allowing him to rule as president until 2036.
Thank you for your feedback.
The raffles and prize giveaways are just part of a broad get-out-the-vote effort endorsed by the government. Companies have authorised their own prize giveaways that could allow them to track employee voting, while government workers such as teachers and doctors – some of whom are busy fighting the coronavirus outbreak – are reportedly being urged to cast ballots, in systematic attempts to boost turnout.
Meanwhile, Instagram and TikTok influencers claim they have been offered millions of roubles by shady middlemen to urge their young followers to vote.
Analysts say the Kremlin has concluded that the rescheduled referendum had to happen now, after Russia had declared victory over the coronavirus (despite more than 7,000 new cases a day still being reported) and before the effects of a battered economy or a potential second wave further sour public opinion.
