© Antonio Parrinello/Reuters | Empty restaurants mean empty coffers for Italian wine producers.
With the entire nation in isolation, we ask the Italian wine industry how they are coping with the coronavirus disaster.
By Tom Hyland | Posted Monday, 16-Mar-2020
The Covid-19 coronavirus has become a critical health situation in many countries, with Italy being hit particularly hard. How has this state of affairs affected Italian wine producers?
Wine-Searcher asked vintners throughout the country for their reaction, and while a few believed this was not the proper time to discuss this, most took the time to reply. Below are a few responses.
The coronavirus exploded about three weeks ago in Italy in such a violent way. Today we see the first effects but it is still not clear what will happen to the wine business. Surely what is lost cannot be recovered, but I am sure that if the conditions we have in Italy and our way of acting to contain it are extended to the rest of the world, the consequences on sales will be disastrous.
This crisis will change the way we consume wine, as people will stay at home more often. More takeaway wine will be consumed, at least in Italy. I feel privileged to produce red wines with aging potential. Choose and drink good wines from small cellars. The trade cannot endure another backlash in favor of industry
Currently, sales in Italy are for all intents and purposes at a standstill, and the restaurant sector has been blocked. Online sales are stable though we do not anticipate growth. Exports, which represent 80 percent of our production, are suffering the repercussions of the current situation. We are concerned about what will happen in Europe and the United States in the coming weeks. Tourism has collapsed, and this fact has definitely led to a decline in wine consumption.
Looking out over the Colle Nottolo hill on a bright and warm spring morning, it's hard to believe what is happening, it seems unreal. Here nature is awakening and so too are the vineyards where, in order to guarantee a good yield later in the season, we have to complete our winter manual work. Luckily, here in the countryside it's not difficult to maintain the requisite "security distance"!
An important activity here is hosting winery visits for wine lovers but this has been suspended for the time being. Small high-quality wineries like ours sell directly to consumers or restaurants, wine bars and wine shops. All of which are now closed or with very few customers. People tend to do their food and wine shopping in grocery stores or supermarkets where our products aren't stocked. We've started a social media campaign for our customers to say: "if you can't come to us, we'll come to you" offering free delivery of our wine. However, we expect to see a strong reduction in sales over the coming weeks, until this global emergency is over.
Francesco Ricasoli, Barone Ricasoli (Castello di Brolio), Gaiole in Chianti, Tuscany
We are all OK. Wednesday night there was another government prescription, therefore we had to close the wine shop, our bar, osteria and everything that has a potential contact with the crowd. Also the Castle is closed. We are operative in the vineyards, cellar and production with all sanitary precautions and person to person distance. We are shipping wine everywhere in the world but domestic sales are nil.
At the winery we work as usual, but the team has been split up into two different groups working at different times to reduce the risk. Many wine orders have been canceled or postponed in Italy. We're still selling wine abroad and shipping orders to many markets, so we are able to limit the huge financial losses across the country.
As you know, we're not living the best time but we need to be positive, the situation is unpredictable now.
On Wednesday, the Presidency of the Italian Council of Ministers issued a decree with a series of measures to contain spread and manage the epidemiological emergency from Covid-19. The Minister ensured continued functioning of companies and their supplies, and deliveries of raw materials and the consequent delivery of finished products in ports, in various Italian regions, as well as free export abroad.
Illuminati is fully operational, and all its productions and services are fully functioning to ensure the production and delivery of the goods.
In three weeks, life in Italy has totally changed for all Italian people. The entire country understands that the most important thing is to be altogether and change the path of the infection. At the moment we are working and shipping wine from the cellar and working in the vineyards.
We pay a lot of attention here; people stay two meters distance apart, cleaning and sanitizing everything. No transmission of virus with food and liquid, this is really important! We closed our tasting room and our Art Suites [guest apartments], but we follow our work in the vineyards and in the cellar with the security model.
A lot of people around the world have sent us nice messages, supporting us, drinking Italian wines. Our incredible experience will be helpful for all other countries where the infection is starting now.
Andrà tutto bene! – Everything will be fine!
It is like we are in the middle of a horror movie. I never thought in my life I would be in a nighmare like this. Every day we wake up in a bad dream. I'm scared for my family. We receive daily calls from multi-generational family restaurants, hotels and friends that say they will not be able to pay their bill at this moment. Probably many of them will not be strong to reopen.
As a committed pro-European, as I always will be, I am sorry how we were treated without solidarity and how others reacted only when the problems affected bigger countries. This is a serious problem that affects everyone democratically without looking at language borders and skin color.
My prayers go to all "Nonni", grandparents in Italy, so important for our culture, guardians and teachers of our tradition and heritage in the rural area and who are the most at risk in this moment. We are pushed gradually to close. This is not a good feeling when you do not know your tomorrow. This is the real time to show your affection, support and esteem. Nature doesn’t stop – this is what we have to grab!
To join the conversation, comment on our social media channels.
