Itchy Eyes? Read This Before You Rub Them.
Itchy eyes — you can’t rub or blink them away. This common, but annoying, ailment hits just about everyone at some point. Most of the time, itchy eyes are caused by allergens, such as pollen, dust or animal dander. The presence of an allergen causes the release of compounds called histamines in the tissues around the eyes, which results in itching, redness and swelling.
When are seasonal allergies most common?
“It’s common to see a rise in cases of itchy eyes in the spring and summer, because of high pollen counts and, with people spending more time outside, exposure to outdoor allergens like certain kinds of weeds,” says Claire Kelliher, M.D., of the Krieger Eye Institute at LifeBridge Health.
In addition to pollen, dust and dander, products such as contact solutions, makeup, creams and even artificial tears used to treat dry eyes, can cause allergy-related itchy eyes.
What are other causes of itchy eyes?
If your eyes are itching and burning, it could be a sign of dry eye syndrome or meibomian gland dysfunction. Dry eye syndrome is caused by a chronic lack of lubrication and moisture on the surface of the eye. Meibomian gland dysfunction is when there is a blockage or some other abnormality of the glands in the eyelid that secrete oils onto the surface of the eye to prevent tears from evaporating too quickly.
Additionally, a condition caused blepharitis, is caused by bacteria and in some cases microscopic mites that live on the eyelids, and causes them to become red and inflamed.
When should I see a doctor?
Causes and severity of itchy eyes can be varied. You should make an appointment with your eye doctor if your symptoms are lasting, getting worse, or don’t subside when allergy season winds down.T
How do you treat itchy eyes?
Applying a clean, cold damp washcloth over your closed eyes can help alleviate severity of itchy eyes. Over-the-counter artificial tears or lubricating drops can be used to flush away allergens, and can be especially soothing if kept in the refrigerator and applied when cold.
“I often recommend Ketotifen, an over-the-counter allergy drop, as a first line treatment for people that have itchy allergic eyes. It’s sold as a generic, at a very reasonable cost,” says Dr. Kelliher.
“I also tell people to avoid drops designed to ‘get the red out.’ Drops that indicate redness relief are full of chemicals that work by constricting blood vessels on the surface of the eyes and can make your eyes itch more,” she adds.
The most effective treatments are those that directly address the cause of your itchy eyes, which is why consulting with your ophthalmologist can be helpful in determining the most effective remedy.
Most importantly, do not rub itchy eyes. Rubbing frequently makes the itching worse by causing the release of more histamines. Rubbing also puts you at risk for corneal abrasion and introduction to bacteria that can cause an eye infection.
If you do not have a regular eye doctor and would like to see a physician at The Krieger Eye Institute at LifeBridge Health, please call 410-601-2020 to schedule an appointment or visit The Krieger Eye Institute to learn more.
