As the list of winners and losers of the Crimean crisis is tallied, Japan's carmakers rank among the unexpected winners.  That's because the Russian rouble has fallen more steeply against strong currencies, such as the euro, than it has against weaker ones, such as the recently depreciating yen. Japanese carmakers are also slower than others to hike up their car prices to adjust to the Russian currency's weakness, say executives from rival automakers.
European and US automakers were hit hardest among foreign automakers. (Most foreign automakers have set up local production facilities in Russia to avoid duties, but they still import cars and car parts.) Sales of VW vehicles fell 9% in February; GM Opel sales were down 8%, and Peugeot sales were down 19%. Their sales were also down in January, as the crisis in the Ukraine brewed. Sales of middle-market Russian brand cars made by GAZ and Lada also tumbled.
Meanwhile, Nissan sales were up 31%, Toyota sales were up 43%, Mitsubishi sales were up 14%, Mazda sales were up 13%, and Honda sales surged 54% last month  The Japanese are likely to come out of this sad tale with a little bit more of the Russian market, which is expected to be Europe's largest by 2020.
Russian assets remained under pressure after U.S. President Barack Obama said on Thursday that Washington was now considering sanctions against key economic sectors in Russia, including financial services, oil and gas, if Russia moved against eastern or southern Ukraine.
I've covered the auto industry for nearly 20 years from Paris, Frankfurt and Detroit, winning awards for breaking news and in-depth projects. I've written stories ranging…
I've covered the auto industry for nearly 20 years from Paris, Frankfurt and Detroit, winning awards for breaking news and in-depth projects. I've written stories ranging from GM's bankruptcy to the breakup of DaimlerChrysler and a resurgent Volkswagen's goal to supplant Toyota as the industry leader. In recent years, I've focused on Japanese and German automakers and traveled to China to report on the emergence of what quickly became the world's biggest auto market.
