this story is from February 05, 2020
RUB under construction at Anandbagh.
SECUNDERABAD: It is not stay orders from the court but delay in acquisition of properties, shifting of electrical lines and water pipelines that has affected the completion of East Anandbagh road under bridge (RUB), which was expected to be ready by 2015. This has come to light in the response to an RTI query filed by a resident of Malkajgiri .
The reply categorically states that no stay has been granted by the court on construction of the RUB at East Anandbagh, which has been pending for the last six years, and adds that all cases pertaining to RUB have been disposed.
The revelation has left residents fuming. They rue how the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) has been dissuading them by attributing the delay to pending court cases. “When no stay has been granted by the court and all the cases have been disposed, why is the GHMC delaying completion of the RUB? We have been waiting for the RUB for close to six years and GHMC continues to delay it further,” said B Nagaraj, a resident of Malkajgiri who filed the RTI application with the GHMC and the roads and buildings (R&B) departments.
The RUB project at East Anandbagh had commenced on May 30, 2014 and was taken up at a cost of Rs 27 crore. Over the last few years, Malkajgiri residents held protests and submitted multiple representations seeking completion of the RUB, but to no avail.
“The leaders have a standard excuse, every time we ask about the status — lack of funds and unending litigation on land acquisition . These arguments only show lack of political will to tackle problems head on,” said PKR Krishnan, a resident of Malkajgiri. “Why did they start the work and close the gate and main road to the public without acquiring the land first? This shows absolute lack of sensitivity to woes commuters,” he added.
The GHMC officials stated that the land acquisition has now been completed and that the RUB will be opened for public use this year. “We were facing issues in acquiring four properties near the RUB. However, recently we have acquired them and handed them over to the R&B department. There were also financial constraints due to which the work could not be taken up,” said T Dasharath, deputy commissioner in GHMC, Malkajgiri.
Start Your Daily Mornings with Times of India Newspaper! Order Now
