Is it possible to make something good out of something bad?
I’ve been thinking about this since the City of Edmonton decided to revisit the licensing of body rub centres, with a view to phasing out the program over a five-year period. A report from city administration on the merits of such a move is due before council’s community and public services committee in the spring.
We apologize, but this video has failed to load.
But it’s also true that licensing body rub studios has been linked to an increase in their number (up from roughly 20 in 2007), a concern for many, including Kate Quinn of the Centre to End All Sexual Exploitation, who has been monitoring the sex trade in Edmonton for more than 20 years.
“By having the licensing regime, to what degree are we facilitating exploitation of those who have no other economic options?” says Quinn.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
The city rightly must ask if harm reduction is enough to justify licensing the centres, a move that can be interpreted as condoning and facilitating the buying of sex — a practice that’s against the law in Canada.
Though body rub centres are defined in zoning bylaws as places where soft tissue is manipulated in a way that appeals to those with “erotic or sexual appetites or inclinations,” women sell a variety of sexual services to men inside those walls.
Authorities involved with body rub centres have danced around the fact that buying sex is illegal, with some justification. But does putting sex for sale behind a door with a few rules and fees attached make it OK? The answer is no, according to one woman who worked from 2006 to 2013 in an Edmonton body rub centre.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Sophia, now 36 and a mother of three, found herself in a mess of debt in her early 20s after a series of abusive relationships with men. She was working five low-wage jobs to pay bills, including as a fitness trainer and office receptionist. Desperate for solutions, she answered an ad that offered $2,000 a week for “adult entertainment.”
“I thought, ‘oh my God, my parents would kill me if they knew,'” recalls Sophia (not her real name), who began working for $300 an hour at a centre.
Sophia is smart and hard-working, and eventually bought her own centre. While continuing to provide services herself, she employed other women in what she considered to be a fair manner. None of her workers was charged for a room if a man ran without paying. No one was fined for being late.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Sophia paid off her debt, got a university degree, bought a house. She avoided hiring women who were working “for the wrong reasons” (such as to support a drug habit or a useless boyfriend). But as tidy as Sophia hoped to make her business, it was not. It was messy, manipulative, frightening, physically repulsive and dangerous.
“I was verbally assaulted regularly, called derogatory names. Men spit on me and choked me until I was almost blacking out. They removed condoms without consent. They dined and dashed, they stalked and harassed me, they followed me home and banged on my door. They made me role-play myself as children.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
“…there were times I would swallow my own vomit, I was so disgusted with them, and with myself.”
Eventually, Sophia got out (a story too long for this column). While she thinks the city was well-intentioned when it first got into licensing — trying to keep children out of the business and clean up neighbourhoods — Sophia now sees licensing as “condoning and supporting” the sex trade.
“It’s all reactive. It’s putting lipstick on a pig,” she says. “I believe in normative shifts. We have to have a bigger conversation.”
A normative shift is what happens when long-accepted practices are suddenly seen in a new light. Sophia believes more attention must be paid to the demand side of the sex trade and thinks men can be educated to understand their participation hurts people. She says that while some of her customers were monstrous, most were regular people who simply didn’t think about the sick system their behaviour perpetuates.
Women also have to be led toward other options for employment.
“This is an archaic practice rooted in women’s economic marginalization,” says Sophia.
The city may make a change, and here’s where more good can come. Over the next couple of months, as the city ponders a new approach to licensing, I’m going to bring you several columns featuring new ways to think about an old problem, ideas on addressing demand, alternate employment, and how best for the city to be involved.
