LONDON (Reuters) - A massive oil price collapse overnight and the fast-spreading coronavirus has led to wild price swings across global financial markets on Monday, with some moves as great as 25%.
Those moves came as Saudi Arabia launched a price war with Russia, sending investors already panicked by the coronavirus fleeing for safety.
When was the last time oil giants such as BP (L: BP ) and Shell (L: RDSa ) shed one-fourth of their value? Never.
The list below highlights some of the biggest price moves and their significance:
** The yield on 10-year U.S. Treasuries ( US10YT=RR ) fell further to a record low of 0.4624%, having halved in just three sessions
** The Russian rouble is down over 8%, on track for its worst drop since December 2014, also when oil prices plunged
** Emerging-market stocks ( MSCIEF ) dropped over 4% and the world's biggest listed entity, Saudi Aramco (SE: 2222 ), traded below its IPO price for the first time
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read Investing.com's comments guidelines and agree to the terms described.
