It's all been smooth sailing for NOK/TRY , with the krone steadily appreciating against the lira. The Turkish currency is one of the key losers of the coronavirus disaster. All of Turkey's key sources of foreign currency have collapsed. Inbound tourism is down to zero and will remain so until June at least. Exports in April and May are expected to be down 80%. International transportation is suffering, too – both since there is nothing to export and due to border closures.
To contain the resulting fall of the lira, the Turkish financial regulator (BDDK) introduced a new rule on 12 April: now foreign exchange operations by Turkish banks can't exceed 1% of their equities (as opposed to 10% previously). Still, the exchange rate against NOK, USD and other currencies continues to decline, albeit more slowly.
President Erdogan is unwilling to ask the IMF for liquidity – at least for now. Meanwhile, the coronavirus outbreak in Turkey still hasn't reached its peak – while in Norway it is going down. For the next few weeks, we can expect a further weakening of the lira against NOK, and we’ll probably see the lira on the list of the most volatile currency pairs in May, too.
Max volatility from 1-20 April: 4.6%
NZD/USD is strongly affected by the economic data coming from China, so it's not surprising that the New Zealand dollar slumped in March. However, though China did enter a recession, the figures are nowhere near as bad as expected: in March, exports were down 6.6% as opposed to the forecasted -14%.
The New Zealand economy, being small, is sensitive to global risk levels. NZD gains when investors relax. So as the situation around Covid-19 is starting to get better in the West, NZD can recover some of its losses.
On the other hand, the response to the epidemic in New Zealand has been very efficient, with less than 1,500 cases, fewer than 20 deaths and one of the lowest transmission rates in the world. The government has already lifted some restrictions, with many businesses expected to reopen in the coming weeks. The government has also pledged over $3 billion in tax relief funds.
The only negative internal factor weighing on the Kiwi dollar is the prospect of more quantitative easing. While the Royal Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) insists that there will be no negative interest rate, the dovish approach of the central bank can soon negate some of NZD’s gains.
What’s next for the most volatile currency pairs?
As European countries ponder economic reconstruction and new borrowing, it's unlikely that the euro or pound will make great gains next month. This creates a favourable situation for the Swiss franc, though currencies from across the ocean will probably outshine it.
AUD and NZD can grow further as investors rediscover their appetite for risk and liquidate USD. SGD can rise, too, as the stock markets in Singapore and elsewhere continue to recover.  And even the embattled Turkish lira could recover some of its losses if Turkey succeeds in arranging new currency swap agreements – for example, with the US and the UK.
Above all, May will be marked by a slow return to normality in some countries after the disaster of Covid-19. Meet us next month for a new list of the most volatile forex pairs!
