The Asda product designed for babies that shoppers are using to ease 'chub rub' (Image: Product image: asda.com)
When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
A TikTok user has shared with her followers a bargain product from Asda that eases chafing or 'chub rub' as she likes to call it.
If you're unfamiliar with it, chafing is the unpleasant sensation caused when your thighs rub together and it is often aggravated in the heat of the summer months.
TikTok user @jdexperience first took to the social media platform with a shorter video where she quickly waved the mystery product with a caption reading: "If you know, you know!"
But it turned out not many people knew - so she followed up with a second video revealing more information about her much loved product.
Talking to the camera she says: "OK, this is for the ladies who commented on my previous post about this little find.
"It's an absolute little beauty.
"It's the only thing I've found that does work for me because I am a bit curvier, a bit chunkier on the bottom, and summer can be an absolute nightmare.
The product the TikTok user is referring to is Asda's 90p Little Angels Liquid Talc that can be found in the baby skin care department and online.
We had a look on Asda's website and it seems that several shoppers are already aware of the product's anti-chafing properties.
Asda's Little Angels Liquid Talc (Image: asda.com)
One customer posted: "After trying to get hold of this for months, finally got some.
"Was told it helps with big boobs and chaffing.
"Well Asda you need to make gallons of this, this is amazing **** 5 stars plus.
"Ladies if you can get hold of this use it for everywhere, makes a lovely hand cream too.
Are you a lover of Style, Beauty or Interiors? Maybe you want the latest tips on keeping fit, eating right, organising your home and staying well, not to mention all the latest showbiz goss and the craic around town then follow Belfast Live's brand new lifestyle page Be.
You can find us on Facebook , Twitter and Instagram.
And some reviewers claimed that the product was also good for treating spots: "OK, so I know this is meant for babies but I use it on myself too, for chub rub, under boob sweat and even on spots.
"I put some of this on my spots over night and they reduce by the morning.
The product has been reviewed 25 times on Asda's website and has received 22 five-star reviews.
