Not only does it work – it’s a bargain (Picture: jdexperience)
Along with the best parts of summer – tans, sangria, and floaty clothes – comes the dreaded chub rub.
Those of us with thighs who touch will know the annoyance of putting on a nice dress, only to find the inside of our thighs getting inflamed and uncomfortable with the friction.
Many people like to wear anti-chafing bands, which come in a variety of pretty colours and styles and can be worn relatively inconspicuously.
However, there’s a new kid on the block when it comes to chub rub solutions, as evidenced by this mum’s TikTok .
She says that it’s the only thing that works for her as someone who’s a bit curvier on the bottom half of her body.
Jdexperience even goes as far as to say it should be renamed ‘chub rub be gone’. That’s a glowing endorsement if ever there was one.
The hypoallergenic product is not tested on animals and has been dermatologically tested to ensure it’s kind to skin.
The talc has proven so popular it’s often sold out (Picture: Asda)
Given that it’s made for babies, you can be reassured that it’s made with a gentle formulation, and can be used for your own chub rub as well as after a nappy change for the little ones.
The creamy formula is what sets it apart from regular talc, helping the anti-chafing talc stick to the skin rather than rubbing off easily.
We can’t wait to try (Picture: mailonline)
One review on Asda’s site says: ‘After trying to get hold of this for months, finally got some. Was told it helps with big boobs and chaffing. Well Asda you need to make gallons of this, this is amazing **** 5 stars plus.’
Another satisfied customer said: ‘I mean yes, this works just as well on the little ones.. but my goodness now it’s getting warmer.. chub rub and under boobs are finally saved with this miracle rub.’
It was also credited with helping men keep fresh down below – are there no end to its uses?
The only downside is that it appears to often be hard to get hold of, with resellers online hiking up prices due to the demand.
If you want to give liquid talc a try but can’t get your hands on the Little Angels one, there are other options available.
Or, head to The Range for their £1 liquid talc for a more purse-friendly option than some others.
Do you have a great story you’d like to share?
