When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
An American barbecue restaurant which introduced a giant chicken nugget and and bottomless crisp buffets to Nottingham has closed down without warning.
Rub Smokehouse has been virtually stripped out apart from the remains of Christmas streamers and balloons strewn across the floor.
The flagship restaurant, which opened in Lace Market four years ago, made belly-busting dishes a speciality and diners were encouraged to post pictures on social media with the hashtag #rubyourselfie.
Who can forget the legendary Nugzilla - the equivalent of 85 chicken nuggets - and the Kitchen Sink, a huge dessert with ice cream, marshmallows, bananas, Oreo biscuits, and brownies, served with a sparkler in a mini kitchen sink?
The owners dreamt up over-sized crazy combinations such as Yorkshire pudding fajitas, a Christmas dinner calzone and the £20 Dr Way Out West Burshake -  a sweet beery milkshake, topped with triple bacon cheeseburgers, and finished off with waffles, whipped cream and strawberries.
The flagship restaurant, in Adams Walk, was also a destination for bottomless events, from chicken nuggets and burgers to retro crisps.
Reviews have been mixed. The last, two weeks ago on TripAdvisor, described Rub as "rubbish."
Customer Darren Hepworth said: "Nothing good about this place. Despite being dead, the food came and was cold. Wife’s meal was virtually inedible. Place looks dirty, the toilets were horrendous.
"Can’t understand why there are any good reviews- they didn’t even have all the drinks on their menu. When I asked about their specials board they have advertised on their menu the guy didn’t have a clue. Rub is Rubbish."
A branch in Birmingham has also closed. A third branch, in Newcastle, closed last February.
Nottinghamshire Live has contacted Rub's directors and is awaiting a response.
