Pound Sterling (GBP), Canadian dollar (CAD), Norwegian Krone (NOK), Russian Rouble (RUB) and Mexican Peso (MXN) exchange rates under pressure - Inventory surge limits crude oil rally, Gulf dollar pegs under threat
After the carnage on Monday, oil prices have remained very volatile and weak. The June WTI contract collapsed to lows near $6.0 p/b on Tuesday with Brent at 20-year lows near $15.0 p/b before a correction.
There has been a rally on Wednesday but volatility remains intense with a $6 range during the day.
Latest EIA inventory data recorded an increase in US crude oil inventories of 15.0mn barrels after a 19.2mn increase the previous month. This later increase was slightly below consensus forecasts while gasoline forecast also rose less than expected. Crude inventories, however, are 12.5% higher than last year after an increase of 63mn barrels over the past 4 weeks. There is little chance of near-term relief with refinery runs continuing to decline.
WTI traded around $14.50 p/b after the data and Brent around $21.00 p/b with markets still extremely uneasy over market conditions amid very volatile trading.
Marshall Gittler, Head of Investment Research at BDSwiss Group examines the case of whether there was a unique problem with the May WTI contract or a wider problem.
‘The June Brent contract, which is cash settled (there’s no option to take delivery, so no storage problems) plunged $8.60 or 34%. So it’s clear that while the US market is particularly troubled, the oil glut is pushing down prices all over the world.
‘The pressure from the overwhelming imbalance between supply and demand seems inescapable, that’s likely to weigh on CAD and NOK.’
TD Securities noted; ‘While the plunge into deeply negative territory and a $60 p/b difference between May and June was a 20-sigma event and may not necessarily repeat itself in the June contract — we are not out of the woods by any means. The risk of hitting tank tops in the key US delivery points such as Cushing remains a key concern and may continue to weigh on prompt prices and keep contangos elevated.”
Given this market structure of steep discounts for near-term contracts, there will be the repeat next month at the June expiry.
In Danske Bank’s view this is the negative WTI price in a nutshell; ‘there are no takers of oil in Cushing, Oklahoma, as storage is used up. The lack of storage creates ‘nonlinearities’ that foster price jumps into negative, usually only witnessed in electricity markets, where inventory options are minimal/non-existent.
In the North Sea, the inventory issue is less acute and flexibility in terms of delivery is greater, which – after all – reduces the downward pressure on Brent somewhat.
OPEC+ has so far failed to agree on a way forward, but pressure will continue to escalate.
Danske expects stabilisation to come from fundamental market dynamics ahead. ‘In our view, the current levels of oil prices will force producers to (continue to) cut back production but as demand recovers (at least partially) when lockdowns are eased, the inventory build should ease.’
Danske sees Brent averaging USD35/p/b this year, rising to USD44/p/b on average in 2021, but downside risks prevail in the short term.
JP Morgan expects WTI to trade at $35 p/b on a 12-month view.
According to RBC; ‘We think OPEC+ may make more headway by sharpening its compliance messaging, particularly around perennial underperformers, most notably Russia and Saudi Arabia may be amenable to dropping production even further.
Goldman Sachs also expects downward pressure on prices in the short term due to the risk of retail investors closing positions and the unresolved market surplus.
The bank, however, expects essential market rebalancing to take place over a shorter period as storage becomes saturated and price volatility continues; ‘With a finite amount of storage left to fill, production will soon need to fall sizeably to bring the market into balance, finally setting the stage for higher prices once demand gradual recovers. This inflection will play out in a matter of weeks, not months, with the market likely forced to balance before June.’
The slide in oil prices will put notable pressure on oil-linked currencies. Countries with floating currencies have all seen notable losses with the Canadian dollar, Norwegian krone, Russian rouble and Mexican peso all seeing notable depreciation. The pound Sterling has also lost ground.
There will also be a focus on the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) currencies which are pegged to the US dollar.
The GCC countries - Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the UAE - have been running currency pegs or managed FX regimes against the USD since the early 1970s.
The slide in oil prices will, however, lead to substantial downward pressure and trigger fresh speculation over devaluation.
According to ING, the case for GCC voluntary currency devaluation appears weak due a major loss of credibility and difficulties in strengthening non-oil exports.
ING summarises, although Oman and Bahrain can stay under pressure through the Spring, based on strong support within the GCC bloc and what should be a second-half recovery in Brent crude to the $35/45 (according to our team), we see GCC pegs intact and implied yields on the FX forwards dropping back to levels seen through 2018/2019 as the summer progresses.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Tim is an economist and has been involved in financial markets for over 20 years as an analyst. He...
