Ellijah Pickering / May 29, 2020 / No Comments
Populum Cold Therapy Hemp Rub is a cooling and therapeutic CBD-infused ointment from a brand that prides itself on a philosophy of absolute transparency and quality.
Already a popular part of their lineup, Populum completely reformulated this CBD topical recently. The new formula is now vegan and free of parabens , a common preservative which can be bad for human health and the environment. They sent us a sample of the new Cold Therapy and we’re happy our experience was fantastic.
Our reviewer reported that Populum Cold Therapy Hemp Rub is one of the most soothing ointments he’s ever tried. This topical gives you an immediate sensation of cooling with the menthol within the rub and a nice easy-to-apply texture from the aloe in it as well. Other soothing ingredients include chamomile and arnica. All-in-all the application of the Populum Cold Therapy Hemp Rub is easy and provides instant relief!
Populum Cold Therapy offered immediate cooling relief from aches and pains, in a new vegan formula.
Populum offered us free products in return for our honest opinion. Read more about sponsored content on the Ministry of Hemp .
Of course, our appreciation for Populum products goes deeper. We love the care they put into every step of creating and presenting their CBD products.
Ad Populum: A Latin phrase meaning ‘for the people’ is not only the inspiration for CBD company Populum’s name, but also the backbone of their core company values.
For Populum , they believe in destigmatizing the hemp plant. Populum seeks to be so transparent with their products, company and process that they help change the conversation around hemp. This helps push back against the current “CBD gold rush,” where consumers can easily get confused choosing between 1000s of products.
Their values are on display from the moment you receive the product, which arrives in simple but tasteful packaging. It’s what’s inside that really stands out.
Populum includes a copy of the third-party lab tests for every product you order, and a how-to with instructions on interpreting them. Many consumers know the importance of third-party lab results. Empowering buyers to actually understand them shows is going a step further.
Populum even has a risk-free 30-day trial on all their CBD products for first time users.
Highlights: Populum Cold Therapy Hemp Rub is a great way to relieve muscle pain and joint aches from a company that you can fully trust. The cooling provides immediate relief while the CBD goes to work for long term relief. New formula is vegan and free of parabens.
Special Offers: Subscribe to Populum products for a 20% discount.
Customer Service & Shipping: Fast, friendly customer service. Populum offers free shipping on all orders.
Texture & Scent: This rub comes out of the bottle in a thin paste texture with a medicinal menthol-infused scent. After use there is very little residue left on your hand and it absorbs quickly into the skin.
Ingredients: CBD oil / Full-spectrum Hemp extract in Water, Isopropyl alcohol, Aloe Barbadensis Leaf extract, Propylene Glycol, Menthol, Dimethyl isosorbide, Carbomer, Chamomilla Recutita Extract, Arnica Montana Flower Extract, Phenoxyethanol, Ethylhexylglycerin, Sodium Hydroxide.
Other: A generous 30-day money back guarantee is available for first-time customers.
On May 11, 2020, Ministry of Hemp conducted our own lab test of Populum Cold Therapy Hemp Rub using Analytical 360, our trusted lab. Download test results here . We didn’t test for residual solvents due to false positives caused by the presence of isopropyl alcohol, a normal and safe ingredient in this topical.
Populum uses Colorado-grown hemp in all their products. One of our Top CBD Brands, we also love Populum Lavender + CBD Face Oil .
