Friday saw the UK pound to Russian Rouble exchange rate on track to record a seventh consecutive week of declines. After falling to touch a 28-month low last week, this week saw the GBP-to-RUB rate trade in a narrow band between R78.35 as the lower bound and R79 at the upper with Sterling last seen challenging to lower bound at R78.348 following the Central Bank of Russia's decision to cut interest rates by 25 basis points and amidst elevated concerns around no-deal Brexit.
While Sterling had managed to trade with some semblance of stability this week as investors booked profits on GBP shorts, upside proved to be short-lived for the Pound with markets once again pessimistic on the Pound amidst elevated risks of no-deal Brexit.
With prolific Eurosceptic Boris Johnson the newly appointed Prime Minister, investors (and the government itself) have ramped up their expectations for no-deal Brexit at the end of October.
While the hard-line Brexiteer has pledged to do all he can to secure a benign withdrawal from the EU, hopes that a fresh face at the helm could inject some progress into proceedings were dented following a refusal from EU officials to renegotiate the EU Withdrawal Agreement with European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker reaffirming that it's the "only and best deal" available.
The set-back highlights the fact that despite months of sensational politicking the UK is materially no closer to securing a managed withdrawal from the common currency bloc with the same challenges which plagues PM May's time in office still unresolved.
"The Brexit impasse has already reared its ugly head, just days into Boris Johnson’s tenure as UK prime minister ... The deadlock appears to solidify market concerns over the prospects of a no-deal Brexit," wrote FTXM analyst Han Tan who remains bearish on Sterling in the current context.
However its early days for BoJo and with his newly appointed Eurosceptic cabinet in place the political headlines are unlikely to abate any time soon with analysts overall bearish on the GBP.
"the cabinet reshuffle likely reinforced the perceived probability of two other (sterling-negative) options: no-deal or (more likely) a new general election," wrote ING FX strategist, Francesco Pesole.
With Brexit-blight dragging UK macros lower, next week's Bank of England (BoE) policy review is expected to yield a dovish shift from the central bank, although the probability of a preemptive rate cut is virtually nil.
As it stands, markets are currently pricing in around 25 basis points of cuts to the key rate over the twelve-month horizon but with the economy stagnating as Brexit uncertainty persists, policymakers could be forced to act sooner rather than later and join the growing camp of rate-cutters.
CBR Cut Russian Interest Rates, Signal Further Rate Reductions Ahead
Speaking of rate-cutters, Friday saw the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) conduct a 25 bps rate cut, lowering the benchmark policy rate to 7.25% as inflation continues to trend back towards the central bank's 4% target and amid lacklustre GDP growth.
The cut was widely expected and already priced into currency markets with 23 of 23 economists polled by Reuters accurately forecasting the quarter point rate reduction.
It was the second rate cut from the CBR in 2019 thus far and according to guidance released by the central bank might not be the last according to the CBR's policy statement summary.
"If the situation develops in line with the baseline forecast, the Bank of Russia admits the possibility of further key rate reduction at one of the upcoming Board of Directors’ meetings,” said the CBR statement.
Overall, the outlook for the Rouble remains robust with analysts forecasting further appreciation as macro fundamentals improve.
"1H19 was very successful for the Russian financial market, with the rouble appreciating 10% against the USD, benchmark yields declining by almost 130bp and CPI underperforming expectations, bringing the Bank of Russia back onto its rate cutting path," wrote ING chief economist (Russia) Dmitry Dolgin, while revising higher their RUB forecasts for the remainder of the year.
Gains for the Rouble were however largely attributed to the external environment and with Russian GDP growth increasingly dependent on the external sector, this represents a key downside risk to the outlook for both growth and the RUB.
"most of the credit goes not to Russia itself, but to the rest of the world, which has become more optimistic on the global rates trajectory, more concerned about the oil supply, and more confident in the future harvest," added ING's Dolgin in justifying the RUB's recent strength, adding "Given the volatile nature of the external markets, we maintain our cautious longer-term view on the Russian market, constrained by local challenges."
While positive on the potential for RUB upside in the remainder of 2019, ING economists expect the trend to be weak given a local preference for FX as the "private sector keeps reducing foreign liabilities, accumulates foreign assets" with the RUB expected to come under increasing pressure into 2020 " due to continued foreign debt redemption and the structural preference of local corporates and households to accumulate international assets."
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
After graduating with a 1st in psychology (BSc Hons), Elaine specialised in the areas of trader psychology...
