Preity Zinta's Pooch, Bruno Hampers Her Workout For A Belly Rub, Hubby, Gene Ensures She Finishes It
Preity Zinta indulges in a workout session and her pooch, Bruno tries to get a belly rub from her as her husband, Gene Goodenough tries to distract Bruno for his wife. Check out the video inside!
By Shreya Sharma Last Updated:
For most of us, our dream life would be a calm house with our husband and kids around and some cute pawdorbale friends with us. Having a pet changes your life for good. You learn compassion and sympathy. You learn what true love means because all they know is to shower you with love and a few bites here and there. Being a pet parent is as similar to bringing a baby into your life as they need your un-diverted attention. And when you fail to do so, they know how to get you back! (Also Read: Divya Agarwal Gets a Big Surprise Gift From Boyfriend, Varun Sood For Renovating Their House )
Preity Zinta had gotten married to her prince charming, Gene Goodenough in Los Angeles on February 29, 2016. The actress is happily living in her abode with her husband and her pooch, Bruno. The actress often shares the snippets of her life with her husband and her dog on her social media handle, making us feel life ho toh aisi! Now, the actress has shared an adorable video with her pawdorable dog and handsome husband.
On June 25, 2020, Preity Zinta took to her Instagram handle to share a super-cute video with her family. In the video, we can see her doing push-ups in her garden, while her pooch, Bruno can be seen making repeated attempts to disturb her workout and her husband, Gene is trying his best to distract him by running around him. As Preity stops to catch a breath, Bruno finally manages his way to her and jumps on her with a ball in his mouth and gets a hug and belly rub from Preity. Sharing the video, Preity wrote, “Where there is a will there is a way ... Bruno is trying everything to sabotage my workout but my #Patiparmeshwar is making sure that I finish my push ups. Hope this inspires all of you to take life in your stride and not give up... gym ya no gym lage raho #pushup #pzfit #lageraho #Ting.” Take a look:
As Preity and Gene had gotten married on February 29, 2016, the couple had to technically wait for 4 years to celebrate their first wedding anniversary this year. After all, the month of February had gotten to see the light of 29th in 2020. Sharing the same, Preity had wittily taken to Instagram handle to post a picture with her husband, and had written, “That look on our faces as we look at the Calendar & realise we have to wait another year to celebrate our #weddinganniversary.” Take a look:
In an interview with The Telegraph, Preity had talked about her life in America. She had said, "I love the fact that I can walk on the streets anywhere and no one even looks at me, except when I am looking very good! (Laughs) It’s so relaxing to enter a restaurant and not have people staring at you. I can go anywhere with oil in my hair. Gene and I go hiking a lot; we are an outdoorsy couple. In America, I like the practicality of life and thought. They are very respectful towards women." (Recommended Read: Anusha Dandekar Thanked Sis Shibani and Her BF, Farhan Akhtar For Taking Care Of Her During Lockdown )
In a throwback interview with The Indian Express in 2017, talking about marriage and women, Preity had said, "Women, in general, are superwomen. They take care of the home and work. They are very few men who do that. For me it is very simple, I am married, working and very happy. I am lucky that I am married to a person who actually pushed me into doing a movie. I thought I didn’t want to do any more movies and I moved to the business side of life." (Recommended Read: Nick Jonas Helps Wife, Priyanka Chopra Jonas With Her Dress And Then Holds Umbrella For Her [Video] )
We loved Preity Zinta’s workout session with her husband, Gene Goodenough and her pooch, Bruno!
AWESOME NEWS! Now you can download BollywoodShaadis app and never miss a story. Get App
AWESOME NEWS! Now you can download BollywoodShaadis app and never miss a story. Choose your device Android or IOS (Apple)
Almost done! We need to confirm your email address. Please click on the verification link we just sent you.
