The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend scrubbing the hands for at least 20 seconds. In the absence of a timer, they suggest singing the “Happy Birthday” song twice while washing.
Research indicates that different temperature waters do not have a significantly different effect on the number of bacteria that hand washing removes. The thorough washing technique is what removes the bacteria.
However, warm water can be more pleasant than cold water, especially when washing the hands for 20 seconds.
Plain soap and water are very effective at removing microbes from the skin. It does not matter what kind of soap a person uses.
According to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) , there is not enough evidence to show that over-the-counter antibacterial soaps are any better at killing microbes than regular soaps.
It is important that children wash their hands regularly, especially after playing outdoors, touching pets, using the toilet, and at other key times.
Adults should show children how to wash their hands correctly and encourage them to sing “Happy Birthday” twice to ensure they clean their hands for an adequate length of time.
Microbes transfer more easily to and from wet hands, so individuals should always dry their hands after they wash them.
How a person dries their hands also matters. Research indicates that both hot air hand dryers and cloth roller towels are less hygienic than disposable paper towels.
Hot air hand dryers, for example, can cause particles and microorganisms to disperse into the air. These microorganisms then contaminate the environment.
As an alternative to disposable paper towels, an individual can use a dry hand towel that they regularly wash at 140oF. Individuals should not share this towel with others.
If frequent washing causes dry or cracked skin, it can be helpful to use a moisturizing hand cream or lotion throughout the day.
Cracked skin allows microbes to enter the body through the surface breaks more easily.
If dry, chapped, or painful skin becomes a persistent problem, it can indicate that an individual is over washing their hands. They should discuss any concerns they have with a doctor.
While washing with soap and water is the best way to remove bacteria and viruses from the skin, these two things are not always readily available.
At these times, an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol is an acceptable alternative.
To use a hand sanitizer:
Apply the recommended amount of gel to the palm of one hand.
Cover all surfaces of the hands and fingers.
Note that hand sanitizers do not kill all types of microbes, and they will not remove visible dirt, grease, and chemicals from the skin.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has announced a nationwide recall of certain bottles of Saniderm Advanced Hand Sanitizer (1 liter) due to the potential presence of methanol.
Methanol is a toxic alcohol that can cause adverse effects, such as nausea, vomiting, or headache, when a significant amount is used on the skin. More serious effects, such as blindness, seizures, or damage to the nervous system, can occur if methanol is ingested. Drinking this hand sanitizer, either accidentally or purposely, can be fatal.
If you purchased this hand sanitizer, you should stop using it immediately. Return it to the store where you purchased it, if possible. Ask your healthcare provider any questions you may have about the safety of the hand sanitizer you use. If you experienced any adverse effects from using hand sanitizer, call your healthcare provider. If your symptoms are life threatening, call emergency medical services immediately. For more information on how to spot safe hand sanitizers, see here .
There are different types of hand washing, including:
This type of hand washing involves the use of soap and water. People perform this type to remove visible dirt, after using the toilet, before preparing food, and at other times. It usually lasts a few seconds.
This type of hand washing uses water and antimicrobial soap. It removes or destroys microbes on the skin.
Medical professionals may use this method before touching a high risk patient, or after contact with a person with an infection.
Medical professionals perform this hand washing, involving water and antiseptic soap, before all surgical procedures. It lasts for at least 2 minutes.
Proper hand washing is necessary to reduce the risk of:
viral infections that cause diarrhea, including norovirus
Proper hand washing can prevent the spread of illness and infection. It is a simple yet effective technique that anyone can use.
To properly wash the hands, use soap and water, and rub every surface of the fingers and hands for at least 20 seconds. Thoroughly dry the hands on a disposable or clean towel, or allow to dry in the air.
Last medically reviewed on  March 18, 2020
