The credit status of Russia’s second largest airport is down because of the Coronavirus outbreak, the outlook is negative
issuer default rating (IDR) of Domodedovo airport (IATA: DME) to ‘BB’ from
million loan participation notes to ‘BB’ from ‘BB+’. The outlooks are negative.
needs” in the coming 12 to 18 months, as well as “some financial flexibility to
subsequent weakening of airline financial positions, including potential
bankruptcies, which could hamper volume recovery. It is also taking into
Russia’s second largest airport’s traffic is projected to decline by around 20 per cent year-on-year in 2020 due to changes in passenger behaviour relating both to business commuting and leisure travel, along with the travel bans introduced by the Russian and the European governments. “Plunging traffic numbers and significant stress for airlines” is an inevitable consequence of these measures, it says. Direct foreign traffic represented around 45 per cent of Domodedovo’s volume in 2019, Fitch notes. Although, as of March 30, domestic air travel has not been restricted, in the event of a possible full lock-down of travel in Moscow, air travel volume “is likely to be slashed even more severely,” the agency notes.
and March 2020, and the increasing potential for airline insolvencies. “These
after the virus is contained. The depreciation also increases DME’s mostly
USD-denominated debt in rouble terms, adding pressure to the credit profile,”
DME’s 2021 traffic to reach 2019’s levels, also due to “difficult macroeconomic
Comparing Domodedovo with arch rival Sheremetyevo airport (IATA: SVO), it notes that air traffic is likely to recover much faster at Sheremetyevo, as the bulk of its business is generated by the majority state-owned national carrier Aeroflot ( BB/Negative ). “As evidenced by the previous rouble currency crisis of 2014, when DME-resident airlines Transaero and Vim-Avia went bankrupt, the lost traffic and slots were mostly snapped up by Aeroflot to the benefit of SVO,” the agency observes.
Despite the unexpected 2020 turmoil, DME nevertheless has
sufficient liquidity to cover the next 12-18 months, Fitch believes. As of the
credit lines with only minor EUR-denominated debt maturities in 2020. However,
in 2021, DME has a US$350 million Eurobond maturity obligation, which
management is expecting to partly cover by the placement of rouble bonds.
refinance its 2021 bullet maturity in advance,” the Fitch assessment concludes.
