MOSCOW (Reuters) – the Ruble OFZ Monday successfully confront the global flight from risk triggered by the fears about the second wave of the pandemic.
To mitigate the negative impact of external background help ruble currency sales by the Central Bank in the budgetary rules, as well as the sale of foreign currency by exporters under the upcoming ruble payments of dividends and taxes starting today the next fiscal period.
At the opening of trading was achieved 70,70 the value of the ruble per dollar for the first time since may 29, but then the Russian currency quite quickly began to recapture the loss.
To 17: 00 Moscow time the pair dollar/ruble calculations “tomorrow” was at the level 70,18, and the Russian currency traded at 2 cents better than the previous close. Market participants from the beginning of the day marked the sale of export proceeds as intraday, growth of the pair dollar/ruble to multi-day highs, whereas large panic purchases of foreign currency they have not seen.
Against the Euro the ruble to 17.00 MSK expensive by 5 cents, the quotations close of 79.15.
The long OFZ yield grows by 1-2 basis points, the 10-year benchmark – to the level of 5.63% per annum. At mid-term papers, it is reduced by 2-3 basis points.
The support OFZ are expectations of a rate cut by the CBR on the Board of Directors of the CBR on June 19.
The Central Bank is expected to go on Friday for more drastic reduction of the key rate, from 100 basis points to 4.5% per annum – such a step forward 19 of the 31 analysts polled by Reuters [nL8N2DS49F].
“Mitigation of the OST in the Russian Federation will be more effective during the period of the lockdown, and with some recovery of economic activity. We believe that regardless of the size of the rate cut on 19 June the Bank of Russia is likely to remain soft rhetoric,” said Dmitry Dolgin from ING Bank Eurasia.
Forex key commodities and emerging currencies are mostly essentially lose in the price, and the ruble now looks significantly better than most of them.
Its role in the current stability of the ruble OFZ and can play a factor of the past long best in Russia, causing the Russian market on Friday was unable to EAT along with other assets to recapture a significant part of the losses incurred on Thursday after gloomy forecasts of the fed.
A barrel of Brent is getting cheaper by 2.1% and is estimated at $37,93, while morning the loss exceed 3.5%.
Foreign markets under the pressure of concerns about the second wave of the coronavirus after new cases of the disease in China and several other Asian countries, as well as data from the USA about increase in the number of cases in some States, removing quarantine restrictions. Beijing reported a record a few months the number of new cases of coronavirus is the second day in a row on Monday, which forced the Chinese capital to return to the restrictions to contain the outbreak [nL8N2DS0NV].
The Central Bank currently sells in the local market currency in the framework of fiscal rules by about 10.2 billion rubles a day.
Russian exporters in the next two weeks can strengthen the presence in the currency market, analysts predict growth of volume of payments of the tax on mineral extraction (25 June) to 200 billion rubles, as against estimates in the 120 billion a month earlier [nRUFORTAX].
Export companies are also actively use foreign exchange earnings in the domestic market in the first half of the summer under the payment of ruble-denominated dividend, and such operations are seasonal factors to support the ruble.
Andrew Kadulin of Bank Saint-Petersburg sees no prospects for further weakening of the ruble, expecting “consolidation in the range of 69.00-70,5 per dollar”.
