The IPO of Tinkoff Credit Systems, a Russian consumer finance bank, trounces rivals’ valuations, even as bad debts tick up and tighter regulations loom.
During the past three years, Russian banks have plastered over holes in the corporate sector with record profits from retail. The choice now might be between fuelling a bubble or stagnation.
In mid-2013, Rusal had its lowest net debt level since 2008: less than $10 billion, Oleg Mukhamedshin, deputy CEO, tells Euromoney. He says the firm hopes to reduce debt further – from six times ebitda – via internal cashflow, dividends from Norilsk Nickel, assets disposals and new equity issuance.
Elvira Nabiullina’s post policy-meeting press conference in July was a first both for her and for the Russian central bank, which she joined as governor on June 24. And although the central bank kept its main policy rates on hold, Nabiullina was by no means short of things to talk about.
Is Kazakhstan a safer bet than Russia?
Kazakhstan is set to remain the safest country in central Asia, and as the economy diversifies away from hydrocarbon and mineral reserves, it could soon precede Russia in the Euromoney Country Risk rankings.
With one or two exceptions, the majority of former Soviet independent states, alongside Russia, have become riskier this year, continuing longer-term trends.
Central and Eastern Europe Awards for Excellence 2013: Russia
The first quarter of 2013 showed the effect of a more difficult rate environment for Russia’s biggest bank, but in 2012 Sberbank proved that it could continue to increase its profit, even after spectacular rises in 2011 and 2010.
Qatar’s investment in VTB helps future deals between Russia and the Gulf, but relations will remain difficult.
Sberbank CEO German Gref says he has led Russia’s biggest bank through a thorough transformation. It has grown onto the international stage and bulked up in investment banking. What are his objectives, and how does he see its role at home and in the region?
Russia, Venezuela, Pakistan and Ukraine were considered the most corrupt emerging markets, according to country risk experts.
Russia’s largely state-owned banking sector needs greater competition to help catalyze private sector investment as the economy enters a new era of permanently weaker growth and lower oil prices, say analysts.
Cyprus’s problems stem in part from doing business in Russia. But the Russian state’s attitude doesn’t make keeping money at home enticing.
Putin gets a strong but pliant central bank governor in Elvira Nabiullina. She might please other constituents too.
Sberbank chief German Gref, who – as the former economics minister – was the boss of Central Bank of Russia governor-designate Elvira Nabiullina, says the bank’s dominance in the country’s economic affairs won’t exert undue influence over monetary policymaking.
A record-breaking loan for Russian oil firm Rosneft last month portends a resurgence in regional buyouts, say loans bankers involved in the deal. Prospects in the Middle East and South Africa might also be looking up.
Internationally marketed local-currency issuance has become the latest twist to a booming emerging market bond market. Russian and Turkish banks and corporates are playing a leading role, issuing new Euroclearable, foreign-law bonds in roubles and Turkish liras.
Rouble unlikely to avoid a hit from Cyprus; support to evaporate
Once seasonal rouble demand for tax payments has passed later this month, the currency should suffer, given Russia’s close links to Cyprus.
The ramifications of selling contingent convertible bonds to retail buyers could be brutally illustrated by the bailout of Cyprus’s banking sector, while ties with Russia complicate strategy.
A trio of successful listings out of emerging Europe has boosted bankers’ hopes of an equity primary markets renaissance in 2013, with prospects for further supply from Russia, Turkey and beyond.
Buy now while stocks last! That seemed to be the sales pitch in a $3 billion debut Eurobond from Russian state-owned oil firm Rosneft late last year.
There are good strategic reasons for Sberbank to be concerned about the growth of such operations as Tinkoff and Home Credit: and good reason for a counter-attack.
