Here, we take a look at China’s imported cases from official data released by the national and local health commissions of China.
Heilongjiang and Guangdong provinces, along with Shanghai and Beijing, have the highest number of imported cases, and together account for 64 per cent of mainland China’s total imported cases.
A patient who arrived in Shanghai on February 27, having travelled from Iran via Russia, became China’s first imported coronavirus case. More infected patients arrived from Italy, Spain, and Iran, contributing to the first wave of imported cases in mainland China.
In March, the repatriation of Chinese citizens, including overseas students from the US and UK, resulted in a sharp rise in the number of imported cases. China reported no new locally spread infections for the first time in the same month.
In April, Russia overtook Britain as China’s biggest overseas source of Covid-19 infections, accounting for 78 per cent of imported cases. When clusters of middle-aged merchants from Moscow’s Lyublino and Sadovod markets tested positive for the coronavirus, China's ambassador to Russia, Zhang Hanhui, pointed out that there were about 160,000 Chinese living in Russia.
As the rest of China cautiously opened up, the remote border town of Suifenhe became a new hotspot with infections imported from Russia. The patients were returning Chinese citizens who flew from Moscow to Vladivostok, and entered Heilongjiang province via Suifenhe. With Heilongjiang accounting for more than 60 per cent of Russian-imported cases, China tightened border controls to divert imported cases to other provinces.
Suifenhe is a county-level city in the northeastern province of Heilongjiang with a population of 70,000. It shares a 27km-long border with Russia and is the only Chinese city in which trading with the Russian rouble is legal. The cross-border railway is an important freight transport link but most travellers arrive at the Suifenhe checkpoint having endured a three-hour bus ride from Vladivostok. China temporarily shut the Suifenhe checkpoint on April 7 to contain the cross-border spread of the coronavirus.
