MOSCOW — The Russian rouble soared to a one-month high against the U.S. dollar on Thursday as oil prices jumped on promising reports from an OPEC+ meeting that could see the world’s leading oil producers slash output in an effort to prop up prices.
At 1452 GMT, the rouble was up 2.5% against the dollar at 73.12, its strongest since March 13, and had gained 1.8% to trade at 79.89 versus the euro, also hitting a one-month high.
Brent crude oil, a global benchmark for Russia’s main export, was up 7.1% at $35.2 a barrel.
Oil prices collapsed after a deal by OPEC and its allies limiting supply fell apart last month, squeezing a market already hit by falling demand due to the coronavirus outbreak, but a new agreement is not a foregone conclusion, with oil producers at odds over how to support prices.
Analysts widely agreed that the OPEC+ meeting would inform the rouble’s movement on Thursday, with any negative news likely to harm the rouble’s recovery from four-year lows reached last month.
“The main question remains open – will the world’s largest powers be able to agree on an output cut,” said Alor Broker analyst Alexei Antonov, warning that if discussions prove fruitless, oil prices could fall to as low as $20 a barrel.
Reuters sources said OPEC+ members would debate oil cuts as deep as 20 million barrels per day at the meeting.
“Given the already announced ambitious plans to cut production, there are still significant risks that the actual parameters of the deal might disappoint the market, which would negatively affect oil and the rouble,” said Bank St Petersburg analysts.
Analysts at Sberbank CIB, the investment arm of Russia’s largest lender Sberbank, said the rouble’s firming on Thursday would likely be short-lived.
“The OPEC+ deal is already included in the rouble quotes, so even if it is concluded, (the rouble’s) further strengthening will not be sustainable.”
Russian stock indexes were up and hitting month-long highs.
The dollar-denominated RTS index rose 4.7% to 1,166.5 points. The rouble-based MOEX Russian index was 1.4% higher at 2,706.7 points.
Shares in Russian steel pipemaker TMK were steady, having jumped 22% on Wednesday after the company said it had decided to de-list its global depositary receipts (GDRs) from the London Stock Exchange.
