After an 18-month trial period, the Irkutsk-based regional airline has wound down its failed wide-body programme
tackle the challenging wide-body project, pointing specifically at a lack of a
left its fleet and the 18-month project is over, those predictions have proven
when the airline leased the first of the aircraft type, followed by two more.
The last of the three units – with registrations VP-BMR, VP-BSJ and VP-BL and all
built between 1997 and 1998 – returned to Spain in early January.
Just like the previous Russian operator of these aircraft, the now defunct VIM Airlines , IrAero was counting on capitalising on operating the wide-bodies on flights to and from China. But whilst this made sense on paper, in reality the project ran into hurdles right from the start. Firstly, with the Chinese programme finally kicking off in October 2018, the entire high summer season was spent attempting to find work for the expensive aircraft, including flights to the Far Eastern region of Russia already served by Aeroflot offering state-supported ‘flat rates.’ Then, in early 2019, IrAero was forced to suspend its B777 operations after its large Chinese travel agent partner backed out of the programme. That is when the wide-body project’s shortfalls became increasingly apparent. Although the airline’s management announced it was still hopeful of resuming B777 operations some day in the future, the idea seemed more dubious than ever.
Despite encountering such obvious difficulties,
IrAero’s management is still defending its stance. “Last year, IrAero’s 20th
first deputy director Vladimir Panfilov insists. “The airline’s RPK numbers
In January through November 2019, IrAero transported some
847,000 passengers, a very solid 35 per cent year-on-year improvement, and it
also achieved a 77.9 per cent seat load factor.
B777s provided, IrAero is back to its regional self, with its nine 100-seat Superjet
100 regional jets, its largest aircraft and the core of its fleet. However its
CRJ200, is not much better off, as only one of four aircraft is actually
operating. There are also the company’s “good old” Antonov An-24/26 turboprops,
but the overall problem remains: there’s simply no sound strategy the airline
can follow, admits one of its managers in a private conversation with Russian Aviation Insider. The Boeing 777
trial was too expensive, both for the airline and for the market, he explains.
“The [long term] idea to work on long-haul routes still remains. But with a
“IrAero has nine SSJ100s in its fleet, but only five
of them are serviceable,” a source has revealed to Interfax newswire. “The
remaining aircraft are not in flying condition. Moreover, one of the aircraft
IrAero has not provided an official statement regarding its claims against SCAC, but has confirmed that only five aircraft remain flying.
Transport Leasing Corporation (GTLK). Of these, four were factory-fresh
deliveries and the remaining five were units previously operated by Red Wings and Yamal Airlines. Throughout 2018 and 2019 GTLK filed
several lawsuits against IrAero in pursuit of pending lease payments, all of which
ended up in a friendly settlement.
In an interview with Interfax, IrAero’s general
director Yury Lapin, insisted that according to SCAC’s figures, the Superjet 100’s
operational economy offers an average monthly flight-time of 202 hours, but in
the course of its operational experience, IrAero has never been able to come
