The rouble hit 52.88 to the dollar on Tuesday, its strongest since 8 December. Photograph: Jussi Nukari/REX
Russia’s rouble hit its highest levels in two weeks on Tuesday, shored up by informal capital control measures designed to head off a repeat of the inflation and protests that marked the county’s 1998 financial crisis.
The government ordered five state-owned exporters including energy groups Gazprom and Rosneft to sell their foreign currency reserves, while officials and banking sources said the central bank had installed supervisors at the currency trading desks of top state banks.
Early on Tuesday, the rouble hit 52.88 to the dollar, its strongest since 8 December. It fell back later but was still was up 0.8% at 55.34.
Economists said the measures were in effect a softer version of capital controls, but that President Vladimir Putin, who has drawn much of his popularity from financial stability and rising prosperity, would keep his pledge not to resort to full-fledged controls.
“They have already forced government exporters to sell their dollars, and same will happen for banks I guess, so in a sense, capital controls are already in place,” said Sergei Guriev, an exiled economist who fled Russia after criticising the Kremlin.
Russians have followed hard currency movements closely ever since hyperinflation destroyed their savings after the collapse of the Soviet Union, before Putin came to power. The rouble plunged to an all-time low in mid-December on the back of lower oil prices and western sanctions, which make it almost impossible for Russian firms to borrow from the west.
The prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, said on Tuesday that Russia risks deep recession. Earlier this month, the rouble fell at one point to an intraday low of 80 per dollar before recovering to below 70 per dollar, from the average of 30-35 seen in 2014’s first half.
The rouble has rebounded after falling against the dollar.
On Tuesday, the Russian government told large state exporting companies that by 1 March they must bring their foreign currency holdings back to the levels of 1 October and report to the central bank on weekly basis.
“If exporters are told not to increase their hard currency positions, it can be viewed as an unofficial reintroduction of capital controls,” said Vladimir Osakovskiy from Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Limiting money flows, once considered a damaging constraint on open markets, has been more accepted in the aftermath of the 2008-2009 financial crisis as a tool sometimes needed to manage financial stability.
But in Russia, the issue has political resonance. Capital movements were liberalised only 10 years ago and restrictions bring back memories of the chaotic post-Soviet financial turbulence which Putin, now in his 15th year as Russia’s leader, made it his mission to banish.
“[Full capital controls] would be a huge immediate blow to the economy,” Mikhail Zadornov, chairman of the board of VTB-24 bank, told the newspaper Vedomosti.
Instead, Russian authorities are being pragmatic.
Four banking sources and sources close to the government said that the central bank had last week begun sending supervisors to monitor currency trading at major Russian banks.
“There was panic,” said a source close to the government. “Something had to be done and we took some measures.”
