THE RUSSIAN ruble is set for its worst week since August 2015 as the nation’s economy struggles in the face of US sanctions and the ongoing Syria crisis, with experts “sceptical” of a recovery until the geopolitical scenario cools.
The ruble has tanked 5.6 percent this week following the war of words from President Trump on Twitter and the new US sanctions against Russian businessmen and their companies.
Tensions between Moscow and Washington over Syria weighed on Russian assets mid-week, but Trump has since tempered his remarks about an imminent missile attack.
Earlier this week President Trump said relations with Russia were "worse" than during the Cold War as the two powers traded insults while Putin tried to defend its ally Syria for an alleged chemical attack on civilians.
The chemical attack on Saturday saw the US, UK, France and Germany consider retaliatory action in Syria.
But Russia has vowed to shoot down any US missiles and bomb their bases should Trump decide to target Syria.
I am bit sceptical about the recovery in the ruble in that regard - it will require a benign geopolitical scenario playing out over coming weeks.
Investor sentiment in Russian stocks has since improved after US President Donald Trump tempered some of his remarks on Syria and trade, but the downturn swallowed another 0.8 percent with Russia’s largest listed firms on course for a weekly loss of 3.8 percent, their worst in a year.
But Inan Demir, senior emerging economist at Nomura International, said that although we can be confident in the assumption that Russian sovereign debt won't be sanctioned only as long as tensions with the West don't escalate, he said, "I am bit sceptical about the recovery in the ruble in that regard - it will require a benign geopolitical scenario playing out over coming weeks."
However in sharp contrast to the plight of the ruble, John Goldie, FX Dealer at Argentex told Express.co.uk that it has been a week to remember for the Pound.
He said: “Sterling has certainly had a fantastic week so far - up against nearly all majors, not just the Euro... Its perhaps more significant in terms of future direction on GBP/EUR though given that we have broken out of the range we've been stuck in since last May.
The expert remains confident that with Brexit negotiations heading in the right direction, Sterling's gains could continue.
He said: “Davis' recent comments on Brexit were testament to the greater optimism recently and the ECB's slight dovish tone to yesterday's meeting accounts provided the perfect opportunity to break through previous resistance.
“With probability of a May hike creeping higher, there seems every chance that Sterling record for gains in April will continue.
“It’s been a while since sterling saw benefit from heightening global risk, but as an historically safe-haven major currency, and with Brexit risks lowering and yield rising, perhaps that status is starting to return.”
Sterling is currently 1.4225 against the Dollar and 1.1575 against the Euro.
