Petrol prices in Russia, a major oil producer, are lower than many other countries, but still a significant cost for people in a country with an average monthly wage of 47,000 roubles ($640)
MOSCOW: Russian consumers are missing out on significantly cheaper petrol and diesel after oil prices plunged to their lowest in nearly two decades as domestic oil firms try to squeeze profits from the retail market to offset weak crude oil sales.
The sharp oil price decline means Russian oil firms are, because of the way their taxes are structured, also on the hook to pay bigger tax bills, giving them little incentive to reduce prices at the pump.
Petrol prices in Russia, a major oil producer, are lower than many other countries, but still a significant cost for people in a country with an average monthly wage of 47,000 roubles ($640).
Though fewer people are driving because of coronavirus-related restrictions, fuel prices are closely watched by the Kremlin and by many Russians, though there is no evidence of widespread discontent over the issue yet.
In Russia, 1 litre of the most popular Euro 4 brand costs around 43 roubles ($0.60), while 1 litre of diesel costs around 47 roubles.
But oil companies, already suffering from a collapse in crude prices, are reluctant to cut petrol prices.
That, in part, is because of looming tax bills they are liable for under a tax mechanism related to the drop in prices.
If they did strip out the amount put aside to cover the tax mechanism, known as the damping mechanism, petrol prices would have fallen to just 23 roubles a litre and diesel to 26 roubles.
"The price now practically consists of just excise tax and the damping mechanism. How can it be cheaper? Everything is for the finance ministry," one source at a Russian oil company said.
Under the current tax system, the state compensates companies for keeping socially sensitive fuel prices stable if oil prices are high, preventing exports of extra barrels to much more lucrative global markets.
But when oil prices are low and exports less profitable, like now, it's the other way round: companies must pay into the state budget.
According to Reuters calculations, the companies will have to pay the state a total of around 67 billion roubles ($910 million) in April alone under the tax rules.
That compares with 300 billion roubles which the state paid the companies back in the whole of 2019. Because lower oil prices are not being passed on at the pump to drivers, consumers are helping oil firms foot their tax bill.
The situation has spurred debate between officials.
Energy Minister Alexander Novak has said petrol prices will not fall this year, but Kirill Molodtsov , once his deputy and now an aide to the chief of the Kremlin staff, has said taxation should be adjusted as soon as this week.
If the tax system is not amended, petrol prices will only get higher in Russia, Raiffeisenbank analysts said in a note. That is because under the existing mechanism companies are allowed to increase prices in line with inflation.
