Executive Bath, a body rub parlour on Ellice Avenue, is closed for violating public health measures meant to slow the spread of COVID-19.
The Free Press has made this story available free of charge so everyone can access trusted information on the coronavirus.
A body rub parlour and a beauty salon in Winnipeg were shut down last week and received hefty fines for violating public health measures meant to slow the spread of COVID-19.
Both Beauty Infinity, a Cordyon Avenue salon, and Executive Bath, a body rub parlour on Ellice Avenue, are listed on the provincial health department's most recent establishment closure report.
On May 4, the province's public health office initiated the first phase of its efforts to reopen businesses, including patios, museums, retailers, dental offices, salons and therapeutic massage providers. However, those businesses that choose to reopen are required to follow strict guidelines or risk closure, financial penalty, or even imprisonment.
For Beauty Infinity, penalties were handed out that day. While the provincial report doesn't specify how the business violated the public health order, it was dinged for a failure to comply, and issued a fine of $2,542 along with a closure order. The business's website, listed on its Facebook page, has been taken down.
Executive Bath's penalty came on May 8, though the nature of its violation isn't specified in the report either. For its failure to comply with the public health order, a $2,542 fine was issued as well.
Beauty Infinity, a Corydon Avenue salon, has a sign on its door for violating public health measures meant to slow the spread of COVID-19.
The pair are the latest local businesses to be hit with fines or closures related to improper COVID-19 procedures, but they aren't the first.
In April, a pair of body art businesses in Brandon were shut down for staying open despite an order for non-essential businesses to close. Those businesses were also hit for not obtaining public health approval to operate a body art business in the city.
