Emerging market currencies firmed on Friday as signs of an improvement in frayed Sino-U.S. relations lifted sentiment, with Turkey’s lira continuing its rebound from a record low hit a day earlier.
China’s commerce ministry said its top trade representatives and their U.S. counterparts agreed over a call on Friday to strengthen economic and public health cooperation and create a favorable environment to implement the Phase 1 trade deal struck in January.
“That will be of substantial relief to markets, as the last thing the world economy needed right now, was an escalation in hostilities on that front,” said Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst, Asia Pacific at OANDA.
Investors had been fretting over the potential fallout from yet another escalation in tensions between the world’s two biggest economies as countries struggle with the economic havoc wrought by the new coronavirus pandemic.
Turkey’s lira climbed 0.3% after some early choppiness. The currency had bounced 1% in the last session after touching all-time lows.
Most Asian shares gained taking an index of regional shares excluding Japan up 1%. Mainland China shares rallied after Beijing further opened up its financial markets to foreign investors.
Along with gains in Turkey South Africa as well as central Europe , MSCI’s index of emerging market stocks looked set to post its best session in more than a week.
But the EM index is still on track to post a loss for the week. Dismal manufacturing numbers across the globe and worries that the easing of coronavirus lockdowns could lead to a second wave of the disease kept risk appetite at bay.
The dollar eased on hopes of a recovery with the reopening of economies and upbeat China export numbers on Thursday. But U.S. employment data due later on Friday will determine if a rally in developing market currencies can be sustained.
Asian currencies made measured gains while rising oil prices helped the Russian rouble shrug off the country’s sixth day of registering more than 10,000 new cases of COVID-19.
Rising inflation in April as seen in data released late on Thursday is unlikely to prevent Bank of Russia from making at least one 50 basis point cut at its June policy meeting, especially if the country’s fiscal stance remains conservative, Dmitry Dolgin, chief economist, Russia, at ING said.
For GRAPHIC on emerging market FX performance 2020, see http://tmsnrt.rs/2egbfVh For GRAPHIC on MSCI emerging index performance 2020, see https://tmsnrt.rs/2OusNdX
For CENTRAL EUROPE market report, see
For RUSSIAN market report, see (Reporting by Susan Mathew in Bengaluru; Editing by David Clarke)
