— Columbia Softball (@CULionsSoftball) May 16, 2019
My junior year was particularly special considering I was named to the First-Team All-Ivy and Second-Team All-Region squads after leading the entire conference in home runs for a season. All of that happening in the same year that I tore my ACL gives new meaning to "rubbing some dirt on it."
Yes, that awkward sliding injury that had me pondering the severity at second base turned out to be a serious knee injury.
In that moment, walking off the field not knowing what just happened, I went through all of the right protocols with my trainer to ensure I was capable of returning to the game. It was mind over matter for me at that point. I knew something was wrong, but I wouldn't allow myself to believe it.
I was able to run and throw, and the fact that I already had loose ligaments made it impossible to pinpoint an actual problem on the spot. So, I finished the inning before heading back to the bench as a precaution.
My knee swelled up like a balloon that night at the hotel. I had a game circled against one of our rivals, Dartmouth, as a possibility for a return date. However, those plans were nixed after an MRI revealed the true extent of the damage.
I had to tell the team and also break the news to my parents. Of course, my dad wasn't quite ready to jump on board with me waving the white flag so soon. He wondered if the team would allow me to attempt to play through the injury with a knee brace. Even my sister suggested I had nothing to lose from at least asking.
The doctor sort of gave me his blessing, while also warning me I'd be at risk for further damage. He said he'd immediately pull me from playing if the knee started to give out. I kept the news to myself to avoid causing speculation of when and if I was returning.
After a week of strengthening, I got to the point where I had to test if I could run on the knee, but there was no way of doing so without showing my team. It was actually before a mid-week game, and we stowed my briefcase underneath the bus. Coach Teague then announced to the team that I was going to try to play, but she also told them not to get their hopes up because I was done if my knee gave out.
A week later, I was back on the field playing in a game. It was crazy. I never thought it was going to be possible, but my team made it possible.
Honestly, if it wasn't for my teammates, trainers, and coaches, I don't think I would have returned to play. These people supported me the whole way and always had my back.
Once I returned, it also hit me that I only had two more years left of softball and wanted to make as much of it as I could. I played every game as if it were my last because it very well could have been.
My knee could have given out at any time. I wasn't able to play in the field due to my cutting limitations, and I could only round the bases if I hit a home run.
I was able to make the most out of an impossible situation.
That year, we wound up winning a program-record 15 Ivy League games and even made it to the Ivy League Playoff Series for the first time in school history.
As a result, we were picked No. 1 in this year's Ivy League Preseason Poll. Winning conference would have been a great way to close out my collegiate career.
We've come a long way but there is still a lot to accomplish.
For the first time, Columbia Softball has been selected #1 in the @IvyLeague Preseason Poll.
— Columbia Softball (@CULionsSoftball) February 5, 2020
Unfortunately, we never had the chance to win it.
Our team was supposed to leave for Oklahoma on a Thursday, but on the Sunday before the trip, we started getting news of growing concerns with the Coronavirus.
We all messaged back and forth in a group chat, wondering what was happening. We didn't know if they were going to cancel the whole season or if we'd even be allowed to go on Spring Break because of the travel restrictions.
Once we learned no fans would be allowed at the games, we brought it up to the coaching staff and asked if the season was in danger of being canceled. They didn't have answers at the time, either. All they could do was encourage us not to take any moment for granted, including practice. Just go out there, play softball, and be happy.
It wasn't until the Wednesday before the supposed trip when they finally broke the news to us. I'll never forget that moment. Coach Teague teared up as she informed us the season was canceled.
Everyone started crying from that moment on.
Not only did my season end, but the season of all of my teammates. Freshmen never got to play in the League, sophomores and juniors lost a year to prove themselves, and seniors like myself had no idea that their collegiate careers, and competitive softball careers for that matter, just ended.
Everyone knew this was going to be a big season for us. But just like that, it was all snatched away.
For me, perhaps the most unsettling part is the fact that I played my last softball game and didn't even realize it. I never had the opportunity to take everything in, knowing it would be the last time I'd ever compete in a collegiate softball game.
I could have thought up a thousand different endings, and none would have gone like this.
The crying lasted a couple days, and then we started getting news of the campus closing. So not only did we have to bury our season prematurely, but we also had to say goodbye to our friends in our senior year of college.
But I refuse to let a disappointing ending ruin such a great story. I guess you could say we all rubbed a little dirt on it and kept on going through multiple seasons full of ups and downs. We stuck together as a team and gave it our all every time we stepped on the field. That's a memory I can take with me and cherish for the rest of my life.
It's hard to believe that I was only a four-year-old girl following in my sister's footsteps by playing a game my family always knew and loved. I can only hope I've left a set of footprints of my own for future players to follow when I'm gone.
It wasn't always perfect, but I can gladly look back, knowing it was the Grzybek thing to do.
