Stock markets may see extended sell-off; Yes Bank, oil shares in focus
3 min read . Updated: 09 Mar 2020, 08:21 AM IST Nasrin Sultana
MUMBAI: Indian stock markets are likely to be under pressure on Monday following weakness in global markets, while the Yes Bank crisis may keep investors cautious.
Asian shares sank on Monday as investors fled to bonds to hedge the economic shock of the coronavirus, and oil plunged more than 20% after Saudi Arabia slashed its official selling price.
The world's top oil exporter plans to raise its production significantly after the collapse of OPEC's supply cut agreement with Russia, a grab for market share reminiscent of a drive in 2014 that caused prices to slump by around two thirds. Brent crude futures slid $9.62 to $35.65 a barrel in chaotic trade, while US crude shed $8.91 to $32.37.
The safe-haven yen surged against emerging market currencies with exposure to oil, including the Russian rouble and Mexican peso, as analysts saw danger ahead.
There were also worries that US oil producers that had issued a lot of debt would be made uneconomic by the price drop.
The number of people infected with the coronavirus topped 107,000 across the world as the outbreak reached more countries and caused further economic carnage.
India, on Sunday, recorded five more cases of deadly coronavirus, also known as COVID-19, taking the total number of confirmed cases to 39.
Yes Bank shares will be eyed on Monday. The arrest of the lender's co-founder Rana Kapoor by the Enforcement Directorate (ED), on Sunday, lends credence to allegations of kickbacks and round-tripping of funds by Kapoor.
The primary allegation against Kapoor is related to Doit Urban Ventures, a company belonging to his family. The company received ₹600 crore from Dewan Housing Finance Corp. Ltd (DHFL) allegedly in return for Yes Bank not labelling loans to DHFL as non-performing assets (NPAs). The directors of Doit Urban Ventures are Rana Kapoor’s daughters Radha Kapoor Khanna and Roshni Kapoor.
A Mumbai court sent Kapoor to ED custody till Wednesday. The ED has estimated the size of the crime at ₹4,300 crore, a figure which was rejected by Kapoor’s lawyers.
State Bank of India chairman Rajnish Kumar on Saturday said survival of Yes Bank was critical for the financial system and that it will invest ₹2,450 crore immediately, which can later balloon to over ₹10,000 crore depending on the due diligence and final valuation, to pick up 49% in the bank.
Among global markets, Italy will come under fire as the government ordered a lockdown at large parts of the north, including the financial capital Milan.
Markets are fully priced for at least a half-point rate cut from the Federal Reserve at its scheduled policy meeting on 18 March, following last week's emergency easing, and a move toward zero not long after.
The European Central Bank will meet on Thursday and will be under intense pressure to act, but rates there are already deeply negative.
Urgent action was clearly needed with data suggesting the global economy slid into recession this quarter. Figures out from China over the weekend showed exports fell 17.2% in January-February, from a year earlier.
Yields on 10-year US Treasuries plunged to a once-unthinkable 0.51%, having halved in just eight sessions.
Yields on the 30-year long bond dived 35 basis points on Friday alone, the largest daily drop since the 1987 crash, and were last down further at 1.13%. The tumble in yields and Fed rate expectations has pulled the rug out from under the dollar, sending it crashing to the largest weekly loss in four years.
The dollar extended its slide in early Asia trade to reach 103.55 yen, depths not seen since late 2016, while the euro shot to the highest in over eight months at $1.1387.
Gold jumped 1.6% to clear $1,700 per ounce and reach a fresh seven-year peak.
* Thank you for subscribing to our newsletter.
Click here to read the Mint ePaperLivemint.com is now on Telegram. Join Livemint channel in your Telegram and stay updated
