Good morning from Memphis, where we're taking a look this morning at why MATA is so desperate for more funds. But first...
Nick Vergos was as Memphis as the dry-rub ribs his father Charlie Vergos pioneered at the family's iconic Rendezvous restaurant tucked in a basement in a Downtown alley.
"Was" — because the beloved 67-year-old restaurateur died of cancer Thursday , as reported by our Jennifer Chandler.
The news was a blow to his family and friends, of course, but also to Memphis, his lifelong hometown, where he was known as a champion of local barbecue, a philanthropist, a die-hard University of Memphis fan and booster, and a mentor to many of the city's best-known chefs and restaurateurs.
Although many people tried yesterday , no one summed up what Nick Vergos meant to Memphis better than his long-time friend and World Golf Championship-FedEx St. Jude Invitational golf tournament general chairman Jack Sammons:
“Nick Vergos was more than America’s Barbecue King. Nick personified all that is good about his hometown. He was Mr. Memphis,” Sammons said. “Nick’s face, his voice and his personality were all a brand in itself recognized around the world as a Memphis icon. If there was a Mount Rushmore for barbecue, Nick and his dad 'Big Charlie' would be there side-by-side.”
If you're looking for funeral arrangements, Jennifer has them here:
Visitation will be from 6:30-9 p.m. Sunday at Hope Church located at 8500 Walnut Grove Road. A memorial service will be held at 11 a.m. Monday at the church. Those attending are asked to use entrance three.
Does MATA really need more money?
The people behind the Transit Vision — part of the broader Memphis 3.0 strategic growth plan — say the Memphis Area Transit Authority needs $30 million more.
The problem is how to get it. Hoping to bring in $9 million for public transit, Shelby County Mayor Lee Harris this week proposed charging people and businesses with more than two vehicles a $145-per-vehicle transit fee , per our Katherine Burgess.
I've already opined here and here about the fee and the legitimate concerns about it — and there are legitimate concerns. Will this drive up the number of unregistered vehicles? How will the county enforce the rule? Does the county have the infrastructure in place to collect? And if people don't pay, what kind of repercussions would they see? Shelby County Court Clerk Wanda Halbert, whose office registers vehicles, is also questioning whether the fee would really only impact 17% of residents , WREG reports.
But a common criticism without merit is that MATA doesn't really need more money, and especially not the $30 million in additional funding recommended by the Transit Vision.
First, MATA currently receives nearly $29.2 million from Memphis, in addition to federal and state sources. That's on par with how much the city gives to its Libraries division ($30 million) or Parks ($35 million). And you could argue that MATA has a much larger impact on quality of life than either division (although, to be clear, we need those, too).
People hear how much MATA is getting from the city and then look at the state of our transit system and think "Gee, MATA must be mismanaging all of that money." But what's really going on is that Memphis is one of the poorest cities in the nation and with a footprint larger than New York City's. Our system costs more and gives a lower return.
That's not to say the public transit isn't important. It is. But people should be realistic about the cost of public transit. Yes, $29.2 million is a lot of money, but it doesn't go far.
OK, you might think, I can see how $29.2 million is necessary. But what about the additional ask of $30 million?
Here's the thing: Even if MATA does find another $30 million eventually, it'll still be woefully underfunded, by public transit standards. Memphis is currently spending a about $45 per capita on public transit, based on the city's 2018 U.S. Census population estimates . Add $30 million in funding, and the city would spend about $91 per person.
That sounds like a lot. But remember how Memphis has a larger footprint than NYC? Well, NYC-Newark was spending $251.75 per capita as of 2017 . And NYC-Newark wasn't even at the top of the list. That honor went to the Seattle region, which in 2017 was spending $393.29 per capita on public transit.
Our $45 per capita spending isn't a lot: it's a drop in the bucket.
An additional $30 million isn't an unreasonable number. It's just that we've underfunded public transit for so long we don't really know what quality transit looks like or how much it costs.
With another $30 million, MATA could give 79,000 more people access to frequent service within a half-mile of their homes, up from the 12,000 that have access now, according to the Vision. In other words, 14% of city residents would have nearby access to frequent service compared to the 3% that currently do. And the percentage of residents who have any service within a half-mile will increase from 80% to 85%.
The additional funding wouldn't give us anything close to a luxury public transit system. But it might give us a semi-decent one, one that gets people from here to there without spending hours in between, and reduces our gas emissions at the same time.
University of Memphis president David Rudd will receive a 33% bump in his pay, raising his annual salary from $394,075 to $525,000 , our Laura Testino reports.
And that's just the base salary. Assuming final approval of the contract from the trustees, he'll also be eligible for an annual performance bonus worth half of his salary and an annual retention bonus, not to mention his housing, car, phone and administrative allowances. Compared to peers, that's on the low end of the compensation spectrum:
Per the request of the board, the peer group comprised aspirational institutions, placing Memphis at the lower range of the group, rather than the middle.
The bump, coming after a controversy over the U of M not paying its custodians a $15 minimum wage, will probably ruffle feathers, and understandably so. But it's hard to argue that Rudd isn't deserving. During his tenure, the U of M has improved dramatically, from the many campus developments to record-setting fundraising and, of course, the hiring of men's basketball coach and rainmaker Penny Hardaway. Perhaps even more amazing is that at the same time, the university hasn't increased tuition.
The salary increase is huge — but so is the impact Rudd is having on the U of M.
Speaking of the U of M: Laura also reports on t he U of M's purchase of land —including part of the Audubon Baptist Church property — for a University Middle School and, maybe down the road, a high school.
For subscribers: Memphis' oldest living Holocaust survivor just turned 100 , our Phillip Jackson reports. Also, amidst growing concerns with the long-term effects of football head injuries, our Mark Giannotto writes about what the sport means for a team in Binghampton .
Yesterday at a congressional subcommittee field hearing in Memphis, U.S. Rep. Steve Cohen, D-Memphis, argued that the 1965 Voting Rights Act should be updated with new rules preventing voter suppression , our Sam Hardiman reports.
