IN RUSSIA at the moment, lots of people are talking about "import substitution". The price of the nation's main export, oil, has collapsed; and the West has slapped on sanctions as punishment for the Kremlin's meddling in Ukraine. (Russia has also imposed counter-sanctions on the West.) So, Russia needs to find new ways of earning export revenues; and it needs to produce more stuff domestically so it can "substitute" for the imports that it can no longer buy.
However, import substitution is not going well. This is for a variety of reasons, which we detail in our recent article on the Russian economy . Foreign investors are not interested in Russia at the moment; and there is little appetite for the serious structural reforms that would get the non-oil parts of the economy going. Non-oil exports are down; manufacturing and agricultural output are stagnant.
Nonetheless, some readers may still be puzzled by such poor performance. Despite all Russia's problems, the fact remains that thanks to the collapse of the rouble, Russia's currency, the country is now extremely cheap. In 2013 a dollar was worth 30 roubles; now it's worth roughly 75. Surely there would be no better time for Russia to develop non-oil export sectors?
However, the rouble-dollar exchange rate (which everyone uses) is a poor approximation of Russian competitiveness. Russia supplies less than 1% of America's imports, and the dollar has been unusually strong in recent months. A better measure of the rouble's value is to measure it against the currencies of all its trading partners. Also it's helpful to adjust it for inflation; since Russian inflation is high at the moment, its exporters will demand relatively more roubles for the goods they produce.
Zsolt Darvas of the Bruegel Institute, a think-tank, has calculated the Russia real effective exchange rate up until November, which accounts for all this. Against the dollar, the rouble has lost over 50% of its value in the last two years. But after adjusting for inflation and its trading partners, the rouble has only lost about 25% of its value. Look in particular towards the end of 2015, when inflation was very high. The rouble was losing out against the dollar, but was appreciating in real terms.
Given that in 2013 the Russian rouble was seriously overvalued, it may be a bit of a stretch to say that the rouble is now "cheap". That import-substitution strategy has a long way to go.
