CNET editors pick the products and services we write about. When you buy through our links, we may get a commission.
The best rubs you can buy for grilled steak, chicken, pork and fish
These are the best dry rubs money can buy for barbecue season.
The secret to expertly seasoned meat, fish or veggies is actually stupidly easy: Don't even think about letting anything touch the grill this summer without giving it a good rub down first. Dry rubs are a great way to add flavor to anything you grill , and these are some of the best rubs you can buy.
A dry rub usually has these three ingredients: salt, pepper and brown sugar, which gives meat and fish a healthy dose of flavor and some sweet caramelization (thanks to the sugar) when it hits the heat. But once you've got those as your base, you can go crazy, adding whatever spices make sense with the natural flavor of what you're cooking. (For example, cayenne is kinda awesome on fish.)
Subscribe to the Deals newsletter, receive notifications and see related stories on CNET.
But don't stress if you're not a flavor chemist: Each of these ready-to-buy rubs is a delicious flavor bomb that'll add texture, too, without you having to lift a finger. Some of them even skip the sugar (it's your life, live it how you want), but bring all of that crazy-good taste. Break one out for Memorial Day , and experiment with other blends all summer long. Another bonus: Unlike a marinade or sauce , you can add a rub right before you cook the meat, making them a godsend for any impromptu grilling sesh!
The Salt Lick authentic Texas BBQ dry rub: Three for $29
This legendary pit outside of Austin serves up some of the most flavorful barbecue in the area. Thankfully you can skip the drive (and the massive lines) and make your own version at home with this rub that's a smoky mix of salt, black pepper, cayenne and other spices. It's seriously addictive.
Trader Joe's BBQ rub and seasoning with coffee and garlic: $10
Everything but the Bagel Sesame Seasoning isn't the only bottle to make a beeline for in the Trader Joe's spice aisle -- grab this deep, complex and delectable rub too and give your burgers, brisket and pot roast a jolt with coffee and garlic. Yep, the bitter grounds, when mixed with roasted garlic, smoked paprika, brown sugar, salt and dried orange peel makes a sweet treat with smoky flavor on the grill.
Craving Korean barbecue ? This bulgogi -inspired blend of light brown sugar with jaggery (an unrefined sugar), smoked paprika, toasted ground ginger and garlic, candied ginger bits, orange zest, black and toasted white sesame seeds, Korean chile flakes and minced onion is a great shortcut to tons of flavor. You could obviously use it on steak and other cuts of beef -- or even pork -- but we have a feeling it would be dynamite on shrimp too.
Salmon rub by Tom Douglas: $7
James Beard Award -winning Seattle Kitchen chef Tom Douglas came up with this dry rub, and trust us, it's the best way to visit the Pacific Northwest without ever having to leave home. Sure, you could use this one on chicken or pork chops, but the blend of paprika, thyme and brown sugar is perfect for salmon fillets , and a portion of sales goes towards the Alaska Wild Salmon Fund.
