Why you'll love it: Biofreeze Pain Relief Gel Roll-On offers fast-acting cooling relief, and the roll-on design makes for mess-free application.
Biofreeze Pain Relief Gel Roll-On offers soothing, cooling relief that helps to stop muscle pain. According to Performance Health Brands, the manufacturer of Biofreeze, this gel works almost like ice. It slows blood flow and cools your skin, relieving your pain at the same time. Performance Health Brands states that Biofreeze is nearly twice as powerful as ice.
Because menthol is the active ingredient in Biofreeze , it does have a light scent but it's not overpowering and fades quickly. The gel contains no nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and propylene glycol- and paraben-free, so it's a safe option for home use. You'll also find that many healthcare professionals, including chiropractors and physical therapists, use Biofreeze in their offices.
My chiropractor first introduced me to Biofreeze, and it's quickly become my go-to muscle rub for daily use. I can feel it working within about 2 minutes of application, and I find that the effects last for hours. It isn't greasy, doesn't stain clothing, and just a little bit of it is often enough to soothe muscle aches in my back. I particularly like the roll-on, mess-free design and the applicator itself gives a massaging effect.
Biofreeze Pain Relief Gel Roll-On has a 4.4 out of 5-star Amazon rating based on 1,420 reviews. "The portable, cylindrical canister is convenient, easy to carry in a backpack or sports bag, and quick and simple to apply. After long hikes or a day of working in the yard, Biofreeze is one of the first things I run to for pain relief," Smartie Mama wrote.
Anna Carman said, "I am an occupational therapist who works in a hospital and is on my feet for more than [eight hours] while I help people to walk and move around all day. This is my go to to relieve my back pain, aches, and all the other fun stuff that comes with the territory of my line of work. I use this after hard workouts when I'm sore too as it helps me get through the workday."
