The Triple M and SEN team paid tribute to Danny Frawley on Saturday.Source: News Limited
The football world was rocked on Monday when Danny Frawley tragically passed away in a car crash.
But there was no better way to pay tribute to Frawley than getting his former radio colleagues together for one more time, to reminisce about the best moments of their time on air.
The Triple M and SEN radio stations simulcasted for two hours on Saturday afternoon, replaying audio and discussing the best moments they had had on air.
Stream every match of the 2019 Toyota AFL Finals Series before the Grand Final Live & On-Demand on KAYO SPORTS. Get your 14 day free trial and start streaming instantly >
Garry Lyon, James Brayshaw, Brian Taylor and Damien Barrett came together, with the radio special providing plenty of laughs.
It was ironic that Frawley switched stations to SEN, with Barrett declaring in the radio special that ‘Spud’ had questioned whether they were even “plugged in” during his time at Triple M.
The quartet reminisced about their favourite Frawley moments, starting with a discussion around the weekly quaddie, a ritual between the group, where they would put in $50 for Frawley to tip a number of horses throughout the day.
Unfortunately, his strike rate wasn’t as high as they had hoped, with Frawley’s special comments responses dipping throughout the afternoon if they begun to lose legs in their quaddie.
From Frawley’s golden trumpet, comments about ‘haircut Timms’ and 360 degree feedback, his lasting impact in the media won’t be forgotten anytime soon.
Here are some of the moments they touched on.
And it was one specific word — ‘the headwobbler’ — which has come into the AFL world when anyone begins to get ahead of themselves.
Often it was Frawley’s fellow panellists who won the award, with Garry Lyon and Damien Barrett winning it.
The prize came with Frawley blowing into a little yellow, plastic kids’ trumpet, which reportedly cost $20.
Current Channel 9 Sunday Footy Show host Tony Jones has long been nicknamed “chompers” — after getting dental work on his teeth.
But the Triple M Rub team didn’t miss when Frawley himself had got some work done — even though he was one of the original panellists who mocked Jones.
Lyon begun by reading a three-page letter to the loyal listeners, before laying into Spud who had declared people shouldn’t be getting hair treatment, spray tans and waxing.
The Melbourne great had been tipped off about some dental work of a fellow panellist by James Brayshaw, who declared he had a “suspicion he changed his appearance”.
Garry Lyon and Tony ‘chompers’ Jones.Source: News Limited
“Spud is now to be known as Chompers Frawley,” Lyon roared as the team was brought to tears, laughing for minutes on end.
“Bulls**t,” Frawley quipped back before conceeding he had got some work done on his tooth.
Lyon declared Frawley would’ve been the perfect candidate to appear on television show Survivor, because of his strong ability to be a double agent and collude with his panellists. See more on his 360 degree feedback below.
Normally Frawley would speak to all of the Saturday rub team before they went to air, teaming up with certain people, ready to fire a bullet at certain members of the team.
When Brian Taylor made the move to 3AW Football, there was a radio truce, that happened to be called off when “Bristle” made remarks about Spud on air.
“That’s what you get on 3AW Football. You’d have Spud muttering [on Triple M] and he wouldn’t get it out. Instead you’ve got Mick [Malthouse], being concise and getting it out,” Taylor said.
And didn’t Frawley fire up at his former radio colleague.
“Is this the same Bristle that I saw in the Green Guide?” he said.
“Is this the same Bristle that was close to tears at that lunch in Flemington. He got blown out by linguini arms Brayshaw?
“At least the people I work with like me,” Frawley said as the other panellists chortled in the background.
The Triple M Footy radio team came together with SEN for the special Saturday Rub.Source: News Limited
“Spud latched onto the whole leading teams [mentality]. You had to sit someone out in the middle, good and bad feedback,” Brayshaw explained.
So he brought the segment to the radio station, with the longest feedback going for 27 minutes.
“Spud tried to get to everyone first, he’d start at quarter to eight in the morning,” Brayshaw revealed.
“’What are you going to go with for Warrior? Well this is what I’ve got. What about Gaz? I’ve got beautiful stuff on Gaz and he’d say I’ve got this’ and I’d tell him you won’t go with that.
On one particular 360 degree feedback, it was revealed Frawley had attempted to collude with all of his other panellists.
“Stay solid. Time to take Wolf and Warrior down” Brayshaw read out a text from Spud when they were asked if they had colluded.
Before Lyon and Barrett revealed the same just seconds later, except for their names changed to Brayshaw in the text.
It was the segment that continued to give, with Barrett suggesting they had to cancel it was it “drove a wedge in us forever”.
Taylor believed he had done nearly 500 Sportsman’s Nights with Frawley over their journey.
And it took a revelation from Lyon to reveal they had been introducing the St Kilda great incorrectly.
“We’d announce him … ‘longest serving captain, All-Australian, represented Victoria and in St Kilda Team of the Century. He’s the vice-captain of the Team of the Century,” Taylor said.
“[Frawley] never said a word,” Lyon added.
Tributes to Danny Frawley are seen during the St Kilda best & fairest on Wednesday. Photo: Kelly Defina/Getty Images.Source: Getty Images
Brayshaw revealed it was Lyon who had got to the truth.
“I must’ve been in the crowd one day. So I thought that’s now how we announce him on radio. And no one ever questioned it. Until Gaz came in one day and I knew Spud was in trouble and said ‘I just need five and it might blow out to 10’,” Brayshaw said.
With Frawley on the phone, the group had finally got to the bottom of his achievements as a St Kilda player.
“I’m not in it [St Kilda’s Team of the Century] mate. These boys have to do their homework. I just sat there and thought if they are not going to do their homework [I won’t tell them],” Frawley revealed.
Frawley’s chortling in the commentary box or the studio was synopsis with the Saturday Rub.
“Buddy could be lining up for his 100th goal and you could make a fake fart noise and that would be it for Spud. He’d lose his focus for 10 minutes,” Lyon joked.
But it was a moment with former Bulldog and Sun Jarrod Grant that had Frawley in stitches.
Grant joined them in the box, with it getting very awkward after Lyon suggested the players may have called him “microphone head” when trying to come up with a nickname when he first arrived at the club.
“I don’t spindleshank took that too well to be called microphone head,” Frawley said at the time.
Jarrod Grant was nicknamed ‘spindleshank’ by the Triple M team.Source: News Limited
“He lost it,” Lyon revealed on Saturday.
“He was half asleep and then Spud looked at me and came alive. He wanted him out of the box so he could have a crack at me.”
In 2011, Garry Lyon got hold of an email Frawley had sent to a Fox Footy makeup artist, asking whether he could buy his own makeup, as he wanted a darker brand than what he was being provided with.
The email came via James Brayshaw, who begun to read out the information that had crossed his desk.
“Suzie (name changed), hope you are well. Suzie, I have make-up but I find when I turn it on, it is too white looking. I have used some of the boys’ make-up and it seems a lot darker. Can I get some of this darker colour? Or tell me what colour and I will buy some. Danny Frawley,” Brayshaw read as the team giggled.
“I’ve had some feedback on the show maybe I’m [looking] a bit pasty,” Frawley conceded.
Get the ultimate AFL experience on your phone with the FOX FOOTY App. Download it NOW for FREE on iOS and Android !
By registering you are agree to our Terms of Use, Privacy Policy and Privacy Notice
