WHETHER you're spending a day at the beach or running through the park in the summer heat, chafing is one of the downsides of warm weather.
Brits are set to bake this week as temperatures are predicted to reach 34C, but the hot weather means more sweat, which could cause sore painful chub rub.
Chafing is caused when the inner thighs rub together due Credit: Getty Images - Getty
While most chafing is just a little bit uncomfortable, more extreme cases can cause the skin to break and may even cause spots.
The skin needs time to heal properly which can be difficult in the summer months if you're wearing skirts or swim wear.
It is estimated that around 99.7 per cent of women are plagued by chub rub in the summer months.
It's caused when the tops of the inner thighs rub together and friction cases the skin to rub away.
We've all felt that painful skin on skin sensation, but what can you do to stop chub rub ruining your summer?
Founder of Smoovall Skin Contact Spray, Reginald Ofori said chafing isn't like other normal cuts or wounds that you would put a plaster on.
He said: "Plasters have many set backs like collecting bacteria, moisture and odour during your workout- another poor option for your skin!"
The heat between the thighs may even cause the plasters to fall off and could leave a sticky residue behind.
While we've all been washing our clothes more because of the Covid-19 pandemic, Reginald said this is also key to prevent chafing.
He said it's especially important to throw your clothes in the wash if you've been working out in them.
"Even if you feel like you didn’t sweat, we all have some bacteria on our bodies naturally, and it loves clingy workout clothes, which is one of the main reasons you might be experiencing skin breakouts.
"If you can’t shower straight after your work out, change your t-shirt to prevent the bacteria being on your skin for longer than it needs to be."
Bacteria loves to cling to clothing, make sure you throw items in the wash after working out Credit: Getty Images - Getty
Anti-bacterial creams such as Savlon and Sudocrem are bathroom staples than can help heal the sore spots.
Applying the creams before you go to bed can help soothe the wounds causes by the friction.
This is while other bathroom staples such as liquid talc could also help. Supermarkets such as Asda offer cut price options for just 90p.
Retailers such as Lush also offer "dusting powders" that can keep chafing at bay.
Last summer Asda's Little Angel's liquid talc was one of the most talked about products after people hailed it as a chub rub remedyCredit: ASDA
During the summer months you want to be comfortable and as temperatures creep up the last thing you want is for your clothes to weight you down.
Wearing lightweight and breathable fabrics such as linen can help to keep you cool.
While many of us have't been seen in anything other that gym wear during the Covid-19 lockdown, this could be a good thing to help prevent chub rub.
Most gym clothing is made with breathable technology, so opt for leggings or even cycling shorts.
Many cycling shorts can also be worn under dresses to stop legs from rubbing together.
This is while some companies also make anti-chafing thigh bands and leggings to help protect you.
Dad killed wife then himself as son, 2, slept after row over mum-in-law
Reginald said some people cover the area that is usually affected with duct tape in order to prevent the skin from rubbing.
He added: "Many people use duct tape to prevent chafing, however this can irritate the skin and is not a long term option.
"Many short term solutions like this can cause new problems, add to the pain and are overall unnecessary."
