Is this what it was like back in the day? I’m walking through the streets of a small city, feeling healthy but wondering about everybody else I see. Have they been exposed to this new illness called COVID-19? Are they having any of its varied symptoms?
Even if they look and feel OK, could they be infected and unknowingly be spreading the disease to the rest of us? Could I be infected and not know it?
Was it like this in 14th century London, when the pestilence that came to be called the Black Death swept westward from central Asia, across Italy and France and into England?
Well, no. Historians estimate that the Black Death killed half the population of England -- an impact this coronavirus is unlikely to have. Still, some health experts say it may evolve into a catastrophe much more dreadful than what we’re seeing now. One former top U.S. health official said 2020 “could be the darkest winter in modern history."
Even if it isn’t as destructive as the Black Death, that sounds grim enough to frighten me.
And yet, when I took my stroll Friday morning through the streets of Fairhope, Alabama, I couldn’t help but wonder whether we Americans truly grasp the destructive power of this coronavirus. When we saw the number of deaths in China and Italy earlier this year, we were willing to close schools, restaurants, gyms, retail outlets and entertainment venues -- even churches -- to reduce its spread.
That was in March. By early May, much of the business community understandably was anxious to reopen. Made nervous by the nation’s president, politicians began to agitate for a return to normalcy, too, and so U.S. cities and states began to allow people to shop, dine out, work out and worship as they used to, with certain conditions.
Is it the right thing to do? As Hamlet said, “Ay! There’s the rub.”
Until many more months have passed, we won’t know if we were smart in May 2020 to reopen our society and our economy -- both of which were really suffering and needed to be rescued -- or if we were beyond stupid to think that the worst of the storm had passed.
Because here’s the problem: We have not been able to test broad segments of our population for the virus, so we don’t have a good handle on who’s infected. Moreover, scientists say we probably have under-counted the number of deaths caused by the virus, and our record of tracking infected people’s contacts with other people is spotty.
As the old saying goes, if you don’t know where you’ve been and you aren’t sure where you are, how are you supposed to know when you’ve gotten to where you thought you were going?
Fairhope is a lovely city overlooking Mobile Bay in southwest Alabama. Its leaders put a lot of stock in landscaped streets, ample cultural activities, lots of parks and a plethora of restaurants, art galleries, antique stores and stylish boutiques. It has earned a reputation for being a wonderful place to retire.
As I walked its streets the other day, not long after businesses had been allowed to reopen, I saw cars everywhere, a scarcity of available parking spaces and groups of people going in and out of stores and businesses. Some folks were wearing face masks, but a lot were not.
And I couldn’t help but wonder: Have we taken this virus as seriously as it deserves to be taken? Most of us haven’t been to New York lately, nor do a lot of us have family members in hard-hit nursing homes, so we haven’t seen COVID-19 up close and personal. We just know that we’re tired of being cooped up with our kids in cramped homes and apartments, we’re tired of being furloughed or unemployed, we’re tired of keeping bill collectors at bay and we’re tired of waiting in long lines at drive-through windows. We’re tired of it all.
So we’re back on the streets and at the beach, and we’re going to church services and out to eat, and we’re shopping in stores once again.
Sadly, God only knows where we’ll be in six months or a year, and at this point, he’s not showing his hand.
Frances Coleman is a freelance writer who lives in Baldwin County, Alabama. Email her at fcoleman1953@gmail.com and “like” her on Facebook at www.facebook.com/prfrances .
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
