In Dalton, Bjorn (Peter) Sternerup, owner of Silver Bear Distillery, has been working around the clock to create hand sanitizer at his facility in the Stationery Factory, where he typically makes vodka and liqueurs.
Hundreds of empty cans of beer sit empty at Silver Bear Distillery in Dalton. Owner Bjorn (Peter) Sternerup's formula for hand sanitizer uses local beer - it's provided by Shire Breu-Haus, which also is in the Stationery Factory, and Brewmaster in Williamsburg - that is at or near expiration.
The distillery at Silver Bear Distillery in Dalton is being used to make hand sanitizer. In addition to Silver Bear, Berkshire Mountain Distillers in Sheffield also is making the product, with both having found a way to fill a need in the community, and to keep generating revenue amid the state of emergency that has hobbled many businesses.
Berkshire Mountain Distillers is selling hand sanitizer, of various sizes and shapes, from its plant in Sheffield.
Bottles of hand sanitizer made by Silver Bear Distillery in Dalton are for sale in Kelly's Package Store in Dalton. Owner John Kelly says he has sold or distributed over 4,000 bottles from Silver Bear, as well as from Berkshire Mountain Distillers in Sheffield.
Berkshire Mountain Distillers owner Chris Weld talks about his rum with Gov. Charlie Baker in 2016 at the distillery in Sheffield. The distillery is making hand sanitizer to meet a growing need in the community amid the COVID-19 outbreak.
Therein lies the rub: 2 Berkshire distilleries fill void, make hand sanitizer
Don't miss the big stories. Like us on Facebook.
In the days leading up to the pandemic, Chris Weld, like many people across the Berkshires, noticed that stores had run out of hand sanitizer.
Shoppers had snapped up the stuff to protect themselves from the looming spread of the coronavirus.
"I couldn't find it anywhere," he said.
But, Weld, the owner of Berkshire Mountain Distillers in Sheffield, was uniquely positioned to do something about it: He could make his own.
Using the gin and unaged bourbon he produces at his craft distillery — "We're using 160 proof; that's why our sanitizer smells so good" — Weld was able to quickly ramp up production of sanitizer after a waiver was granted by federal regulators.
Two Berkshire distilleries have found a way to fill a need in the community, and to keep generating revenue amid the state of emergency that has hobbled many businesses.
In Dalton, Bjorn (Peter) Sternerup, owner of Silver Bear Distillery, has been working around the clock to create hand sanitizer at his facility in the Stationery Factory, where he typically makes vodka and liqueurs.
His formula uses local beer — it's provided by Shire Breu-Haus, which also is in the Stationery Factory, and Brewmaster Brewing Services in Williamsburg — that is at or near expiration.
Both distillers said packaging has been a challenge; Sternerup said he has been able to find bottles here and there, but they aren't uniform, meaning he constantly is redesigning labels to fit.
"We would rather make vodka and liqueurs," Sternerup said. "Producing hand sanitizer is not really a moneymaker, but it is the right thing to do. We have the equipment and we have the know-how."
He said that hosts of donors have pitched in to help provide the sanitizer to first responders, doctors' offices, the United Way and other charities.
"This is the community where we live and where we sell most of our products," he said. "We want to make sure that this is available to our first responders and health care workers who we all depend on."
Both distilleries also distribute the sanitizer for sale at local stores.
John Kelly, owner of Kelly's Package Store in Dalton, says he has sold or distributed over 4,000 bottles from Silver Bear and Berkshire Mountain Distillers. Weld also sells his sanitizer at the distillery and Carr Hardware stores around the Berkshires.
"For, me, I feel very fortunate that I can keep my staff employed and make a lot of donations," Weld said. "We just lost a little more than half of our business with all the restaurants closing. It's nice to be able to keep the lights on and give back to the community as well."
If you'd like to leave a comment (or a tip or a question) about this story with the editors, please email us . We also welcome letters to the editor for publication; you can do that by filling out our letters form and submitting it to the newsroom.
