The world’s favourite house pets and future rulers in disguise, cats, are universally known as confusing creatures. When was the last time you and your cat had a mutual understanding? Is it the time they willingly drank out of their bowl instead of the tap? Or was it when they completely ditched their comfy beds for tiny cardboard delivery boxes?
These hard to please and impossible to interpret felines have had humans puzzling over their nature for decades. In a desperate attempt to understand what they like and dislike, our species has unearthed ancient lore and myth, studied them and got somewhere with making them associate themselves with their given names. None of the above worked.
SEE ALSO: Cats Know When You Call Their Name and Choose To Ignore You On Purpose!
So instead of trying to make them corporate with our puny human ways, we figured understanding cats and adjusting accordingly is a better option. We have lived with them, we’ve loved them and we’ve understood their anatomy. No really, here’s evidence of our findings:
We already know what cats hate for most of the part. It includes interacting with humans, being petted by humans and complying with anything we beg them not to do. But we still have a long way to go when it comes to understanding feline behaviour. Out of the many mysteries, one jarring question doesn’t seem to find an apt answer: Why do cats hate belly rubs?
Anyone who has ever been tempted to rub the furry belly of a fluffy cat will know hell hath no fury than a cat scorned. I’ve personally seen cat owners who’ve had them for years show up with scratch marks. The cause: An unfortunate attempt at touching the soft belly of the beast. All we really want is to be able to give belly rubs to our pets and for that, we need an in-depth understanding of what’s going on with the aversion to belly rubs. It’s high time we find out more and so scientists carried out extensive research to find out why the felis catus doesn’t like belly rubs.
In a National Geographic study , animal behaviourist, Lena Provoost of University of Pensylvania School of Veterinary Medicine chalked down the simple reason. Cats don’t like being touched on the belly for the same reason they don’t like being touched on the tail. The hair follicles on a cat’s tail and belly are hypersensitive. A belly rub can be overstimulating due to the heightened sesitivity. That’s why most cats will move away or go on the aggressive should the human not take heed of their warning signs. Boy, do they know how to make their displeasure known!
Cats prefer being pet on the head, chin and cheeks. This is where their scent glands are placed. Cats associate humans and fellow clan members by their scent and that’s why they rub their heads and cheeks against those they are familiar with, a way to recognize the people and cats they know. So the next time you head over to run your fingers through a cat’s belly fur, know that you’re simply in the wrong if they take you as a stranger.
The major hurdle that comes with understanding cats is that they are all very different, I happen to have met cats who love belly rubs and that’s plain baffling! Not every cat will go over your arm with razor sharp claws, some of them will be fine with the belly rubs. This is because all of them are so different. Cats have very different personalities and they each have individualistic traits. Good luck trying to figure out what kind of cat you’ve encountered every time you question the urge to rub their bellies.
