With the Fed-induced stranglehold of emerging market currencies set to dissipate as the Fed cutting cycle commences, analysts at American multinational investment back and financial services firm Morgan Stanley have turned bullish on EMs suggesting that now is the time to buy in to ride the bearish USD trend as it develops.
"We are bullish," wrote the team of Morgan Stanley analysts led by head of fixed-income strategy, James Lord, in a note to clients, before elaborating with "Emerging-market currencies have lagged, but with growing conviction that the dollar has turned, we think that a catch-up is under way."
While it has been in the offing for some time (analysts began calling for an EM rebound in Q4 2018 as US data soured), soaring Fed rate cut bets have lent further credibility to the outlook along side the global developed market trend towards a more accomodative stance on monetary policy. Having fallen sharply from mid-May in line with aggressive trade rhetoric in the US-China spat and elevated concerns regarding the health of the global economy, the MSCI EM currency index has rallied sharply from its 2019 low at the end of May to trade at its highest level since April, despite the persistence of geopolitical and trade tensions.
Despite the recent push back from Fed officials, tempering market expectations regarding the magnitude of anticipated cuts, it seems a foregone conclusion that the US central bank will kick off an easing cycle = with investors looking to a 25 bps rate cut in July.
"Comments from dovish FOMC member Bullard not in support for a 50bp cut in July forced a re-think of market expectations from the FOMC meeting,” wrote Citibank analyst Johanna Chua, adding "Risk assets broadly reacted negatively with equities lower and USD stronger.”
Over the longer-term however, Morgan Stanley expect EMs to shine as Dollar strength fades on narrowing policy rate differentials.
In particular, Morgan Stanley analysts favour the Russian Rouble (RUB) which also happens to be the best performing developing-market currency of the year thus far.
Furthermore, Morgan Stanley have increased their long exposure in a basket of LatAm currencies and expects the Indian Rupee to extend recent gains.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
After graduating with a 1st in psychology (BSc Hons), Elaine specialised in the areas of trader psychology...
