As US President Donald Trump landed in India in signs that converging interests between the two nations, there were warmth and bonhomie all around, overriding recent differences over e-commerce, agriculture, medical devices, digital trade and proposed new tariffs, which raised hopes of better political, security and trade ties between two of the world's largest democracies.
Addressing a gala reception in Ahmedabad, Trump promised a ‘fantastic’ trade deal with India.
But that feel-good factor failed to rub off on Dalal Street , which saw a bloodbath of rare kind, as fears of a coronavirus pandemic haunted investors across markets. A surge of infections outside mainland China triggered steep falls in Asian shares and Wall Street stock futures as investors fled to safe havens such as gold. Oil prices tumbled and the Korean won fell to its lowest since August.
On Dalal Street, Sensex tanked over 800 points, as investors chose to book recent gains on their stock bets, anticipating worsening of the pain. The 30-share index tumbled 807 points or 1.96 per cent to end at 40,363, while the 50-share Nifty index declined 242 points or 2.01 per cent to settle at 11,838.
All 30 constituents in the Sensex pack of stocks ended in the red with Tata Steel declining the most, down 6.39 per cent. Infosys, with a fall of 0.18 per cent, shed the least in the 30-share index.
All sectoral indices on BSE ended in the red with metals plunging the most, down 5.71 per cent. It was followed by auto, down 3.39 per cent and telecom, down 3.33 per cent.
The broader markets fared worse than benchmark with BSE Midcap falling 1.60 per cent and BSE Smallcap 1.58 per cent.
India was not the only country seeing a fall on Monday amid concerns over coronavirus. Elsewhere in Asian, the Hang Seng index fell 1.8 per cent, to 26,820.88, while the China Enterprises Index lost 2.1 per cent to 10,568.33.
European equity markets also retreated at the start of trade, with Italy recording the heaviest fall after the country confirmed the nation's fourth death from the deadly coronavirus outbreak. In the UK, FTSE100 slipped over 3 per cent in early trade.
Over the weekend, South Korea put the country on high alert while the number of infections jumped to over 700 and deaths rose to seven. In Italy, officials said a third person infected with the flu-like virus had died, while the number of cases jumped to above 150 from just three before Friday.
On the other hand, safe haven gold climbed over 2 per cent in amid the widespread of Covid-19. The yellow metal was up 2.12 per cent at Rs 43,571 per 10 gram in the afternoon trade.
In Ahmedabad, Trump said relations with India hold a special place for his country, and affirmed that America “loves” and is “loyal” to India.
Addressing the 'Namaste Trump' event at Motera, he said the US would seal defence deals worth $3 billion on Tuesday. Trump and Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be holding delegation-level official talks in New Delhi on Tuesday. Sharing stage with US President Donald Trump, Prime Minister Narendra Modi also said that India-US ties are no longer just another partnership, but is a far greater and closer relationship.
The virus has thus far killed over 2,400 people in China and infected 76,936, slamming the brakes on the world’s second-largest economy.
