The Platinum One body rub parlour on York Street. (Derek Ruttan/The London Free Press)
City bylaw officers slapped two London body rub parlours with warning letters after the businesses were caught staying open in defiance of the law this week.
Police and bylaw officials conducting an enforcement blitz on Wednesday found two body rub parlours, Platinum One at 768 York St. and Virginia’s at 125 Clarke Rd., were still operating, London bylaw boss Orest Katolyk said Friday.
We apologize, but this video has failed to load.
“All body rub parlours were inspected earlier this week and I can confirm all are currently closed,” Katolyk said in an email.
There are six body rub parlours licensed to operate in London, but the businesses were supposed to close at 11:59 p.m. Tuesday after the province ordered the closure of all non-essential services for two weeks to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The head of a London women’s agency and longtime opponent of body rub parlours applauded city officials for moving quickly to ensure the businesses closed.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
“This is a public health issue,” said Megan Walker, director of the London Abused Women’s Centre (LAWC). “We understand this is a difficult time for women, including those in the sex trade.”
LAWC is willing to provide services to the affected women, including helping them access government funding in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak, Walker added.
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau announced Wednesday that all Canadians who lost their jobs as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak, including those who are self-employed, are eligible for a $2,000 monthly payment under the Canada Emergency Response Benefit.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
According a city bylaw, body rub parlours are defined as businesses where attendants use “kneading, manipulating, rubbing, massaging, or touching by any means” to “appeal to erotic or sexual appetites or inclinations.”
The city has capped the number of body rub parlour licences at six and will reduce that number to five if one of the operators lets their licence expire without renewing it or has it revoked.
Follow us on Twitter and Facebook for breaking news and updates as they happen. Email lfp.website@sunmedia with any cancellations or stories. For more local and national stories go to: lfpress/tag/coronavirus
