Ukraine crisis sends stock markets sliding; Russia's MICEX tumbles 11% - as it happened
Escalating tensions over Crimea push shares down; drive oil, gold and wheat prices up
A currency exchange office in downtown Moscow, as the ruble hits new record lows against the US dollar. Photograph: Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP
Trader Peter Tuchman on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange today, as world markets are roiled by the Ukraine crisis. Photograph: Richard Drew/AP
Another catch-up of events in the financial markets over the last few hours:
The ruble has also hit record lows against the US dollar . The selloff prompted the Russian central bank to spend at least $10bn propping up its currency, having hiked interest rates from 5.5% to 7% early this morning.
In Europe, the FTSE 100 fell 101 points while Germany’s DAX suffered its biggest one-day fall since the height of the eurozone crisis - down 3.4% by the close.
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones index has joined the selloff-- down 184 points, a drop of 1.3%, in afternoon trading.
...although some analysts, including JP Morgan’s Stephanie Flanders , reckons some Russian assets look pretty affordable now.
But there is optimism over the US economy after two manufacturing surveys beat forecasts. Both the ISM and Markit found that factory growth picked up last month.
And that’s all for today. Do keep watching our main Ukraine crisis blog for the latest news tonight.
The Russian military presence in Crimea continued to build, with troops massing outside Ukrainian military facilities, patrol boats sighted and Russian forces establishing control of both sides of the Kerch channel separating Crimea from Russia.
US vice president Joe Biden, in a call with Russian prime minister Dmitry Medvedev, urged Russia to pull back its forces. Medvedev said it was necessary to protect all Russians including those in Ukraine.
Russia has requested a third emergency meeting of the UN security council over the crisis in Ukraine.
And there are reports that EU leaders will meet to discuss the Ukraine crisis on Thursday:
Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Christine Lagarde, delivers her speech as she takes part in the Global Forum Spain 2014 in Bilbao today. Photograph: ALFREDO ALDAI/EPA
Meanwhile in Spain, Christine Lagarde has sparked a row by telling an event in Bilbao that the Spanish labour market requires further reform.
Lagarde told the Global Forum on Spain in Bilbao that:
Thanks to the formidable actions over the past five years, Europe – and Spain –are now turning the corner. Yet the task is far from finished. Growth remains too low and unemployment too high for us to declare victory on the crisis.
Our correspondent in Spain, Stephen Burgen, reports that the IMF chief was immediately attacked for, in effect, advocating more wage cuts:
Joaquín Almunia, the European competition commissioner, who was also in Bilbao, criticised Lagarde for calling for wage cuts, which he said would be “neither sensitive, reasonable nor fair”.
“Sacrifice has to be shared, and economists should not demand what is not viable in practice,” he said.
The ruble over the last 20 years. Photograph: Thomson Reuters
The Russian ruble is still hovering at its lowest ever levels against the US dollar tonight.
It is changing hands around at 36.5 to the dollar, a drop of 1.5%, despite its central bank spending at least $10bn to support the currency - and this morning’s emergency interest rate hike.
Capital Economics just issued research note on the Ukraine crisis, by their analyst Julian Jessop.
He reckons the fallout of Russia’s incursion into Crimea could be short-lived, but also compares the crisis to the 2008 conflict with Georgia - and concludes by suggesting an IMF-led bailout of Ukraine could leave less money to help eurozone countries in future.
I’ve pasted part of it below:
More generally, there are a number of points to make about history, economics and the financial market implications.
First, we have been here before. Russia and Georgia fought a brief war in August 2008 over the disputed territory of South Ossetia, which has many similarities with recent developments in Ukraine. The key point is that the conflict was short-lived and ended by an EU-sponsored ceasefire. Russian forces still occupy South Ossetia which has now declared independence from Georgia, a position that very few other countries officially recognise but no-one can realistically do anything about. A similar outcome in Crimea would soon drop out of the daily headlines (as have the ongoing tragedies in Syria and South Sudan).
Second, though, Ukraine is roughly ten times larger than Georgia in terms of population (45 million vs. 5 million) and GDP ($180bn vs. $16bn). Ukraine’s financial markets and external debts are correspondingly much greater and it is a more credible candidate for EU membership in due course. Indeed, unlike Georgia, Ukraine shares borders with four current EU members. Third, regional turmoil could also have a major impact on the Russian economy itself and on its trade, particularly in energy, with the rest of the world. The country’s financial markets and currency have already been hit hard, prompting an emergency rate hike Monday morning in an attempt to stem capital outflows.
Two specific risks are worth dwelling on. One is the possibility of the disruption to the supply of Russian energy to the European Union, whether as a result of Western sanctions or Russian manipulation. Russia is of course a major supplier of oil to Germany and the Netherlands in particular and of natural gas to Western Europe generally. However, disruption to energy trade would be in neither side’s interest, especially Russia’s as it would simply encourage EU customers to seek more secure supplies elsewhere. We suspect that any Western sanctions will only target individuals and political and cultural links, rather than trade.
The other issue is the financial burden of supporting Ukraine. The country needs around $25bn soon to refinance debt and pay other bills for goods and services. Over the longer-term, the cost of supporting the transition could run into the hundreds of billions of dollars. These are not particularly large sums when measured against the combined resources of the IMF and the major advanced economies who might be willing to offer bilateral support. Nonetheless, every dollar spent on Ukraine is a dollar not available to finance bailouts elsewhere, including the weaker economies of the euro-zone. <end>
Update - the German DAX has now officially closed, and it’s an even deeper fall than initially thought.
Germany’s index of leading shares tumbled 333.19 points to 9,358, a drop of 3.44%.
That’s very slightly worse than the 3.41% tumble on 1 June 2012. Josh Raymond of City Index says its the biggest decline since November 2011, when the eurozone crisis was raging.
The selloff is picking up pace on Wall Street, where the Dow Jones is now off 211 points or 1.3%.
As our main Ukraine liveblog reports , Russia has now requested a UN security council meeting later tonight to discuss the situation.
Nervy investors have fled shares in favour of safe government debt.
The price of US Treasury bills has risen today, pushing down the yield (interest rate) on 10-year US debt to 2.6%, from 2.65% on Friday.
Phil Orlando, chief equity market strategist at Federated investors, said it was a classic flight away from risk:
Big losses in London too, where the FTSE 100 has just closed down 101 points at 6708, a fall of almost 1.5%.
European stock markets have closed with heavy losses across the board, as events in the Crimean peninsula hit investor confidence hard.
The German DAX provisionally ended 3.3% lower, in its biggest one-day fall since May 2012 ( as explained at 4.04pm , many firms have big exposure to the Russian economy).
Italy’s FTSE MIB also shed 3.3%, with Unicredit bank dragged down almost 6% by fears over its exposure to Ukraine.
And the EuroSTOXX bank index, which tracks financial stocks across the region, slid 3.8% -- in its biggest one-day fall since last August.
The Ukraine crisis continues to drive the wheat price higher. It’s currently up 4% in the London futures market, reflecting concerns that supplies from the world’s fifth-largest supplier could be hit.
The other Russian stock index, RTS, fell even further:
The Russian stock index RTS closed the day down 12%. Has to be one of the worst days ever for Russian stocks.
Investors in Moscow are nursing the cost of Vladimir Putin’s decision to send troops into Crimea tonight.
The MICEX index closed down 10.7% at a nine-month low, with every share on the index losing ground.
Mostotrest, the biggest Russian heavy construction company, tumbled by 25% today. It was followed by electricity transmission firm Rosseti, down 22.8%.
Mining firm Mechel lost a fifth of its value.
The prospect of the situation escalating further drove a wave of selling in Moscow through the day, wiping more than $50bn off the index by the close.
Dmitry Kulakov, head of equity trading at Olma investment house, bluntly summed it up:
Frightened by the situation around Ukraine, investors held a selling spree of Russian assets.
Biggest fallers on the MICEX tonight. Photograph: Thomson Reuters
A string of big-name German companies have seen their share prices hit today by the Ukraine crisis.
That has sent Germany’s DAX down 2.9% in late trading, making it the worst-performing major stock index outside Moscow.
Major industrial firms and manufacturers dominate the biggest fallers on the DAX this afternoon, including chemicals maker BASF,pharmaceuticals firm Bayer, auto maker Volkswagen, and Siemens.
Biggest fallers on the DAX in late trading. Photograph: Thomson Reuters
Michal Hewson of CMC Markets explains:
The German DAX has borne the brunt of European market losses today given that German companies do an awful lot of business with Russia.
After an hour’s trading in New York, the Dow Jones industrial average remains firmly in red - now down 150 points, or 0.95%, at 16168.
Manufacturing giant and conglomerate General Electric is the biggest faller, down 1.7%. Financial stocks are under pressure, with JP Morgan and Goldman Sachs both down around 1.2%.
Nigel Green, founder and CEO of deVere Group, a wealth management firm, reckons today’s market selloff is a “bump in the road” rather than the start of a crash.
...and reckons stock markets will soon be more sanguine about the escalating tensions in the region:
“As the situation regularises, in whichever form that might take, and the world becomes accustomed to the new and/or existing realities, investors are likely to classify the Ukraine-Russia stand-off as ‘a local issue.’
“Global financial markets will then return to focusing on key fundamentals, such as the improving trend of US economic data, than to what is happening in Ukraine.”
We’ll know in a few weeks if he’s right....
David Crow, assistant news editor at the Financial Times, flags up that the £34bn wiped off the Russian MICEX index today ( see 1.56pm ), is actually more than the cost of the Sochi Olympics:
The ISM survey of America’s manufacturing sector has beaten forecasts, mirroring Markit’s survey an hour ago ( see 2.13pm )
The Institute for Supply Management’s healthcheck of factory activity jumped to 53.2, up from January’s 51.9, which was disappointingly weak.
That indicates growth accelerated as new orders picked up after bad weather cause disruption at the start of 2014.
Austria’s third-largest bank, Raiffeisen, has put the sale of its Ukrainian division, Bank Aval, on hold following the latest developments in the country.
A spokeswoman for the bank tells us:
Various parties with interest in purchasing Raiffeisen Bank Aval have approached RBI already some months ago.
A possible sale of our Ukrainian operations is on hold for now, however, due to the situation in Ukraine.
FastFT has more details here , explaining that Bank Aval operates 818 branches in Ukraine and has 3.1m customers.
Raiffeisen’s shares are down 8% today. It is thought to be one of the banks with the biggest exposure to Ukrainian debt ( more details ).
The New York stock market has opened, and shares are falling as expected.
The Dow Jones industrial average shed 132 points, or 0.8%, at the first few minutes of trading to 16190.
Gold, though, is up 1.5% at $1,347/ounce, gaining $20 today.
Investors sought safer havens such as gold and fled equities after the United States’ government conceded that Russia now has control of Crimea in Ukraine.
The latest line is that the Russian foreign ministry has said that US secretary of state John Kerry’s recent comments on the crisis are ‘unacceptable”, and contained threats against Russia.
The US stock market is expected to follow Europe’s lead when Wall Street opens in around 10 minutes.
The Dow Jones industrial average is tipped to fall at least 100 points, having closed at 16,321 on Friday night, before Russian troops crossed the Ukranian border.
Here’s the situation in Europe right now.
FTSE 100: down 100 points at 6709, -1.5%
German DAX: down 287 points at 9404, -2.96%
French CAC: down 104 points at 4303, -2.4%
America’s factory sector grew faster than expected in February, according to Markit’s monthly survey .
The US manufacturing PMI jumped to 57.1, up from 56.7 in January. That may calm concerns that bad weather has hurt the world’s largest economy.
Firms reported a jump in output and new orders, while job creation hit an 11-month high.
Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, says it’s “one of the largest monthly improvements in manufacturing for almost four years”. It appears that firms caught up with orders that were lost when the polar vortex inflicted icy weather on the US.
Encouraging, but also a reminder that the Ukraine crisis comes as the global economic recovery remains fragile.
David Thebault, head of quantitative sales trading at Global Equities in Paris, reports that many investors had failed to predict Russia’s military incursion into Crimea. Thus this morning’s selloff:
“Investors had underestimated the risks of an escalation in Ukraine, so the events over the weekend are a wake-up call for the market.”
On Monday afternoon, MICEX capitalisation stood at 18.4 trillion roubles [$512.03bn or £301bn], down from 20.5 trillion on Friday, the press service said in a statement.
For US folks just waking up, this will open your eyes - Russian stocks down 11% today: pic.twitter.com/reFBjktNo8
Breaking away from Ukraine again,the latest Forbes rich list is out -- and Bill Gates has reclaimed the title of the world’s richest person.
Gates ($76bn) swept Mexico’s telecoms magnate Carlos Slim ($72bn)aside after seeing his fortune rise by $9bn in 2013, Forbes reports .
Amancio Ortega ($64bn), who controls the firm behind Spain’s Zara fashion chain, is third followed by everyone’s favourite cherry coke-swilling value investor, Warren Buffett ($58bn).
The report also shows an increase in the number of women billionaires overall, up to172 out of 1,645 in total.
Mark Zuckerberg saw the biggest increase in wealth, with his fortune jumping by $15.2bn to $28.5bn as Facebook shares soared last year.
Joshua Raynond of City Index says there are four key reasons for shareholders to be very concerned about the situation:
1. The potential of the situation to deepen and intensify remains large.
Russia has been known to be unpredictable in the past and its aggressive and quick action in the region, along with parliamentary backing for further troop deployment not just in Crimea but the Ukraine as well, shows that it remains steadfast to increase its presence in the region. Russia has historically shown that it will protect its assets and people without hesitation. This is exactly what it is doing.
2. The reaction of the G7 is crucial.
Do they call Russia’s bluff? Even if Ukraine strikes at Russian troops in the Crimea region, it will still be the response of the G7 that holds the key for complete market volatility and fear. It’s hard to see at this stage, with Russia holding all the cards, for the west to dramatically do anything other than appease Russian aggression.
3. A quick look at oil prices shows the impact this situation could have.
Nymex front month oil futures prices hit their highest level since September last year, hitting $104 a barrel. Further oil price rises will have a knock-on effect on stocks and sectors that rely on a stable oil price to keep fundamental costs down. Rising oil prices is a direct threat to the ability of stocks to rally in the near term. This needs to be watched.
The crisis could give investors the excuse they need for a 5%-10% market correction.
Market corrections are healthy for the long term bullishness of major indices and as such, should not be feared. However, with the FTSE 100, DAX and Dow Jones all recently hitting levels which triggered selling, a small price correction could now be due. So if anything, the timing of the Ukraine crisis may have well triggered the inevitable.
Stephanie Flanders, JP Morgan’s chief market strategist for UK and Europe (and former BBC economics editor) suggests today’s heavy selloff in Russian stocks has created some real bargains for investors:
“Events in Ukraine have clearly pushed investors into “risk-off” mode, especially when it comes to emerging market assets. Aside from this short-term volatility, we would still say the direct economic and financial fallout from Ukraine itself was fairly limited - though markets are perhaps not focused enough on the broader contagion that could follow a messy Ukrainian sovereign default.
However, Russia’s involvement clearly magnifies the scope for contagion and increases the possibility that global energy prices will be affected both directly and indirectly, because of Russia’s previous negotiating role in the Middle East.
We have been saying for some time that emerging market assets look cheap, and Russia’s looked cheaper than most. At these prices, you don’t have to take a very optimistic view of Russia’s future to see some potential bargains.”
