No ultimatum, says the Russian defence ministry, via Vedemosti .
Russia’s defence ministry has denied information that they have given Ukrainian forces in Crimea an ultimatum.
An official defence ministry called the original agency statement about the ultimatum “complete nonsense”, and said no such ultimatum had been given to the Ukrainian military in Crimea.
See previous reporting on a supposed “ultimatum,” talk of which began with an Interfax news report.
Hawkish Republican senator John McCain blamed what he called the “feckless foreign policy” of the Obama administration as a partial cause of events in the Ukraine during a speech to lobbyists at the American Israel Public Affairs Committee in Washington on Monday, Guardian Washington bureau chief Dan Roberts (@ RobertsDan ) reports:
“What happens in Ukraine is directly related to what happens in the Middle East,” he said, pointing Obama’s failure to take military action in Syria and relaxation of sanctions against Iran as signs of weakness seized on by Putin.
The Arizona senator and former presidential candidate said president Obama “believes the Cold War is over - that’s fine, it’s over - but Putin doesn’t believe it’s over”.
McCain also claimed Putin was deliberately waiting until the end of the Olympics to crack down on Ukraine dissent.
“The people went out by the hundreds of thousands and said they did not want to be part of Putin’s Russia and that’s what it’s all about, and now immediately after the Sochi games we see the occupation of Crimea,” he told the Aipac conference.
Russia has requested a third emergency meeting of the UN security council over the crisis in Ukraine. The meeting is scheduled to begin in about four hours, according to a Luxembourg diplomat who spoke with Reuters:
The council met on Friday and Saturday to discuss the crisis in eastern Ukraine but took no formal action, as expected. Both meetings highlighted the deep divisions between the United States and other Western nations and Russia, which has a major Black Sea naval base in the Crimea region.
“She was not sure he was in touch with reality, people briefed on the call said. ‘In another world,’ she said,” the New York Times reported.
The vast gap between Putin’s and the west’s perceptions of what is taking place in Ukraine is adding to the pressure on the White House to take the lead in what US experts are calling the defining international crisis of Barack Obama’s two terms. Senior US administration officials concede that Putin has taken total control of Crimea .
“We believe that such a position will not help stabilise the situation in Ukraine and only encourages those forces that would like to use the current events to achieve their irresponsible political goals,” the Russian foreign ministry said, according to Reuters.
Here’s what Nato said Sunday:
The North Atlantic Council condemns the Russian Federation’s military escalation in Crimea and expresses its grave concern regarding the authorisation by the Russian Parliament to use the armed forces of the Russian Federation on the territory of Ukraine.
US vice-president Joe Biden and Russian prime minister Dmitry Medvedev have spoken by phone, Interfax reports.
Medvedev spoke about a need “to protect” Russians in Ukraine, Reuters quotes Medvedev spokeswoman Natalya Timakova as saying:
Medvedev “declared that it is necessary to protect the interests of all Ukrainian citizens, including residents of Crimea, and citizens of Russia who are located in Ukraine”.
UPDATE: Here now is the view on that conversation from the US, from a White House spokesman via Reuters. In this version, Biden urged Russia to pull its forces back from Ukraine:
“The Vice President urged Russia to pull back its forces, support the immediate deployment of international monitors to Ukraine, and begin a meaningful political dialogue with the Ukrainian government,” the White House said in a statement released later on Monday.
He is not that senior but says he’s on a base right now and neither he nor the base commanders have heard anything of the sort. He said: “It’s probably another red herring to stir up trouble.”
Also, it seems to be coming from Russian interfax, quoting Ukrainian Interior Ministry. That should ring some alarm bells, folks.
UPDATE: Oksana Grytsenko called a Ukrainian navy spokesman, who told her “as far as I know” an ultimatum “has been voiced”, but he referred to a different time for the ultimatum than originally reported by Interfax, which – conflicting times for the assigned zero-hour – would seem to undercut the whole point of an ultimatum. Oksana reports for the Guardian:
I spoke to Oleg Chubuk, spokesman of Ukraine’s naval forces. “As far as I know, the ultimatum has been voiced for 18 p.m., with a demand that Ukraine’s soldiers surrender arms,” he said, adding that the timing could have changed. “Ukraine’s sailors don’t yield the provocations, guns are under control,” he said.
Asked how would they react to “a real storm”, Chubuk said “they must act according to statute”, meaning defend their stations. But he hoped the storm would not happen.
On 2 bases today, told Russian troops asking Ukrainians not to defect to Crimean authorities but to join *Russian* troops. Huge distinction.
To clarify that last tweet, they are being asked to join Crimean forces or "Crimean people" too, but first demand is for defection to Russia
European Union foreign ministers have agreed to suspend talks with Russia on visa issues because of Russia’s seizure of Crimea, a draft of a statement to be issued later on Monday said, Reuters reports.
Russia and the European Union have been discussing visa cooperation since 2007, with Russia keen to have visa-free access to the EU’s member states. It is an issue raised at nearly every meeting between Moscow and Brussels.
“The EU has decided to suspend bilateral talks with Russian authorities on visa matters, as well as on the new agreement,” a draft of statement to be issued by EU foreign ministers said.
This needs to be treated with caution given the only source is an unnamed official.
The ultimatum, Interfax said, was issued by Alexander Vitko, the fleet’s commander.
The ministry did not immediately confirm the report and there was no immediate comment by the Black Sea Fleet, which has a base in Crimea, where Russian forces are in control.
“If they do not surrender before 5 am tomorrow, a real assault will be started against units and divisions of the armed forces across Crimea,” the agency quoted the ministry source as saying.
RUSSIAN FORCES POSE ULTIMATUM Commander of the Russian Black Sea Fleet Alexander Vitko posed an ultimatum to the... http://t.co/GA67x84sLg
