Ahmaud Arbery was hit with a truck before he died, and his killer allegedly used a racial slur, investigator testifies
Updated 0244 GMT (1044 HKT) June 5, 2020
Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.
William Bryan told investigators he heard Travis McMichael use a racial epithet after fatally shooting Ahmaud Arbery in Glynn County, a Georgia Bureau of Investigation agent testified Thursday at a preliminary hearing.
Bryan told police Travis McMichael said "f***ing n***er" after three blasts from his shotgun left Arbery dead in the street in the Satilla Shores neighborhood in February, GBI Assistant Special Agent in Charge Richard Dial testified. Body camera footage also showed a Confederate flag sticker on the toolbox of McMichael's truck, he said.
On cross-examination, Dial testified Bryan mentioned the slur in a May 13 GBI interview, and to Dial's knowledge, Bryan had not previously made the allegation, including during a May 11 interview.
Thursday's hearing lasted about seven hours, with the judge ruling all three defendants -- Bryan, McMichael and McMichael's father, Gregory McMichael -- will stand trial on all charges.
The details of Arbery's last moments emerged amid a week of nationwide protests over another killing -- that of George Floyd by police in Minneapolis -- and demonstrators have also called for justice in Arbery's case.
During Thursday's testimony, Dial said there were "numerous times" on social media and via messaging services that Travis McMichael used racial slurs, once messaging someone that he loved his job because there "weren't any N-words anywhere."
In another instance sometime before the shooting, he replied in an Instagram message that things would be better if someone had "blown that N-word's head off," Dial testified. Dial did not say to whom McMichael was referring and was not asked for more context.
Bryan, too, had several messages on his phone that included "racial" terms and indicated he may have prejudged Arbery when he saw him that day, Dial said.
"There's evidence of Mr. Bryan's racist attitude in his communications, and from that I extrapolate the reason why he made assumptions he did that day," he said. "He saw a man running down the road with a truck following him, and I believe he made certain assumptions that were, at least in part, based upon his racial bias."
Arbery's mother, Wanda Cooper, was devastated when she heard Dial's testimony, she said.
"I often imagine the last minutes of my son's life. I didn't imagine it would be that harsh, but to learn that that statement was made in the last seconds of his life ... it was very heartbreaking," she said.
Scores of protesters gathered outside the courthouse after the hearing, and they could be heard chanting, "All lives matter when black lives matter," according to CNN affiliate WJXT .
Dial outlined events that led to Arbery's death and said that before Arbery was shot, the three men charged in his murder engaged in an elaborate chase, hitting the 25-year-old jogger with a truck as he tried to escape them.
Asked whether he believed McMichael could've been acting in self-defense, Dial said the opposite was true.
"I believe Mr. Arbery was being pursued, and he ran till he couldn't run anymore, and it was turn his back to a man with a shotgun or fight with his bare hands against the man with the shotgun. He chose to fight," he said. "I believe Mr. Arbery's decision was to just try to get away, and when he felt like he could not escape he chose to fight."
Gregory McMichael, Travis McMichael and William "Roddie" Bryan, Jr. faces charges in Arbery's killing.
As Travis and Gregory McMichael attempted to head him off, Arbery turned and ran past the truck of Bryan, who recorded the killing, and Bryan struck Arbery with the side of his truck, Dial said.
Bryan told police that at one point he thought Arbery was trying to enter his truck, Dial said, adding that he didn't know whether that was true but he felt Arbery was trying to escape.
Investigators found a swipe from a palm print on the rear door of Bryan's truck, cotton fibers near the truck bed that "we attribute to contact with Mr. Arbery" and a dent below the fibers, he said.
Bryan was working on his porch, defense attorney Kevin Gough countered, and his client didn't know what the McMichaels were doing.
Bryan "sees someone he doesn't know followed by a truck that he does. He does, with all due respect, what any patriotic American would have done under the same circumstances," Gough said.
Though Bryan's attorney has argued his client took no part in the killing, Dial said Bryan yelled to the McMichaels, "Do you got him?" when he saw them chasing the 25-year-old jogger.
After yelling out to the McMichaels, Bryan joined the chase, at which point none of the three had called 911, Dial said.
