Oil markets rebounded after West Texas Intermediate crude for May delivery fell into negative territory Monday for the first time ever. Since, both WTI and Brent crude - the international benchmark - have pared some losses .
"There is little in the way of fundamental developments to support the move higher, although given the amount of weakness recently, we were due a relief rally," wrote ING's Warren Patterson in a Friday note. Prices have also been supported by renewed tension between the US and Iran, he said, but will likely be short-lived unless there is further escalation.
Investors also looked to companies reporting first-quarter earnings, the first reports to show early impact of the coronavirus pandemic on business. Shares of Verizon rose 0.6% on earnings. Intel stock rose 0.4% despite announcing second-quarter guidance that fell below analyst expectations.
DraftKings, a sports betting firm, surged as much as 18% in its first day of trading Friday, even as sporting events have been cancelled amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Read more: Manny Stotz is so good at allocating capital that billionaire Howard Marks was his biggest investor from the get-go. He breaks down a high-upside bet he's making on 'frontier' stocks in nations like Bangladesh and Egypt.
Some optimism that a treatment for COVID-19 diminished Thursday when a report showed that Gilead Sciences drug remdesivir failed to improve patient conditions in a clinical trial. In addition, the overall economic backdrop continues to deteriorate as the coronavirus pandemic rages on, keeping consumers at home to curb the spread of COVID-19.
On Thursday, the Labor Department reported US weekly jobless claims were 4.4 million for the week ending April 18 , bringing the five week total to 26 million. The same day, a gauge of business activity showed a major slowdown amid the coronavirus outbreak.
On Friday, US durable goods slumped the most since 2014 , dragged down by a 300% drop in civilian aircraft orders, likely due to Boeing cancellations.
