The 1990 recession lasted the same length of time as the 2001 recession but was more severe. Stocks trended higher in the eight years prior and peaked two weeks after the recession began. Early in the recession, stock declined, losing 26% until bottoming October 11, 1990 (C-1). During this decade, stock markets soared until the tech bubble burst in March 2000.
The fear index (the VIX) was only a few months old at this point and topped out at 36.47 August 23, 1990 (C-3). The 10-year treasury also fell slightly (C-2).
The early 1980s saw two recessions. During the first, stocks fell a little more than 8.0% (D-1). In the second, stocks lost slightly over 23% (D-1). Once Fed Chair Volker tamed inflation, stocks soared, and the boom was back. In each case, the 10-year Treasury yield fell during the recession (D-2).
This recession was one of the longest. Sparked by the OPEC embargo against the U.S., it was also one of the worst for stocks. Stocks lost about 43% from the start of the recession to the bottom and dropped 49% if you begin January 11 that year.
What lessons can we learn from past recessions?
·        Stocks may rise entering a recession.
·        Stocks always decline during a recession.
·        Stocks tend to rise before the recession ends.
·        The degree to which stocks fall during a recession is affected by how long it lasts, its severity, and the valuation of stocks when it begins.
·        Some of the best days in the stock market occur during a bear market.
During the Great Depression, after peaking, stocks fell 48% in two months, recouped half of its losses by mid-April 1930, then fell to its ultimate bottom July 8, 1932, a little over two years later. The total loss was 89.2% and it took until November 23, 1954, 25 years later, to surpass its September 3, 1929 peak.
How bad could it get this time? Stock performance is closely tied to corporate earnings, which is tied to economic activity. In the present case, economic activity will be worse than anything we’ve seen in our lifetime. Thus, stocks may fall as much or more than they did during the 2008 recession. While no one has a crystal ball, given the global and U.S. economic shutdown, we could see the worst period since the 1930s.
To read more about the coming recession, click here .
I am a CFP professional with extensive experience working with wealthy and affluent clients. After 30 years, having worked with some of the largest firms in the world, I
I am a CFP professional with extensive experience working with wealthy and affluent clients. After 30 years, having worked with some of the largest firms in the world, I will attempt to lift the veil and take you behind the scenes of the financial services industry. My goal is to educate investors on various aspects of the economy and financial markets, and reveal steps you can take to strengthen your personal finances and avoid some common pitfalls. 
I will discuss the universe of investments including mutual funds, ETFs, bonds, and stocks. In addition, I will provide you with practical, usable information, to empower you to take charge of your financial life, bringing clarity to the complex.
