The FTSE 100 has closed down 0.9%, or 51 points, at 5,791
Meanwhile, the FTSE 250 has closed down 2 per cent at 16,082.
UK stock markets have underperformed compared to their European counterparts, with the FTSE 100 dragged lower by heavyweights like BP and Shell as oil prices continue to slide.
European stocks rallied more than 1 per cent, with German's Dax rising 1.3 per cent and France's CAC 40 rising 0.5 per cent - although Italy’s FTSE MIB ended the day 0.4 per cent lower.
Shares on Wall Street have risen more than 2 per cent, thanks to reassuring data from China other signs of a return to economic normalcy.
The price of Brent crude has fallen more than 5 per cent to $30 a barrel as concerns over global demand remain despite OPEC and Russia having agreed a record cut in supply.
Meanwhile, gold prices rose to a fresh seven-year high as a hedge against inflation and currency debasement that the massive central bank and government stimulus measures around the globe could cause.
Just before close, the FTSE 100 was 0.8 per cent at 5,796.
Meanwhile, the FTSE 250 was down 2 per cent at 16.082.
Rupert Thompson, chief investment officer at wealth manager Kingswood, says that despite the recent rebound, equity markets are set to fall back.
The rebound in equity markets resumed in force. Global equities gained as much as 10% in local currency terms and as of Friday were up 21% from their March low. The US has led the rebound and has risen 25% from its low point. The recovery in UK stocks has been a more moderate 17%, aside from the small and mid-cap area with the FTSE 250 up 28% from its low.
Economic activity has fallen off a cliff in much of the world and, while it should start to recover over coming months, it looks unlikely to recover back to pre- COVID-19 levels until late next year, by when a vaccine may hopefully have been developed. As for corporate earnings, estimates have already been cut significantly but look certain to be revised down substantially further.
In short, we believe the bounce in equity markets is overdone and equities are quite likely to fall back.
The pound has risen against the dollar to hit a fresh one-month high today, benefiting from a slump in the greenback in the wake of the IMF's gloomy projections for the global economy.
Sterling is up 0.6 per cent against the dollar, with £1 buying $1.258 on currency markets this afternoon.
Against the euro, the pound is up 0.2 per cent to €1.148.
Maike Currie, director for workplace investing at Fidelity International, comments on the Social Market Foundation’s proposal to scrap the 'triple lock' on pensions:
First introduced under David Cameron’s coalition government, the “triple lock” guarantee dictates that the state pension will be increased each April by whichever number is the highest out of the previous September Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation number, earnings growth or 2.5%.
That may have seemed reasonable at the time - however, at that stage no-one was predicting a global pandemic. With COVID-19’s inevitable impact upon earnings we face a situation where retirees are seeing a significant rise in their state pension, while a chunk of the working population faces a major fall in their income as the pandemic weighs on businesses and the economy.
This is the straitjacket the Government finds itself in today when it comes to the triple-lock promises it has made to pensioners and it may very well be inevitable that it needs to abolish this guarantee in order to shore up the economy and ensure measures are spread across generations. There’s no doubt that the triple lock costs money or, by extension, that its removal will lower the incomes of pensioners in the future. The argument the government now faces is the question of economic fairness, across generations.
Clubs in League One and League Two can defer player wages for up to 25 per cent for the month of April after the biggest deal to date in English football was struck, a joint statement from the EFL and PFA has announced.
The two governing bodies will form a panel with six club captains or PFA delegates from sides in the third and fourth tier to 'engage in dialogue in respect of players’ wages', it continued.
