Now let’s look at another investor, Sam, who had the same account as Kim but decided to sell and go to cash at the end of 2008. Was he better off?
If Sam cashed out at the end of December 2008, his account would be worth about $129,000 despite investing $160,000. Even though he lost principal, Sam managed to bail before the bottom of the crisis, which was March 2009.
Fast forward to January 2010–the market rebound is seven months old and Sam feels comfortable getting back in. He takes his proceeds from the 2008 liquidation and reinvests with the same 85/15 investment mix as before. Sam resumes dollar-cost averaging $5,000 per quarter.
By the end of February 2020, Sam’s portfolio would be worth roughly $746,000. Kim’s portfolio is ahead by nearly $150,000.
In the last scenario, let’s look at Jack, who’s strategy was just like Sam’s, but Jack waited until January 2011 to get back in with the same investment and contribution strategy as before. By the end of February 2020, Jack’s account would be worth $639,000…over $250,000 less than Kim’s account and more than $105,000 less than Sam’s!
Impact of going to cash and being out of the market. Past performance not indicative of future ... [+] results. See disclosure for more information.
When it hurts to look, maybe you shouldn’t
No one likes losing money. Wild swings in the stock market can make even the most level-headed investor second-guess their strategy. Although self-isolation is easier than ever these days, it’s not realistic to avoid the news completely. However, that doesn’t mean you should check your portfolio every day or even every week.
We all know that our accounts go up and down each day. Other times, like now, the market swings are much more volatile than usual . Checking your account can create unnecessary stress and perhaps worse, may end up pushing you to act when you shouldn’t.
Your home is an asset too, likely one of your largest assets. But chances are you’re not checking Redfin or Zillow every day to see how the value has changed because you’re not planning on selling any time soon. You know the housing market goes up and down.
If you are about to put your home on the market, then perhaps the current real estate market is more of a daily concern for you, as conditions in the short-term will impact the sale. However, it’s important to remember that this isn’t the same as individuals who recently retired. Unlike the sale of a home when you take your proceeds and just walk away, in all likelihood, new retirees are still investing for the next 20, 30 years or more .
Unfortunately, when the market is up and everyone is growing their assets, planning and portfolio construction can take a backseat for many investors. Portfolios that are thoughtfully constructed and diversified are built to withstand a variety of market conditions over the long term. That is not to say things can’t go wrong or diversification will insulate you from losses—because it won’t.
But investors have much better odds of success when they rely on tested investment principles, data-driven methodologies, and the support of an advisor who will help them navigate choppy waters. While panicking and going to cash isn’t typically advisable, that doesn’t mean investors shouldn’t make any adjustments during periods of market volatility .
Perhaps retirees should consider taking less from their portfolio if they’re worried about running out of money. Perhaps pre-retirees should consider investing extra cash while valuations are cheaper than they were at the beginning of the year. Could it get worse from here? Sure. But if you’re a long-term investor, you have to zoom out.
Financial planning and modeling is perhaps the best way to sleep at night during periods of extreme market volatility. In working with clients, we can run a Monte Carlo simulation to account for the inevitable ups and downs in the market, cash in, cash out, and the timing of these factors, to help investors grow comfortable with what their portfolio may be able to withstand over time.
The time to make adjustments to your portfolio generally isn’t after volatility occurs. And while past performance is not indicative of future results, we can use data to help inform us about where the market might go in the future.
It’s likely that we’re not out of the woods yet. People are still getting sick and it’s important not to lose sight of the human element behind recent stock activity.
From a purely financial standpoint, if your goal is to wait until you’re 100% sure we’ve already passed the bottom before investing or reinvesting, you’ve already missed out on some of the recovery.
And that really matters—between January 2000 and December 2019, if you missed the S&P 500’s best 10 days your average annualized total return would be 2.44% compared to 6.06% had you stayed fully invested. Missed the best 20 days? You’re essentially flat.
Again, these swings happen really fast—during this period 60% of the best 10 days fell within two weeks of the worst 10 days.
According to Dimensional , in the years following a 10% correction or worse, the stock market has still been up on average (and significantly so) in the one, three, and five years to follow.
Average Stock Market Returns After Decline (Fama/French Total US Market Research Index Returns, July ... [+] 1926-December 2019)
Will this time be different?
We don’t know yet—but long-term investors should probably just ride it out.
1 Note: these ETFs were selected because of their age (e.g. availability of historical return data) and because the funds track two popular indexes well-known to many investors (the S&P 500 and the Bloomberg Barclays Aggregate Bond Index). For simplicity, only two ETFs were chosen for this analysis, but this is not intended to represent a well-diversified asset allocation. In practice, investors should generally consider a well-diversified portfolio that includes other asset classes and geographical regions.
Past performance is not indicative of future results. Indices are not available for direct investment.
I'm a Certified Financial Planner professional and believer that complex doesn’t mean better and shortcuts rarely work. Our financial lives are multi-dimensional, so I
I'm a Certified Financial Planner professional and believer that complex doesn’t mean better and shortcuts rarely work. Our financial lives are multi-dimensional, so I write about a range of topics in personal finance and investing. I’ve been published by TheStreet, U.S. News and World Report, Business Insider, and others. In working with clients, I aim to help put the pieces together into a unified strategy. My goal is to help educate investors about the best ways to build wealth and avoid letting ‘sexy’ strategies drive financial decisions. Saving and investing, like diet and exercise, takes time (and sometimes sacrifice) to see lasting results. Darrow Wealth Management is an independent, fee-only registered investment advisor and second-generation family business in Boston and Concord, MA. The material contained in my articles is for general information only and should not be construed as the rendering of personalized investment, legal, accounting or tax advice.
