Thursday’s rally in high-yield bonds could give the impression that the Federal Reserve was considering buying the whole market. But the details of the central bank’s intervention may disappoint the bulls.
Headlines announcing the Fed’s foray into high-yield debt drove the ICE BofA U.S. High Yield Index to its third largest single-day gain on record. The index’s price rallied 3.1%, and its yield spread over Treasuries—the extra compensation investors demand for the risk of default—narrowed by 85 basis points. The market’s two larger single-day gains also came in relief rallies on Fed announcements, in October 2008 and April 2009.
This time around, however, when investors look closely at the details of the central bank’s plan, they may discover a catch: The Fed won’t be able to buy any of the bonds that were actually in the ICE BofA index that posted those historic gains Thursday. It won’t be able to buy in great size, either.
Most of the central bank’s junk-bond intervention will likely be limited to “fallen angels,” or companies that were rated investment grade on March 22 when the program was introduced. None of the companies downgraded last month have been added to the index yet; its monthly reconstitution was delayed for the first time ever in March because of market volatility.
And only some of those downgraded companies will qualify for the Fed’s bond-buying program. For example, the central bank can provide backstop financing for companies such as Ford Motor (ticker: F), which got downgraded to junk on March 25. But companies that were downgraded to junk before the March 22 cutoff, such as Kraft Heinz (KHC) and Occidental Petroleum (OXY), will have no such luck.
There is bad news for Ford as well. The Fed can spend at most $11.3 billion on any company’s debt, according to the program’s terms . That doesn’t fully cover one-third of the $36 billion in fixed-rate bonds that Ford has outstanding. While Ford is a relatively large issuer for the high-yield market, it isn’t all that large compared to the other former investment-grade bond issuers that make up the ranks of fallen angels.
The fallen-angel rules apply to both of the vehicles that the Fed has created to buy corporate bonds: One will buy up to $250 billion of debt in secondary trading, and the other will buy up to $500 billion directly from companies.
Another important caveat pertains to those vehicles’ sizes. A large part of their buying power comes from leverage, since the vehicles are capitalized with $25 billion and $50 billion of the Treasury Department’s cash. And while the Fed can buy $10 of investment-grade bonds for every $1 of Treasury money, it can only buy $7 of high-yield bonds for every $1 in the vehicle.
The S&P 500 Just Had Its Best Week Since 1974. Next Up: an ‘Economic Coma.’
To be sure, the Fed will be able to buy into the wider junk-bond market in one way. It can buy exchange-traded funds that own junk bonds in its secondary-market vehicle, which may help explain the searing rally in the market’s two largest ETFs. The iShares iBoxx $ High Yield Corporate Bond ETF (HYG) and SPDR Bloomberg Barclays High Yield Bond ETF (JNK) both gained more than 6.5% on Thursday.
But the Fed says the “preponderance” of its $250 billion vehicle will be devoted to investment-grade ETFs. And it will need to limit its leverage even more with junk-bond ETF purchases: Only $3 to $7 of junk-bond ETF purchases for every $1 of Treasury cash, according to the plan’s terms. That means that its secondary-market vehicle may not end up with $250 billion to spend.
Just goes to show that bond investors should always read the fine print—especially in risky high-yield markets.
Thursday’s rally in high-yield bonds could give the impression that the Federal Reserve was considering buying the whole market.
