Country Living editors select each product featured. If you buy from a link, we may earn a commission. More about us.
We promise you can grow these flowers—even if your thumbs aren’t green.
When it comes to gardening, Mother Nature is incredibly forgiving—you just need to know some basics to help her out. Many flowers actually are simple to grow if you know a few fundamentals, which is why we've rounded up the easiest flowers to grow right here. For starters, read the plant tag or description to learn if the flowers are annual flowers , which live one season, or perennial flowers , which come back every year. (Here's our thorough guide on annuals vs. perennials for more tips.) If they’re perennials, make sure they'll survive winters in your USDA Hardiness zone . Pay attention to the light requirements, too: Full sun means six hours or more per day; part sun is about half that. And don’t try to plant a sun lover in the shade, or a plant that needs shade in full sun. You’ll only set yourself up for failure, waste money, and kill off your poor, helpless plants!
It’s also essential that you keep your plants watered when they're first planted and during any dry spells—that is, if you don’t get any rain for a week. (You may want to check out these drought-resistant plants if the area you live in has an arid climate.) And if you’re planting flowers in pots, make sure there are drainage holes, or drill a few in the bottom of the pot yourself. No plant enjoys soggy roots! Now, push back your sleeves, put on your gardening gloves and plant these easy flowers to grow in your garden.
Your grandma (and her grandma!) probably grew these sturdy old-fashioned favorites. These annuals are almost indestructible, surviving heat and dry spells and blooming nonstop from planting until a hard frost. They come in varying heights from six inches to two feet in colors including sunny yellows, cheery oranges, and creamy whites. Insider hint: Pinch off the dried flower heads to encourage further blooms, and save them so you’ll have seeds to plant next year! Marigolds require full sun.
