Every item on this page was hand-picked by a House Beautiful editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.
There's a reason impatiens are so popular.
Not every plant loves sunshine! Just ask these varieties, all of which prefer a shady spot next to the house or under the canopy of a large shade tree or two. If your yard is blessed with tons of coverage, these are the plants that'll do best in your flower beds, hanging baskets, and containers . Before planting, pay attention to how much shade you have. Full shade means 3 hours or less of direct sun, while part shade is 3 to 6 hours. Some shade lovers, such as flowering shrubs , bloom best with a teeny bit of sun (preferably in the morning). If you're planting shrubs or perennials , which come back every year, make sure they're suited to your USDA Hardiness zone (find yours here) .
Try these shade lovers to brighten up any dark spot your garden:
These annuals are one of the only plants that will put on a floral display in full shade. Downside: Some types are susceptible to powdery mildew, a devastating disease that kills the plants and overwinters in the soil for years! If you've had problems in the past, look for other types (such as New Guinea impatiens) and new hybrids that are more disease-resistant.
There are many kinds of hostas, all of which require some shade, but not the same amount. A good rule for gauging this: The darker the leaf (they vary from white to dark green), the less sun it needs. One word of caution: If you have a lot of deer in your neighborhood, planting these perennials is like ringing the dinner bell!
This perennial, also known as coral bells, produces colorful leaves in shades ranging from deepest burgundy to lime green. The tiny spikes of flowers are insignificant in mid-summer, but the foliage will brighten any dark corner of your yard.  Some newer types actually tolerate the sun, so read the label to be sure what you're buying.
This gorgeous shrub produces oodles of impressive flowers from early summer to fall. It prefers morning sun and afternoon shade. It's the only type of hydrangea that offers gorgeous autumn color with its foliage.
Astilbe needs shade so its pretty flower plumes won't fry in the sun. Plant these perennials in drifts, or clumps, for best effect with other spring-flowering shade-lovers such as ferns and hellebores. It comes in many shades including pale pink, creamy white, and hot pink.
There's a reason ferns are often found in moist, shady forests: Their favorite environment is where there's light shade provided by tree branches. These perennials come in an array of lovely, lacy forms and spread to form a beautiful ground cover in time. Make sure you choose a variety that can survive winters in your climate.
Richly variegated leaves make this ornamental grass, also called Japanese forest grass, a winner for shade gardens. Although most grasses prefer sun, this short, clump-forming variety looks best in partial shade; if this perennial gets too much light, the leaves may develop burn marks.
Bletilla, also called Chinese ground orchid, is a stunning low-maintenance addition to any garden.  Protect plants from the harsh afternoon sun if you want them to look their best.  Plant the bulbs previous fall for spring blooms.
The unglamorous name of this perennial is distracting, because it's actually a lovely and reliable ground cover that needs little care. Dead nettle, also called lamium, has silvery or variegated foliage with white, pink or purple blooms.
The huge, heart-shaped leaves are what make this plant so stunning!  Some newer types take sun, so read the plant label to be sure about what you have.  They're perennial in warm climates (zone 10 or warmer), but bring indoors in winter in cold climates to enjoy as a houseplant.
Varieties to try: Heart to Heart Blushing Bride, White Christmas
Just like many beach goers, this annual prefers morning sun and afternoon shade—and it'll reward you with a longer bloom period. Torenia, also called wishbone flower, is lovely draping from a hanging basket, and hummingbirds adore it!
Foamflower, also called tiarella, is a cold-hardy perennial that blooms with masses of frothy flowers in early spring. If you want these delicate flowers to look their best, make sure plants are located in part to full shade, especially in more southern zones. It's evergreen in some climates.
This darling annual looks best cascading from baskets and containers. Lobelia doesn't like the heat, so make sure it's in full shade and keep it watered. If it starts to look shaggy in mid-summer, trim back, and it will rebound in the cooler weather of fall.
These gorgeous annuals are grown primarily for their striking leaf colors that range from lime green to deep red with flower spikes in summer. Coleus typically likes shade, but some newer varieties will tolerate sun. Read the plant label to be sure.
This stunning annual drapes beautifully from pots and hanging baskets and blooms all season long. Hummingbirds will flock to fuchsia's gorgeous flowers in purples, pinks and whites! Keep this plant in full shade.
Lauren Smith McDonough Senior Editor Lauren is a senior editor at Hearst.
Arricca Elin SanSone Arricca SanSone writes for CountryLiving.com, WomansDay.com, Family Circle, MarthaStewart.com, Cooking Light, Parents.com, and many others.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
