In honor of Mother Nature, we’ve rounded up a few of our all-time favorite fashion bouquets. These aren’t the type of blooms offered as congratulations at the end of a show, but full-on floral arrangements that walked down the runway.
Way before flowers became a seasonal trend on the catwalks, Magnoliophytae (the scientific name for a flowering plant), were placed in vases to liven up our lives. Today, these natural beauties are often woven into many elements of a fashion show, from the decor to the actual designs, creating drama all around. Whether a model is carrying fresh cuts down the runway in a tote, or turning into a lifesize bouquet of her own, flowers are undoubtedly the ultimate accessory.
From John Galliano’s elegant floral headdresses to Virgil Abloh’s fragrant harness for Louis Vuitton, check out 15 of our favorite floral-themed fits below.
Styled like lifesize bodega bouquets, complete with extra-large red ribbons, Kaia Gerber and Gigi Hadid turned heads.
Prabal Gurung’s models looked like they had arrived at the show from a garden as they carried woven totes that were filled to the brim with fresh flowers.
Giant daisies add exuberance to this John Galliano for Christian Dior look.
Virgil Abloh doesn’t shy from pushing gender norms, and this dainty floral harness proves it.
Rose-blossom braids and sequined petal patterns delivered some sunshine of their own at Rodarte’s rainy show.
Tanya Dziahileva in a graceful gown made of real flowers—now that’s a grand finale.
Gaultier’s Virgin Mary-inspired headpiece elegantly mixed religion and romance with a few roses.
This Venus-inspired ensemble leaves little room for imagination but, naturally, Laetitia Casta pulls off the daring darling bride effortlessly.
Model Mona Matsuoka stole the show in this romantic rose bustier, one with unkempt leafy stems to add some natural drama to the look.
Anna Sui accessorized this Days of Heaven-themed show with flower crowns and hay-filled floral bouquets.
A rainbow color story of flowers dresses up the dark T-shaped hair, giving the look an earthy edge.
Maria Grazia Chiruri went wild for her debut couture collection for Dior. The models wore wildflower halos down the garden-like catwalk.
With their frilly Victorian-style dresses and flower-filled bags, Marc Jacobs’s models looked ready to attend a garden party of their own.
The dark romanticism of this show was heightened by the thorns and all headpieces.
Here comes the bride! For the finale of his show, Karl Lagerfeld gave Solange Wilvert away on the runway. Her dreamy look included a ribbon-tied bouquet of white roses.
