Every item on this page was chosen by a Woman's Day editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.
“As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. Abide in my love.”
We throw the word “love” around pretty freely. We use it casually to talk about everyday things we like a lot. More seriously, we talk about our love for other people: Our children, our spouses, our friends, to name a few. But, sadly, life teaches us that all these loves are impermanent. Our car might break down, the ice cream might melt, or, much more seriously, our loved ones might die or disappoint us.
Divine love is of another order. God will never disappoint us. God will never disappear. Our Lord Jesus Christ did not sacrifice himself on the cross only to stop caring after his resurrection. The Bible reminds us of these truths over and over again, in both the Old and New Testaments. Spend some time with these Bible verses that remind us of God’s unconditional love; his ever available, freely given love to all who seek it in times of trouble. God’s love is the only love that never falters and never fails. Take comfort in your faith and knows that God truly loves you, now and forever.
"Beloved, let us love one another, for love is from God, and whoever loves has been born of God and knows God. Anyone who does not love does not know God, because God is love."
The Good News: God’s very essence is love; when we love one another, we are fulfilling God’s most fundamental wish for our lives.
“O Lord, God of Israel, there is no God like you, in heaven or on earth, keeping covenant and showing steadfast love to your servants who walk before you with all their heart.”
The Good News: As it was for the Israelites of old, the love of our God is never failing.
“What then shall we say to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us? He who did not spare his own son but gave him up for us all, how will he not also with him graciously give us all things?”
The Good News: No matter how your enemies gather against you, if God is on your side, you have nothing to fear.
“How precious is your steadfast love, O God! The children of mankind take refuge in the shadow of your wings.”
The Good News: There is room for all of us beneath the protective wings of the Lord.
“I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me. And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.”
The Good News: The sacrifice of Jesus on the cross was God’s love made manifest. As Christians, we share in the crucifixion and the resurrection that followed.
“But you, O God my Lord, deal on my behalf for your name's sake; because your steadfast love is good, deliver me!”
The Good News: God is ever available, a ready source of help in times of trouble.
“In this the love of God was made manifest among us, that God sent his only son into the world, so that we might live through him. In this is love, not that we have loved God but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.”
The Good News: God loved you first, before you were even born, and the proof is the life of our savior Jesus Christ, who came to free us from the bondage of sin.
“Who is a God like you, pardoning iniquity and passing over transgression for the remnant of his inheritance? He does not retain his anger forever, because he delights in steadfast love.”
The Good News: Our God is a god of forgiveness, ever willing to offer us a chance at redemption. It is never too late.
“And hope does not put us to shame, because God's love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us.”
The Good News: God’s love justifies our lives and fills us with hope for the future.
“For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.”
The Good News: Even death has no dominion over those who love and are loved by the Lord.
“And we know that for those who love God all things work together for good, for those who are called according to his purpose.”
The Good News: With God’s love in our hearts, all our actions will be directed toward good.
“Whoever has my commandments and keeps them, he it is who loves me. And he who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and manifest myself to him.”
The Good News: Our love for Jesus the Son is answered by divine love and care from Father and Son alike.
“For I am sure that neither death nor life, nor angels nor rulers, nor things present nor things to come, nor powers, nor height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
The Good News: There is nothing in our future, not even our own deaths, that can keep us from the love of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
“As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. Abide in my love.”
The Good News: Jesus loves us, just as God the Father loved him; in this truth we can rest secure and at peace.
“But God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.”
The Good News: Though we be sinners, Christ sacrificed his life and suffered on the cross for us. There is no greater love than this.
“For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have believed that I came from God.”
The Good News: Faith and love go hand in hand, as does our love for God and His love for us.
“Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword?”
The Good News: There is no calamity — physical or emotional — that can separate us from the love of our Lord.
“But God, being rich in mercy, because of the great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ.”
The Good News: Our God of love is also a God of life; in our faith we come alive and exist joyfully.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
