The family of Antwon Rose II has settled its wrongful death lawsuit against former police officer Michael Rosfeld and East Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, an attorney says.
Antwon Rose, 17, was fatally shot in June 2018.
"The parties have settled the matter amicably" said Fred Rabner, an attorney for the Rose family. "It has been a great honor working towards achieving justice for the family and supporters of Antwon Rose II."
The Rose family won of total of $2 million, according to a source with knowledge of the settlement.
That is the maximum amount East Pittsburgh can pay under its insurance policy, the source said. Approximately $1.17 million will go to Rose's estate, with the remaining amount going to legal fees and reimbursement costs, according to court documents.
The Rose family's civil suit sought at least $1 million for alleged use of excessive force and further unspecified damages to pay for medical bills, funeral expenses, and legal fees.
CNN's calls to attorneys representing Rosfeld and East Pittsburgh were not immediately returned.
In March, a jury found Rosfeld not guilty in the fatal shooting of 17-year-old Rose in June 2018. His family sued, alleging Rose's civil rights were violated when Rosfeld used "excessive and deadly force" against him.
Rose was unarmed when he was shot three times after he ran during a traffic stop, according to the criminal complaint.
A witness to the shooting captured it on video that was posted on Facebook.
The suit also claimed East Pittsburgh "maintained a policy and custom of failing to properly screen, train, supervise, discipline, transfer, counsel or otherwise control officers" who are known to engage in excessive force." The suit said the East Pittsburgh Police Department had no proper policy or training on a litany of topics, including de-escalation tactics and the discharge of firearms, and did not have any "disciplinary or investigatory procedures to address alleged wrongdoing and complaints against officers."
Rosfeld faced one criminal homicide charge, but the jury was instructed to consider additional charges of first-degree murder, third-degree murder, voluntary manslaughter or involuntary manslaughter. After hearing three-and-half days of testimony, the jury deliberated four hours and found him not guilty on all counts.
CNN's Lauren del Valle, Janette Gagnon, and Steve Forrest contributed to this report.
