CNET editors pick the products and services we write about. When you buy through our links, we may get a commission.
From colorful styles and fun prints to denim, and elastic bands to ties, these are the face coverings we're wearing when we leave the house.
With businesses reopening in many states, it might become a requirement to wear a mask or face covering when you go out in public. Whether you're buying a mask or making a homemade face covering , you'll need to get one soon if you're planning on going anywhere. Here are the masks our CNET editors are wearing when we leave the house. (These were lovingly made by CNET Senior Managing Editor Dan Ackerman's mom.)
CNET Senior Photographer James Martin made this face mask from denim. He crafted a two-panel design with a wire nose and an interior pocket for an optional filter and one shoelace looped and used as a strap.
If you can't go to the flamingoes, bring them to you. We found these tropical masks at this Etsy store .
If you're a Star Wars fan, you'll love this face mask we found at an Etsy store . We certainly do.
Aloha! Missing the beaches in Hawaii? Grab one of these face masks we found at Hilo Hattie .
CNET Senior Photographer Sarah Tew's mother made this face mask from old sheets she cut up. A wire is sewn into the mask for a contoured nose piece. She used a sewing machine.
CNET Video Producer Chase Evans also shopped at the mom store. His mom contoured these fun masks to fit the face better. They have a pouch inside to add a filter and have elastic ear loops.
CNET Editor in Chief Connie Guglielmo got creative with her face mask. It's made from cotton with adjustable side straps that you can tighten or loosen with a bead. She used a wide twist-tie from a coffee bag inserted in the fabric for a better fit around the nose.
CNET Copy Editor Jim Hoffman has a family friend who's also a quilter. She made these face masks from her left-over material.
Another Star Wars fan, CNET Senior Associate Editor Ty Pendlebury, got this Star Wars-themed Day of the Dead fabric from the JoAnn fabric store. His wife kindly found a pattern and made it for him.
