Andrew Robinson, new global chairman for Norton Rose Fulbright, said he wants to urge lawyers to work together across offices because clients are asking for "seamless" service.
By Brenda Sapino Jeffreys | February 26, 2020 at 10:17 AM
Your article was successfully shared with the contacts you provided.
Andrew Robinson, global chairman of Norton Rose Fulbright. (Courtesy photo)
Improved global collaboration, strategic C-suite management, increased diversity and inclusion—they’re the type of goals any leader of an international firm would hope to advance.
Become a Free ALM Digital Reader.
Benefits of a Digital Membership:
Senior reporter Brenda Sapino Jeffreys covers the business of law in Texas. Contact her at bjeffreys@alm.com On Twitter: @BrendaSJeffreys
James “Bo” Pearl, who notably represented Ke$ha in her suit against a former producer, said he was attracted to the idea of helping to build the practice at Paul Hastings.
The judge cut Wilmer’s fee request by 60% after finding the firm failed to provide detailed billing rates.
Neal Manne, a managing partner of the trial firm, said Susman is making "slow but steady progress" after being hospitalized in April.
Law Offices of Mark E. Salomone
How are you illustrating differentiation to clients and potential lateral targets?  How are you measuring performance against peers?  Use Legal Compass to benchmark a firm against its competitors, unearthing unique insights about performance, partner retention, market penetration and more. Click to log in, or begin your free trial.
Amid increasing complexity and emerging threats, managing risk in U.S. Government supply chains has never been more challenging. Take your Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) to the next level with these effective strategies.
As remote work becomes normalized, learn how document automation can help your firm tackle new virtual challenges while increasing efficiency.
The coronavirus pandemic is an unprecedented global event that has left businesses in uncharted territory. The volume of contracts that may warrant review for force majeure provisions continues to grow. Read more to learn how your contracts may be impacted to remedy the situation.
With this subscription you will receive unlimited access to high quality, online, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry. This is perfect for attorneys licensed in multiple jurisdictions or for attorneys that have fulfilled their CLE requirement but need to access resourceful information for their practice areas.
Our Team Account subscription service is for legal teams of four or more attorneys. Each attorney is granted unlimited access to high quality, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry along with administrative access to easily manage CLE for the entire team.
Gain access to some of the most knowledgeable and experienced attorneys with our 2 bundle options! Our Compliance bundles are curated by CLE Counselors and include current legal topics and challenges within the industry. Our second option allows you to build your bundle and strategically select the content that pertains to your needs. Both options are priced the same.
