The message of The Cardigans' "Lovefool" is surprisingly dark. It's about a woman so desperate to reman in a failing relationship she's simply asking her partner to convincingly pretend to be in love. You'd be forgiven for missing that though, as the disco-inflected drums and bass line are irresistibly fun, and Nina Persson delivers the lyrics with a sweet level of restraint.
Originally meant to play over a love scene in Batman Forever, Seal's "Kiss From a Rose" ultimately was used in the film's end credits. It went on to be a colossal hit, making off with Grammys for Record of the Year and Song of the Year in 1996.
"You Got Me" by The Roots ft. Erykah Badu & Eve
The Roots' "You Got Me" expertly captures relationship insecurities that come with distance and different lifestyles, but the Grammy-winning track ultimately has a positive outlook. "If you were worried 'bout where / I been or who I saw or / What club I went to with my homies / Baby, don't worry, you know that you got me," Erykah Badu memorably sings on the hook. The song's stayed relevant, being interpolated by Drake and Earl Sweatshirt, and sampled by British producer Burial.
Perhaps the most memorable of Elton John's many stellar contributions to the Lion King soundtrack, "Can You Feel the Love Tonight" is a piano-powered ballad about the power of true love to tame even the most restless hearts. "And can you feel the love tonight? / How it's laid to rest / It's enough to make kings and vagabonds / Believe the very best," he sings.
This operatic power ballad written by Jim Steinman, was kind of a proto-meme as people were never sure what exactly it was that Meat Loaf wouldn't do for love. The song won Meat Loaf a Grammy for Best Rock Vocal Performance in 1994.
A simmering R&B ballad about finally finding the person you've always dreamed of, K-Ci & JoJo's "All My Life" showcases the brothers' gift for joyful tenor harmonies. The duo came close to giving the song to another artist, but their vocals are what give it its signature warmth.
A gargantuan love song almost as big as the film it came from (or the iceberg that sunk its titular boat), Céline Dion's "My Heart Will Go On" kept the love story of James Cameron's Titanic in the ears and hearts of listeners for years to come. Love can touch us one time / And last for a lifetime / And never let go 'til we're gone," she sings.
'90s boy band music can get a little saccharine, but the earnestness of Backstreet Boys' 1997 hit "As Long as You Love Me" is charming. "I  don't care, who you are, where you're from / What you did as long as you love me," they sing in harmony.
*NSYNC's first big hit was a lovelorn record about being single and distraught, but thanks to a memorable bass line from producers Denniz Pop and Max Martin, as well as swooning lead vocals from Justin Timberlake, "I Want You Back" is as catchy as anything in the boy band's repertoire.
The Cure's "Friday I'm in Love" was not only one of the band's biggest hits, but a complete departure from their usual more somber sound in favor of bright, blissful guitar chords. "'Friday I’m in Love’ is a dumb pop song, but it’s quite excellent actually, because it’s so absurd," singer Robert Smith once said of it , and like all the great dumb pop love songs out there, it'll leave you with a massive grin.
