For the last 42 years, Carolyn Cox Rose's family members have rarely discussed her violent murder, at least not openly.
The 47-year-old Escambia County real estate agent was raped and killed April 7, 1978, and her body was left at a home she was scheduled to show in Cantonment. Despite media coverage and rewards for information about her killer, a suspect was never arrested and the case turned cold .
But for decades, the crime's brutality broke the spirits of Rose's closest relatives and the lingering question of who could have perpetrated the horrid acts has haunted generations — until last week.
The Escambia County Sheriff’s Office announced last week that investigators had finally closed the cold case murder after advances in the field of DNA analysis led to a suspect — Julius William Hill Jr., who died 13 years ago while in federal prison for an unrelated crime.
"It was like 42 years of holding my breath washed over me,” said Cherie Mulhollan, Rose's niece, who was 27 at the time of her aunt's murder.
Mulhollan had a close relationship with her aunt. Her own mother had been diagnosed with a sometimes debilitating mood disorder, and for a large part of her childhood, Mulhollan was raised by her maternal grandparents — the parents of both her mother and Rose.
"My mother was kind of fragile, with her nerves and such," said Mulhollan, who now lives inRichmond, Virginia. "So I was the one that got the phone call that Carolyn had been murdered. My mother and I — and I had a baby at the time around a year old — we took off, as well as with my grandparents, for Pensacola.
"Then we got there. I think we stayed in a state of disbelief and shock, full of quandary, for quite a while. It was horrible. Because, No. 1, we’d lost Carolyn. Then, I hurt so bad for my cousin. But then, seeing my grandparents suffer was unimaginable.”
The pain the family felt the day that Rose was killed never left them and was passed down for generations.
"It wasn’t something that you could forget or walk away from or stick in the back of your mind," Mulhollan said. "It was there."
Rose, a vice president for Better Homes Inc., was a prominent Pensacola real estate agent in 1978, according to News Journal reporting in the wake of her death.
"She was an independent woman," Mulhollan said. "I know when she and (her first husband) Carl Starke got a divorce, she was like 'Out! And give me that real estate license!’ She was gung-ho, and she could sell ice cubes to the Eskimos. I mean the woman was a force within herself."
On the day of her murder, Rose left her office around 8:30 a.m. April 7, 1978, telling an assistant she had an appointment to meet a potential buyer at a $65,000 property at 2668 Highway 297A. She didn't mention the client's name.
When Rose had not returned to work by 2 p.m., two of her co-workers grew worried and drove to her last known location. They discovered her 1977 Chevrolet Caprice Classic parked at the ranch-style property and found Rose's body lying face up on the empty floor in the bedroom.
Slices of her blouse had been used to bind her hands behind her back and tie her legs. Rose’s underwear and bra were knotted around her neck, the News Journal reported.
Investigators were divided about the nature of the crime. Some assumed it had been a "spur-of-the-moment slaying" while others observed a crime scene that could have only come from meticulous planning, according to News Journal archives.
Local real estate agents quickly banded together to offer a $5,000 reward for information that might lead to an arrest.
"The latest violence has created a climate of fear and apprehension among Pensacola real-estate sales people — a climate which has led many to reconsider the hazards of their profession," the News Journal reported at the time.
A local inventor, Dillon Vickery, began converting electronic garage door openers into devices, designed especially for real estate agents in danger, that could blare loud sirens at the push of a button.
The ECSO launched an investigated into a man from New York who had been in the greater-Pensacola area looking to buy at the time of Rose’s killing but did not find enough evidence to make an arrest. He was eventually cleared as a suspect.
Although the case turned cold, the DNA evidence the ECSO collected in 1978 was never thrown away. Recently, ECSO investigator Kevin Coxwell partnered with the Florida Department of Law Enforcement and the Parabon NanoLab to research the cold case.
That research, plus advances in DNA technology, led investigators to identify Hill as the suspect in Rose's death.
Within 10 months of Rose's murder, her mother died of heart failure.
"She didn’t sit around and cry and mourn and outwardly exhibit this disaster that was happening to her, but I think it just sucked the life out of her," Mulhollan said. "She had always been kind of like a little rotund, round woman, but she quit eating. She literally melted away.”
Mulhollan said her own mother was "never the same again" after her sister's death.
Rose's son, Carl "Pat" Starke III, who was 24 at the time of his mother’s death, had to be sedated when he learned what had happened, according to his daughter, Erin Starke.
"How she was killed was just horrible, and to know what it did to my dad," said Erin Starke, Pat Starke's daughter and a current resident of Brunswick, Georgia. “He has never, ever, ever talked about her death. I wouldn’t have even known about it if my mom didn’t tell me.”
Carl Starke died this spring from what his family believed was the coronavirus, his daughter said.
While Erin Starke was only 3 years old in 1978, that hasn't stopped her from feeling like she was robbed of knowing Rose.
"I feel like I missed out on the influence that she would have had or given me," she said. "I missed out on someone who didn’t just want to have a family and children and to live the wife life."
Both Erin Starke and Mulhollan said they have found solace in finally knowing who authorities believe killed their relative, although he will never stand trial.
Hill died in 2007 in the United States Penitentiary in Victorville, California, where he was serving a 30-year sentence for two bank robberies.
"It would give me a little bit of joy to know he suffered," Erin Starke said.
Mulhollan first learned that the ECSO had named Hill as the killer while pulling into a Walgreens parking lot in Richmond.
“My phone rang. But I don’t check my phone until I parked, and thank God,” she said. “It was my son saying that they had matched the DNA, and I am so glad I was alone. Because I became totally unglued. It washed over me."
Mulhollan said she sat in her car, crying.
"It's a long time to hold your breath, but it’s a good ending," she said.
Colin Warren-Hicks can be reached at colinwarrenhicks@pnj.com or 850-435-8680.
