LOS ANGELES--( BUSINESS WIRE )--4Keeps Roses, Inc. announces that their illustrious, specially preserved roses are available for purchase at select 7-Elevens across the United States for Valentine’s Day, February 14, 2020.
Roses are a classic gift—one of the most universally beloved ways to convey love and affection. But they are also one of the most fleeting. A bouquet of roses is breathtaking when it arrives at your doorstep, but it fades a few days later. 4Keeps Roses solve this problem, transforming a rose from a simple, temporary gesture into a beautiful, long-lasting luxury gift.
Grown in the rich agricultural region of the Andes Mountains, 4Keeps Roses are picked at their peak, when their natural beauty is most arresting. They are then treated through a patented preservation process that keeps them in perfect condition for up to two years. These preserved roses can be cherished all year long, creating a living memory of a special moment every single day.
“We are thrilled to have 4Keeps Roses available at select 7-Elevens nationwide this Valentine’s Day,” said Sidney Richlin, Co-Founder of 4Keeps Roses. “These special flowers are the perfect gift for a holiday focused on love. Each rose is a unique, enduring token of affection, and they are now conveniently located at your local 7-Eleven.”
4Keeps Roses will be available year-round with holiday-specific colors and packaging, making them a perfect gift for holidays including Christmas, Mother’s Day, Halloween and Easter.
4Keeps Roses are available in a variety of colors and require zero maintenance. In addition to 7-Eleven, the flowers are currently sold online at 4keepsroses.com .
4Keeps Roses brand is owned by Ed Roses, LLC a subsidiary of Edison Nation, Inc. (EDNT), a multifaceted ecosystem which fosters innovation and drives IP, media and consumer products. Edison offers innovation sourcing, product design, sales, manufacturing, and fulfillment services. Edison Nation’s model is to source innovative ideas to launch internally or license to brand partners. Edison Nation hopes to leverage its television property, Everyday Edisons to become the recognized leader in the innovator community.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is a financial measure that is not calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("U.S. GAAP"). Management believes that because Adjusted EBITDA excludes (i) certain non-cash expenses (such as depreciation, amortization and stock-based compensation) and (ii) expenses that are not reflective of the Company's core operating results over time (such as restructuring costs, litigation or dispute settlement charges or gains, and transaction-related costs), this measure provides investors with additional useful information to measure the Company's financial performance, particularly with respect to changes in performance from period to period. Edison Nation management uses EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA (a) as a measure of operating performance; (b) for planning and forecasting in future periods; and (c) in communications with the Company's Board of Directors concerning Edison Nation's financial performance. The Company's presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to different methods of calculation and should not be used by investors as a substitute or alternative to net income or any measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Instead, management believes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should be used to supplement the Company's financial measures derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP to provide a more complete understanding of the trends affecting the business.
This press release contains forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. All statements, other than statements of historical facts, included in this press release regarding strategy, future operations and plans, including assumptions underlying such statements, are forward-looking statements, and should not be relied upon as representing the Company's views as of any subsequent date. Such forward-looking statements are based on information available to the Company as of the date of this release and involve a number of risks and uncertainties, some beyond the Company's control, that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated by these forward-looking statements, including consumer, regulatory and other factors affecting demand for the Company's products, any difficulty in marketing the Company's products in global markets, competition in the market for consumer products and inability to raise capital to fund operations and service the Company's debt. Additional information that could lead to material changes in the Company's performance is contained in its filings with the SEC. The Company is under no obligation to, and expressly disclaims any responsibility to, update or alter forward-looking statements contained in this release, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
