Refrain from posting comments that are obscene, defamatory or inflammatory, and do not indulge in personal attacks, name calling or inciting hatred against any community. Help us delete comments that do not follow these guidelines by marking them offensive. Let's work together to keep the conversation civil.
Be the first one to review.
We have sent you a verification email. To verify, just follow the link in the message
TIMESOFINDIA.COM | Last updated on - May 2, 2020, 13:00 ISTShare fbshare twshare pinshare Comments (0)
With the beauty industry using more and more natural ingredients in their products, how can flower be left behind. For all those people who love flower, here is some good news for you. Flowers can not only heal and repair your skin but can also hydrate and reduce acne. Here are a few flowers which have amazing beauty benefits and must be included in your beauty regime right away:
Used as rose water, face masks, lotions an even night creams, rose is incorporated in several beauty products. With its hydrating and healing properties, rose keeps the skin lively and even mends broken blood vessels. Its anti-bacterial properties make it ideal for people with oily and acne-prone skin. Using rose water controls the excess of oil on the skin, while using rose creams and masks helps in getting rid of acne.
Famous for its usage as an essential oil, lavender helps in normalizing dry, oily and sensitive skin types, by creating a balance of sebum production. Lavender also helps in providing relief and reducing tension by providing a calming effect to the skin. The flower is full of antibacterial and antiseptic properties, which is the reason why it is included in several face masks and creams.
Chamomile flower is a wonder flower for all the skin care enthusiasts. It contains anti-inflammatory, anti-fungal, antibacterial and antiseptic properties. These qualities help the skin regain its elasticity, reduces redness and also calms the skin down. Chamomile is widely used to make oil and its dry powder is usually used to make skin-calming face packs.
Known for its exfoliating and skin reviving qualities, hibiscus is a widely used flower in the beauty world. The flower is loaded with benefits and its usage on skin tones, firms, exfoliates, controls oil production, hydrates and protects the skin against premature aging. Hibiscus oil is also used in several hair oils, as it helps in replenishing the scalp and promotes hair growth.
Jasmine is a suitable plant to unclog and clear the skin pores. The flower is packed with antioxidants and is also used for anti-ageing treatments. It is also known to hydrate and soften the skin, which is why the wax of this flower is used in manufacturing several beauty products.
A widely available flower in India, marigold has its own set of beauty benefits. The flower is also known as calendula and its oil is widely used all over the world. Calendula oil has anti-inflammatory properties and helps in reducing acne spots and marks. You can also use the oil on insect bites to soothe and relieve the pain.
All the skin care fanatics out there might know how helpful can pansy be. It contains salicylic acid, which is the reason why it is widely used as an astringent. It provides a calming effect to the skin and can either be used as a mask or can be sprayed all over the face as mist.
