Though this season of 90 Day Fiance: Before the 90 Days is still airing, things are not looking too good for Big Ed Brown and Rose Vega . What we’ve seen of them on-screen has been cringeworthy enough but the things that have been happening off-screen are even worse. Brown has been accused of sexually harassing a woman and Vega has made claims that Brown never loved her at all. Now, Vega has another message for Brown.
Vega and Brown’s relationship was pretty much doomed from the start. Their over 20 year age gap and cultural differences didn’t exactly set them up for success. Brown also lied about his appearance and failed to tell Vega that he didn’t want any more children before he came to visit her in The Philipines. Once he met Vega, Brown demanded a number of things from her. First, he wanted her to take an STD test and then he asked her to shave her legs. Fans immediately called Brown out on social media over his shaving request.
“I woke up last Sunday morning and it wasn’t a good morning because all of the haters came out,” he told Us Weekly after his behavior became public. “I had asked Rose if she would shave her legs, and people were really upset about that. And I was having a conversation with my daughter Tiffany, and she’s like, ‘Dad, look, that’s completely normal. I live in San Diego. Everybody goes to the beach, people laser their legs.’ … So it wasn’t something that I was really used to.”
Later, he asked Vega to brush her teeth, claiming that her breath was “not pretty.”
Brown has been gaining a lot of fame since this season of 90 Day Fiance began airing. But Vega recently claimed that that was always Brown’s plan.
Rose is dragging Big Ed for his lies! #90DayFiance #90DayFianceBeforeThe90Days pic.twitter.com/qdn6VU4uEz
— John Yates (@JohnYates327) April 23, 2020
“[Ed] doesn’t really care [about] me,” she said in a now-deleted video. “He just wants to be famous, that’s why he’s doing that … He did not even give me a penny,” she said. She went on to claim that Brown had been telling lies about her.
Brown has also claimed that he is only sure that the relationship was real from his side and some of Brown’s family members have speculated that Vega was in the relationship for the money. Vega recently posted a picture on Instagram with a caption responding to all of her haters.
“Remember, if people talk about you behind your back, it only means you are two steps ahead of them,” she wrote. “Be happy for them and always think positive. God has great plan for me not now but soon.”
Are Big Ed and Rose still together?
Brown and Vega aren’t technically allowed to reveal their relationship status until their season finishes airing due to their NDAs, but from the looks of Vega’s video, things don’t seem too great between them.
