Fenella Fletcher working at Wisteria Rockridge in Oakland. Credit...Kelsey McClellan for The New York Times
How a small florist in Oakland, Calif., navigated a minefield of rules to sell on the make-or-break Mother’s Day weekend.
Fenella Fletcher working at Wisteria Rockridge in Oakland. Credit...Kelsey McClellan for The New York Times
OAKLAND, Calif. — Elizabeth Wardman was driving to San Francisco’s wholesale flower market last week when she heard on the radio that California was going to allow florists to reopen for Mother’s Day as part of an easing of coronavirus lockdown rules.
By the time she got to the market at 6 a.m., the parking lot was teeming with florists stocking up for one of the busiest weekends of the year. Wisteria Rockridge, her flower shop in Oakland’s tony Rockridge neighborhood, had already received online and phone orders for the weekend. Ms. Wardman scooped up as many flowers as she could in a fit of panic buying.
A flood of delivery orders came in to the shop, three times the usual amount for Mother’s Day. But Wisteria had to stop accepting orders on Wednesday. The store had furloughed its employees and didn’t have enough people to do the work. For the rest of the week, the phone rang unanswered.
Shutting down a business for a public health emergency seven weeks ago, it turned out, was a fairly straightforward thing. Reopening? That has turned out to be a lot trickier. Like thousands of other small-business owners, Ms. Wardman has had to reinvent her shop on the fly, hoping to reach enough customers to keep at least a tiny portion of her operation alive. And she has had to navigate health rules that aren’t always easy to follow and can feel more than a little arbitrary.
California may have allowed florists to reopen for Mother’s Day — but Alameda County, where Ms. Wardman’s shop is, did not. A grocery store across the street could sell flowers. Open-air garden centers, allowed by the county to reopen just days earlier, could sell flowers. But Ms. Wardman, with her tiny shop, still could not.
Elizabeth Wardman opened Wisteria Rockridge in 2015, specializing in custom arrangements. She’s had to pivot to premade bouquets at the moment.Credit...Kelsey McClellan for The New York Times
She tried anyway. When the store opened on Mother’s Day, Ms. Wardman did her best to nod to the county’s rules — or not completely flout them. The metal rolling gate out front was still down, and the veranda, usually overflowing with a colorful assortment of seasonal blooms, was empty. The store was selling premade arrangements, not its hallmark custom bouquets. Customers were not allowed inside. A wooden bench blocked the doorway. For a day, at least, she ran an open-air business.
“I keep thinking I’ll get through this, and then I’ll think about how I’m going to approach the next step. Then the rules change, and so I have to make another adjustment,” she said. “It’s a very confusing time.”
Wisteria, like other San Francisco Bay Area businesses deemed nonessential, had to close its doors when Alameda County, which stretches along the east side of the bay, and six other counties imposed shelter-in-place orders on March 17. Several days later, just as all of California was following the Bay Area’s lead, Ms. Wardman furloughed all of her employees.
A native of England, Ms. Wardman, 59, who goes by Liz, moved to the United States in 1989 for a teaching job. When that contract ended, she started working in flower shops and has done that for the last 30 years. With glasses perched on top of her head, she speaks with a faint English accent and exudes the restless energy of a person with a lot to do.
When Ms. Wardman opened Wisteria in 2015, she knew that running her own store wouldn’t be easy. In the preceding three years, two other flower shops had shut down in the same space. Ms. Wardman had been an employee in both stores and knew the challenges of sustaining a business with high Bay Area taxes and expenses.
But she loved the neighborhood, and she wanted to create a “place of beauty” with an English garden aesthetic where customers could work closely with florists.
She said the store was doing “OK” before the pandemic. It wasn’t losing money, but it wasn’t making a ton of it, either. Wisteria had five full-time employees and part-time staff during busy periods. Last year, the shop generated around $750,000 in sales.
On the same block as Wisteria, other small businesses are also straining to deal with new health rules. The grocer next door, Yasai Produce Market, is allowing only five customers in the store at a time. Wood Tavern, a pricey neighborhood brasserie, is doing takeout orders while selling pantry items like sodas and ketchup. Ver Brugge Foods, the butcher, is shortening its hours because it doesn’t have enough staff coming in.
On the day her flower shop was ordered to close, Ms. Wardman did what she had done most Mondays: She woke up at 3 a.m. and headed to San Francisco’s flower market. That morning, she bought $1,600 worth of roses, tulips, ranunculus and spirea. By noon, she had heard the news of the lockdown.
“My first thought was, what am I going to do with the flowers?” Ms. Wardman said. “Then I started to think about what am I going to do with these people who depend on me for their livelihood.”
Robert Kayen picked up Mother’s Day bouquets. This year, the shop made about a third of what it made on that high-traffic weekend last year. Credit...Kelsey McClellan for The New York Times
At the end of the first week, she decided that she had no choice but to let her staff go. The wholesale market, her main source of flowers, was closed. (San Francisco allowed it to reopen in the week leading up to Mother’s Day.) It was unclear when Wisteria would be able to fully reopen.
A few local growers asked if she would buy some of their flowers. She had longtime customers placing weekly orders for bouquets and a handful of orders from people who heard that Wisteria might still be open. She did the arrangements and made most of the deliveries on her own.
Even though her sales were down 75 percent in April from the year before, she had a few things going for her. Her biggest cost, labor, was close to zero. She wasn’t even paying herself a salary. And her rent was based on a percentage of her sales.
“A percentage of not very much is not very much,” she said.
For Mother’s Day, Wisteria couldn’t rely on last-minute walk-up customers as it had in the past. Fenella Fletcher, who has worked at Wisteria since its opening, built an online ordering system on the store’s website to supplement the phone orders.
On the Friday before Mother’s Day, Ms. Wardman and Ms. Fletcher, who has been a friend for 18 years and was working without pay, scrambled to build all the bouquets for Saturday delivery.
Inside, even through the filter of a mask, the air smelled like spring. A corkboard hanging on the wall had stacks of handwritten orders pinned to it. The ground was littered with loose stems, leaves and flowers that didn’t make the cut.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
My state is reopening. Is it safe to go out?
States are reopening bit by bit . This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
How do I get tested?
If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.
Ms. Fletcher worked on arrangements with industrial buckets of tulips, roses and other flowers at her feet. She stopped to fix another arrangement that she said wasn’t quite right. Too much contrast in the colors.
When customers came by to pick up their arrangements on Friday and Saturday, they slid their credit cards through an opening in the metal security gate. Flowers were handed over with an offer of a squirt of hand sanitizer.
Inside the nine-foot-wide store, maintaining social distancing proved difficult. Shelves, finished arrangements on rolling tables, empty pots and succulent plants crowded every surface. There was a narrow path to the rear where Ms. Fletcher was arranging flowers. As Ms. Wardman and others walked, they squeezed past one another like passengers in an airplane aisle. The phone rang nonstop.
A frantic Ms. Wardman scooted past, shouting to no one in particular: “Not stressed at all!”
On Mother’s Day, a sign outside the store read “Grab N Go only” with a handful of premade arrangements resting in metal buckets on the sidewalk in front of the store. An orderly line formed in front for pickup orders or last-minute flowers.
“We want her to stay in business,” said Jill Boyce, who lives nearby and was waiting for her flowers. “It’s part of my neighborhood. We all need each other.”
Ms. Wardman, like other small-business operators, worries about what’s to come. “It’s not going to be the same,” she said.Credit...Kelsey McClellan for The New York Times
When customers asked for a custom bouquet, Ms. Wardman could only apologize.
“We can’t operate like we once did. Things are a little different now. I’m sorry,” she said.
It was one of many reminders that business was not back to normal and may not be for a long time. One customer tried to pay with cash, but the store was taking only credit cards. Potted orchids, another popular Mother’s Day gift, were not available. But nothing seemed to bother Ms. Wardman more than not being able to make custom bouquets.
She said she had opened Wisteria as an alternative to supermarkets and other florists with what she called “the bucket shop mentality” — premade bouquets sitting in big black buckets. “But that’s what I am doing,” she said.
Ms. Wardman said Wisteria made about $11,000 on Mother’s Day weekend, better than she had expected. It made $33,000 last year.
As she considered the coming months, there were some grim realities. She probably couldn’t let customers inside the small shop and maintain adequate social distancing. All her wedding orders were canceled or postponed.
“It’s not going to be the same,” she said. “We can’t grow. All we can do is keep treading water.”
