After the sinking of the Scandies Rose, a harrowing search, 2 survivors and an aftermath of anguish
Before Alaska crabber Brock Rainey headed out to start a season, he checked in with his longtime friend Mike Daily. This winter was no different.
“Tossing lines for the Bering Sea today…Love you brother,” Rainey texted in the hours before the boat he crewed on — the Scandies Rose — left Kodiak on Monday.
The 130-foot vessel never reached its next port. The boat capsized and sank New Year’s Eve near Sutwik Island off the Alaska Peninsula. A Coast Guard helicopter crew rescued two crew members — including a man from Edmonds.
Rainey and four others, including two men from Washington, were not found during a 20-hour search that was called off Wednesday night.
Brock Rainey, a crew member on the Scandies Rose, is missing. (Courtesy of Ashley Boggs via AP)
The boat had years of experience working the Alaska snow crab and king crab harvests, and also fished for Pacific cod. Family and friends who had hoped for another successful year are now grieving.
“I fished in my early 20s, and we know the risks,” Daily said Thursday. “But it is incomprehensible to think that it is a friend who has been lost.”
The Scandies Rose’s co-owner, Dan Mattsen, said the boat was managed out of Seattle and homeported in Dutch Harbor, in Alaska’s Aleutian Islands. The crew was identified Thursday by the Coast Guard.
The boat was skippered by Gary Cobban Jr., who his younger sister, Deanna Cobban, described as from a family of Kodiak, Alaska, crabbers. He was identified as among the missing along with his son, David Cobban, of Kodiak, Rainey, who lived in Idaho, and Arthur Ganacias and Seth Rousseau-Gano, both from Washington.
The two survivors are Dean Gribble Jr., of Edmonds, and John Lawler, of Alaska.
They were treated at Providence Kodiak Medical Center and released Wednesday, according to Carlie Franz, a senior communications specialist at the hospital.
Gribble Jr., in a YouTube video posted Thursday, said the boat started listing hard to the starboard side in what he described as the “worst possible conditions that included 20-foot seas, strong winds and icing conditions.”
The video was made private Friday and is now unavailable for public viewing.
“Everyone was trying to get out… I just wish the other guys could have made it,” he said.
Gribble and Lawler fought hard to survive, according to Gribble’s father, Dean Gribble Sr., an Alaska crab-boat captain, who said his son was back in Washington state.
Gribble Sr. said his son told him the boat went down fast. His son and Lawler, after they put on their survival suits, were knocked off the boat by a wave. They made their way into the life raft, which was released as the boat sank, said Gribble Sr.
Lawler, reached Thursday, said, “It’s pretty terrible.” He declined to say more, explaining he needed more time before talking about what happened.
This photo of Dean Gribble Jr., one of two crew members who survived the sinking of the Scandies Rose, was taken last year on another boat during the king crab season. (Courtesy of Dean Gribble Sr.)
The Coast Guard responded to a mayday call from the boat around 10 p.m. Tuesday. Coast Guard officials describe a harrowing search -and-rescue effort in rough seas and strong winds. Aircraft were deployed out of Air Station Kodiak to an area about 180 miles to the southwest, near Sutwik Island off the Alaska Peninsula.
Coast Guard crew involved in the rescue told the Kodiak Daily Mirror they did not see the boat, nor any debris.
They saw two life rafts. One had a blinking light but was found to be empty. They found a second raft a half-mile away, around 2 a.m. Wednesday. Gribble and Lawler, in the raft for 4 hours, were wearing survival suits.
“They were ambulatory. They didn’t have any medical issues, they were just severely hypothermic,” Coast Guard rescue swimmer Evan Grills told the Daily Mirror.
Grills was lowered from a helicopter to help Gribble Jr. and Lawler into a hoist.
