Grace Gaeng played on attack for High Point women's lacrosse from 2011-2013. Gaeng is third all time in history in career points with 191. Since her time at High Point, Grace and her brother Liam started a business called Mindfultation. Mindfultation offers donation-based virtual meditation and mindfulness classes for ages 8-18.
HPU: What made you choose High Point?
Grace: When I left Maryland, I was looking at a few other bigger schools and I realized the environment would probably be pretty similar to Maryland. Being an athlete at a big school can make it difficult to integrate yourself into other areas of the school. It's obviously possible, but it can be a bit more challenging because your schedule is different than everybody else's. With transferring, and it obviously being the second time around to choose a school, I decided I wanted to make a more well-rounded decision that wasn't solely based off of lacrosse. I wanted to feel more connected to the school as a whole. Lyndsey and the assistant coach at the time, Whitney, also played a huge roll in my decision. Aside from our standards around competition aligning, our philosophies and morals were very similar. I knew that if for some reason lacrosse did not turn out how I had pictured, it was still going to be an experience that I would gain so much from.
HPU: Your first season at High Point, 53 goals. Do you remember anything from that season? 53 goals, 18th in the country in goals. Is there anything you get reminded of from that season?
Grace: I think the biggest thing that stands out for me was the transition in terms of how we moved throughout our training compared to what I experienced at Maryland. Our work ethic at High Point was very different. I don't think it was necessarily a bad or a good thing, we were starting a program, we had a lot of catching up to do. I thrived on the time, effort, and heart that went into having to grind in a different way. Starting a program from the ground up just made every step we took so much more meaningful.
HPU: What kind of impact has High Point University and HPU athletics had on your career development?
Grace: High Point University has been extremely impactful in terms of how I have approached my career. When I arrived at HPU it was the first year of the women's lacrosse program. I had transferred from a school that was already established and thriving athletically, to a school that was starting a program from scratch. One thing about this change for me personally was the insight that experiencing two extremes gave me. I knew what the highest level of success looked like in women's lacrosse, yet I stood among a raw and newly growing program. This contrast presented me with the opportunity to feel and experience a variety of different emotions. The biggest impact that it had on me was my interest in working for a start-up and starting my own business one day. The grit, the opportunity for implementation of new ideas and methods of approach, the trial and error phases, and the impact that every little decision could potentially have, was a thrilling and inspiring experience for me. To put hard work in at every stage of helping to grow the program, the feeling of being completely humbled during moments of despair, and most importantly, seeing growth from the ground up were things I realized could bring me a lot of happiness moving forward. As much as HPU lacrosse had an impact on me at the time, the school, as a whole, and the academics were just as meaningful. When I wasn't on the field, I was being motivated by the endless inspiration that the University presented. From President Qubein to professors, to coaches, to those who worked on the grounds and maintenance personnel, everyone wanted you to do and be your best. That example of wanting to do well and motivate others to do the same continues to stick with me today.
HPU: Growing up how did you handle your feelings (of self-doubt, nervousness, frustration)
Grace: My recollection as a young child is a tad blurry, but as my emotions started to become more of a "thing" and started to be present in my day to day life, I remember hating them. The feelings of anger, disappointment, frustration, and guilt were specifically ones I struggled to allow myself to express. I quickly turned towards negative self-coping mechanisms to avoid the sensations that these feelings brought on. Thankfully, later in life, I decided that my way of handling these emotions were holding me back from being successful. So, in a nutshell, my answer would be that I didn't handle them well. I buried them deeper down every time they arose. Although I didn't necessarily handle them well still greatly appreciate this question because from children to adults, I don't believe we talk about emotions and feelings nearly enough, specifically when it comes to productively talk about them. With that in mind, I'd love to propose two questions for anyone who finds themselves reading this…
1. "Do you remember being taught skills to handle your emotions as they arose?" 2."Growing up, aside from receiving punishment for "overreacting" or reacting in an "immature way" and or turning towards self-harmful behaviors, was the topic of how you were feeling discussed or validated calmly or productively?"
HPU: What led to your "lightbulb" moment where you started becoming more aware of your emotions? (Was it due to an event? More of a realization?)
Grace: I would say for myself, and I imagine for many others, the lightbulb moment took some time. It gradually would get a little lighter the darker things got, or the more difficult things seemed to feel. It wasn't clear that my daily struggles were directly related to the way I was handling my emotions. I believe that was the case for me and is the case for many. When we replace our emotions with avoidance it makes it easy to forget or be aware of the root cause of how and why one is currently moving through life the way they are. It's years of un-layering habits that must take place. For me, it took time to peel away the years of layers and start to reflect on the "why?"
HPU: How did you discover meditation?
Grace: I discovered meditation when I moved out to Denver a few years back. At the time I had recently gotten out of an unhealthy relationship and had a lot of PTSD and ruminating thoughts. I felt as though I was taking all of the steps to support my ability to heal and move forward, one of which was seeing my therapist, yet I was still feeling stuck. After having this conversation with my therapist, she recommended giving meditation a try. Simultaneously, my brother Liam and one of our friends had been practicing meditation as well. At this time in my life, I embraced growth and the power I had previously found through therapeutic practices. When the idea of meditation was presented I was eager to try it. The truth was, it was hard! I remember trying to meditate for five minutes. It felt like an eternity! Funny enough, the athlete in me took over. I reflected on the fact, that in many cases achievement and change take time and practice, and typically don't come easily. I thought to myself "if this is so hard, there has to be something behind it!"
HPU: How has meditation helped you?
Grace: Meditation and mindfulness practices have helped me in so many ways, and I think the combination of the two is key. I had been practicing a lot of mindfulness skills since graduating from college, but never had explored meditation. By practicing mindfulness, I felt as though my approach to communication was more productive and my appreciation and gratitude for the things and people around me was heightened. This offered me a lot of peace and fulfillment. It was not until I added meditation on top of my mindfulness practices, that I saw an even greater shift. For me, meditation has helped rewire and train my brain to react in ways that without it, would have drifted into negative and worrisome thoughts. It's given me the ability to accept uncontrollable feelings and thoughts without overthinking and ruminating on them. As a result, I find myself being more productive, more intentional, more loving towards myself, and more patient with others.
HPU: Where did the idea of "Mindfultation" come from (How old is it, who all were involved from the beginning)
Grace: My brother Liam was looking to find a more fulfilling job, and I was eager to start a business. Through my experience in athletics in addition to conversations with my brother about the current state of society and human functionality, both personally and interpersonally I brought up the idea of starting a meditation camp for kids, similar to sports camps. It made us realize how underutilized meditation is and how different our childhood development may have been if the meditation had been presented to us.
HPU: Since the discovery, how has your curiosity grown?
Grace: Since first discovering meditation my curiosity grew immensely, specifically around the science behind the practice. I have always been intrigued by human behavior and psychology, but practicing something, in addition to therapy that I could directly feel results from, sparked a whole new level of curiosity. My brother and I have immersed ourselves into the educational aspect of meditation and feel that the better we can understand the science behind it, the more we can get convince people to try it. It's incredible how much of our lives are wrapped up in our psyche and how implementing meditation and mindfulness can relieve ourselves from getting emotionally bogged down. No matter your background or lifestyle, meditation and mindfulness practices are extremely versatile and can change your life.
HPU: What has it been like to take this journey with someone so close to you? A sibling at that?
Grace: It's been awesome and challenging all at once! I think to start a business with anyone, especially a sibling brings on a lot of challenges. I think something would be wrong if that wasn't the case. We both push each other in different ways and bring different things to the table, which is extremely important. The nice thing about working with a sibling is that we aren't afraid to hold anything back and we can brush things off just as easily. It also has been pretty great to see us keep each other emotionally accountable, both in our work and our personal lives.
HPU: What do you think is the biggest misconception about meditation (Effectiveness, time-consuming, etc.)
Grace: In my opinion, one of the biggest misconceptions about meditation is that it has to have a spiritual or religious component to it, which is not the case. Some approach it spiritually, but at Mindfultation, and with many other services, meditation can be non-secular. I also hear a lot of people say, "it's not for me." This isn't necessarily a misconception, but it's an interesting response to address when it comes to a barrier to why one may not be open to it. Speaking for myself, I also thought "It wasn't for me." It's a common response. People find other activities that help them destress and tend to categorize those activities as their "own type of meditation." Other healthy outlets, such as exercise, art, or music, allow one to relax and destress, but that in itself is a common misconception. Meditating isn't JUST about destressing. There is more to it. A lot of results come from physical training and stretching your brain in ways that build muscles and strengthen brain circuits/receptors that aren't worked by simply partaking in an activity that relieves stress. Although I feel meditation takes more effort than simply finding yourself in a state of relaxation, I do believe that you can't necessarily be "bad or good" at it. It shows up differently for everyone and can look different from day-to-day. I think taking an additional step, whether it's using breathing exercises etc., can be a step towards taking an activity that helps you destress and transforming it into a more meditative practice.
HPU: What does a class in Mindfultation look like?
Grace: Right now, we offer drop-in classes for anyone from the ages of 8-18. Classes are broken out into different age groups. A misconception some have is that we meditate for 30-45 minutes straight, which is not the case. When working with kids, we have to be mindful of their attention span. At Mindfultation, we combine mindfulness practices with meditation. With that in mind, our classes incorporate activities and reflections from art to writing, and group discussions, along with, of course, different meditation practices. We also offer sport and performance specific classes that incorporate many of the same activities but are tailored to an athlete's mindset and their performance outcomes.
HPU: Why do you all believe implementing these techniques at an early age is beneficial?
Grace: After reflecting on how much meditation and mindfulness helped us in adulthood, both Liam and I started to reflect on how beneficial these skills could have been for us if we had them at an earlier age. It's said that the human brain stops developing between 25 and 30 years of age, with most development occurring between birth and teenage years. With this knowledge, we believe that the benefits of mindfulness and mediation can have a strong impact during those formidable years. In turn, mindfulness and meditation, although perceived by many as a practice and skill, can also develop into an integral part of one's personality. One's outlook on life, their relationships, and most importantly, their ability to handle hardships, plays an imperative role in one's well-being and success. It is for those reasons that we believe an early start results in a better chance of success later in life.
What is the long-term benefit/impact of meditation?
Big picture, we believe that mindfulness and meditation practices can help foster awareness, and in turn, be able to experience our lives, play our sport, and show up in relationships in new and beautiful ways. With the hope of bringing these practices into the daily lives of others, we feel that it's inevitable that we will see long-term results in individuals and throughout our communities. The younger generation will one day be leaders and hopefully, in return they will teach their children and their children's children, creating a more aware and intentional society, starting with the ways one shows up in their personal and day to day relationships.
HPU: What impact did High Point have on Mindfultation and starting that company?
Grace: Going to a small school where you interact with many of the same people daily and just the campus is so beautiful in general, I remember calling my parents so many times that first year and being like, 'I just cannot believe I am here.' I think that brought on a lot of awareness and gratitude towards how impactful your environment and the people in your environment can be, and how meaningful and impactful you can be towards them too just by smiling at them or saying 'hi.' I think this is just in general, but I lived in New York City and so bigger places which I think would correlate to bigger schools, it is easier to just put your head down and keep to yourself. At smaller schools and smaller environments, I think you are either forced to do it or more inspired to make those connections. I was in an impactful moment in terms of driving more awareness within myself.
How important is being self-aware and conscious of your feelings in a time like this?
A strong sense of self-awareness is always important regardless of what time and age you find yourself in. Yet, in today's world, there are far more distractions that keep us from developing a healthy relationship with our emotions. From increasing exposure to social media and the development of the "online self", to a growing sense of loneliness which is a result of younger generations becoming more mobile, a sense of self-awareness amidst these rapid cultural changes is a necessary component to feeling self-fulfilled and grounded.
