The sleeveless design of Amber's dress gave passerbys a clear view of the extensive tattoo collection she has amassed on her arms.
Rose was seen carrying a lime green beverage and a bag of to-go food in her hands as she ventured towards the beach.
Cute cut: Amber continued to sport her signature bleach blonde buzzcut, which allowed her to show off the controversial Bash Slash tattoo on her forehead
Mask off: Amber alternated between wearing her CDC recommended face mask and carrying it in her hands, while Catelyn appeared to wear her mask for the duration of their time in public
Amber alternated between wearing her CDC recommended face mask and carrying it in her hands, while Catelyn appeared to wear her mask for the duration of their time in public.
Catelyn - who welcomed her second child with YG last July - sported a nude toned bodysuit and a pair of Vetements jeans for her outing with Amber.
She rounded out her fashion forward fit by slipping her feet into a pair of black and green Nike kicks and loading all of her belongings into a black Chanel purse.
Selfie time: Once they made it to the sand, Amber and Catelyn took a seat and posed for a series of selfie snapshots
Once they made it to the sand, Amber and Catelyn took a seat and posed for a series of selfie snapshots.
In the back-to-back photos, Amber kept her sunglasses on and pouted for the camera, while Catelyn flashed a small smile.
On her Instagram Story, Rose shared footage from an electric bicycle ride she took on the pier.
Pouty: In the back-to-back photos, Amber kept her sunglasses on and pouted for the camera, while Catelyn flashed a small smile
Since entering quarantine, Amber has been providing her 19.9million followers with frequent fashion inspiration.
'Thinking about how much I hate People while simultaneously thinking this @fashionnova outfit is super cute,' captioned the model in a post shared to her page on Tuesday.
In the sexy snapshot, Amber donned a white off-the-shoulder sweatshirt and a pair of coordinating mini shorts.
Serving looks: Since entering quarantine, Amber has been providing her 19.9million followers with frequent fashion inspiration; Amber pictured on Instagram on Tuesday
She has also been using her platform to show solidarity with the Black Lives Matter movement and the LGBTQ+ community.
Amber was formerly married to rapper Wiz Khalifa, 32, from 2013 until 2016. They share a seven-year-old son named Sebastian Taylor.
In October of last year, Rose welcomed her second child, son Slash Electric, with boyfriend Alexander Edwards, 32.
Mom life: Amber was formerly married to rapper Wiz Khalifa, 32, from 2013 until 2016. They share a seven-year-old son named Sebastian Taylor; Sebastian and Amber pictured in 2018
Share or comment on this article:
