Every product was carefully curated by an Esquire editor. We may earn a commission from these links.
Just when you're relieved to be off that Somali pirate ship, you have to go and record the theme song for your reality show!
When it comes to Schitt's Creek, there is no shortage of Easter Eggs for fans latch onto. Obviously, fans love Moira Rose's wig collection. There are inside jokes about the town and a strange C-plot about Bob the mechanic's love life. But in all of that hilarity, one running gag that always delivers is the casual references that Alexis Rose makes to her life, before moving into the Rosebud Motel in Schitt's Creek.
The series is currently in its final season, coming to a close just as it's reaching its apex of critical acclaim. But for those who are already dreading the finale of the series, we have found a solution. Give Alexis Rose a prequel series, you cowards. I re-watched the series and cataloged every single one of Alexis's nonchalant references to her former life. If Daniel and Eugene Levy wanted a bankable spinoff, they have plenty of material—2,007 words of material to be exact.
As you celebrate the final season, please find an exhaustive list of every moment that Alexis Rose mentioned her wild past. Did she play billiards to free her friend from a Ugandan diamond smuggler? Absolutely. Did she have a lock of hair to get into Kiss Kiss? You bet. Here are all her misadventures, for your consideration.
This content is imported from YouTube. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
“As if I didn’t see this coming. He’s broken up with me five times already. Like there was that time that he never met me in Rio. And remember that time when he gave me his ex-wife’s engagement ring? And then there was that time last summer when he left his molly in my glove compartment and then I got arrested.”
“I drove into the Prada store on Rodeo Drive. In fairness, it did look like the entrance to a parking garage. And I was high at the time.”
“My eyes are brown. I’m basically sample-size. And one time, I escaped from a Thai drug lord’s car trunk by bribing him with sex. Everyone can just calm down because Aroon was a lovely gentleman until he ran out of money!”
David: "Dubai, 2010. I had to pick you up from that blind date that went terribly wrong. It was a total disaster."
“I went on a blind date to Bali with Leo, so I’m pretty sure it’ll be fine.”
Episode Eleven, Little Sister: When Alexis Tried to Be Musical, Pt. 1
“Honestly, Twy? Ix-nay on the ong-say because I tried it once and the guy ripped the guitar out of my hands and he just started smashing it on the ground. Granted I am tone deaf and he was a super angry marine. But…”
“So this is weird. Today marks the longest relationship I’ve ever voluntarily had with someone. Yeah, the actual longest relationship was a three month affair with a Saudi prince, but for the last two months of that I was trapped in his palace trying to get to an embassy.”
“Oh my God. Ever since David left, you two have been so dramatic. Do I have to remind you of the time that I was taken hostage on David Geffen’s yacht by Somali pirates for a week and nobody answered my texts?”
“Like, have you ever had to negotiate in Arabic? It’s very difficult. And try getting into Kiss Kiss in Tokyo without a lock of human hair.”
“I mean, I like it because Jared Leto gave it to you, and he was my first kiss, but I don’t know if I like it like it.”
“I was a beard for a very well-known actor, and I get it. It’s uncomfortable.”
“I had a friend in Venice Beach who sold raw milk, and his whole compound was raided. He also sold drugs.”
“It’s just a checkpoint. I’ve been through tons of these in Johannesburg. It’s like a drive through, except everyone has a gun. I remember. I had just gotten my braces off.”
Alexis: "I was very hands on David. I came up with all the flavors by myself."
“If there’s one thing I’ve learned, when it comes to love, you can’t let the little things get in your way. Like I once dated this Sultan’s nephew who was forbidden to talk to me or even look at me, and we made it work for like, half a regime change.”
“Um, I’m sorry, were you picked up by the South Korean police on New Years? I had to sweet talk the consulate’s lawyer to get me a passport by midnight.”
“I can’t go to college yet because I didn’t finish high school. It’s so embarrassing, and I never should have taken that semester off, but I did meet Beyonce in Mykonos, so it was almost worth it.”
“So as Jocelyn said, my name is Alexis. Yes, I did not finish high school. It’s this long boring story involving a yacht and a famous soccer player, and like, a ton of mushrooms. Anyway, I think it would be so great if we could just go around the room and everybody tell me, like, five things about yourself.”
“It’s just that she never said ‘Let them eat cake.’ I asked Kirsten Dunst who played her in the movie. That line was actually written years before Marie Antoinette allegedly said it, and um, Kirsten also told me at the premiere that she was jealous of my bangs. My friends used to call me Marie, but that was mainly because I was casually seeing Prince Harry, so there was the whole like, ‘Is she going to be a princess thing?’ but it was also because we were going through this dark phase where we were just… partying too hard.”
“That reminds me of when I was in Bangkok. There was this amazing little resto-lounge that specializes in Tahitian food and scalp massages.”
“One takes the back left corner. One takes the right. One asks you if you have those wool hoodies in a different size. The other one compliments you on your cuticle game, and while you’re laughing that up, the two in the back are filling their bags with facial cleanser. It’s the exact same move I used with my klepto friends in the Hamptons.”
“I used to text Zac Efron just like, for a booty call. Poor thing would be pressing the buzzer before I even hit send.”
“You learn pretty quickly when you’re in a Ugandan diamond smuggler’s villa, playing for your friend’s freedom.”
Episode Thirteen, Merry Christmas, Johnny Rose: When Alexis Went to a Cookie Swap, Kind Of
“So cute. I basically did exactly the same thing with my friends once, but instead of cookies, it was whatever we could find in our parents’ medicine cabinets, and instead of a Christmas party, it was an old boot factory in Krakow.”
Moira: "That ship set sail hours ago. Literally. Alexis and Stavros are on his father’s yacht by now, off to Cadbury."
“Tell that to me at 21, escaping the Yakuza.”
“So, way back when, all of my girlfriends and I used to throw the diamonds we got from our parents on a table and just do, like, a big jewelry swap. I wish I had someone in this town to swap with.”
“I actually got this in a swap with Sienna Miller, and by that, I mean it fell off her wrist at a Halloween party and I kept it.”
“I once passed off a mini horse and three guinea pigs as service animals, so anything is possible.”
"My best friend Summer used to date Hef in high school, which isn’t as weird as it sounds ‘cause he was like, a very young 77."
“Every time I did that with a boyfriend, I’d send them off with someone who isn't a threat, like Pippa Middleton or Rihanna… What are the GRs? The ground rules? This is why you have ground rules, David. Josh Groban has a thick leather bound binder full of them.”
“Hello, my name is Alexis Rose represented by Alexis Rose Talent. I have chosen to perform the title track off of my critically reviewed, limited reality series, A Little Bit Alexis. Feel free to sing along if you know the words.”
“Yeah, um, I was one of the original Pussycat Dolls, but it only lasted two weeks because apparently I’m ‘too pretty.’ But you just need to chill. If this is anything like my first afternoon with the Pussycat Dolls, it’ll be a couple hours of Kegels and then an afternoon of cheeky Bellinis.”
“Okay, I’ve just been to Miami so many times, and trust me, the wildlife is not as sexy up close.”
“Oh my god, Turkish Cosmo once included my photo in their list of world’s best sarongs, so let’s just say that I know my way around a beach.”
“I’ve been traveling the world since I was a teen model, but something about this feels different.”
Justin Kirkland Justin Kirkland is a writer for Esquire, where he focuses on entertainment, television, and pop culture.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
