With winter ending, its time to give new life to your garden. Accuweather knows just what to plant in your garden and when this spring.
Spring has sprung! With the new season comes a beautiful reminder of what Spring brings. There is a new energy in the air as everyone heads outdoors to soak in the beauty of the new season. A staple of Spring is annual flowers.. Unlike perennials, annuals may only thrive for a season or two. But the pop of flash and color that annuals bring to a garden make them a worthy addition to your spring shopping list. The best time to plant most annual flowers is when the weather is warm — late spring, summer, and even early fall are all fine planting seasons. There are some annuals that do better when planted in climates with lower temperatures. These are called cool-season annuals. As far as evaluating which annual flowers to add to your garden, you shouldn’t have much trouble because there are a lot of options online. Many virtual flower shops give you an up-close glimpse of the best annual flowers to plant..
Some of America’s favorite and most popular annual flowers include:
This annual flower is quite large, and it has a bright majestic hue of orange. This type of Marigold is not only loved for its vivid color, but it is also a sturdy flower that lasts until September and resists disease better than some other flowers. Also, this type of marigold makes an excellent cut flower. In a vase, it can last for at least ten days.
These baby roses grow petite flowers with dark foliage. They are perfect for growing in containers or small spaces.
Compact and uniform, these alluring blue flowers are annual flowers that are ideal for bedding, landscaping and containers. These flowers are also fast growers, blooming early and flourishing for an extended period.
This annual flower has a vibrant pink color that doesn’t fade. Zinnias may look fragile, but they are tough plants that can combat drought, humidity and heat. Beginning gardeners usually love zinnias because they require minimal care and thrive for a long time.
If you are a beginning gardener, or just new to planting annual flowers, here are some tips to make your efforts a success:
Plant the annual flowers on a cloudy day. This will protect your newly planted annual flowers from sun stress. You can also achieve the same results by planting in the evening.
If time is tight and you have to plant on a sunny day, put up some sort of shading to protect annual flowers’ seedlings. A piece of cardboard or a pop-up beach umbrella can do the trick.
Before adding annuals to a flower bed, arrange the potted plants in the pattern you’ll follow when planting. And remember to space out your planting based on mature plant size. You want to give your annual flowers enough room to spread and grow.
Water annuals that are dry before removing them from cell packs or pots. The root balls should be moist when you plant them. And never pull annuals out of their containers which will break the stems. Instead, remove plants by squeezing the pot and flipping it over.
Use your hand or a trowel to dig a shallow hole large enough to cradle the root ball. If you’re planting many annuals, hold a trowel with the blade facing down and the concave side facing you. Stick the trowel into the soil and pull the handle forward. This will create a hole behind the blade that should be big enough for the root ball.
Always water annuals after planting with a watering can or hose-end sprayer. Soak the soil thoroughly and add a layer of mulch to slow water evaporation and discourage weeds.
Annual flowers are beautiful and bold. They are a great addition to almost any garden and now that the weather is warm, it’s the perfect time to start planting them. As you head outside to bask in the beauty of these annual flowers, brush up on these hacks on how to keep spring allergies at bay.
