Antwon Rose’s mother says she didn’t meet with President Trump, although he claimed they did
Antwon Rose’s mother says she didn’t meet with President Trump, although he claimed they did
Antwon Rose is a known name here in Pittsburgh, but on Tuesday, President Donald Trump brought his story to a national level and claimed to have met with Rose’s family.
“I’ve just concluded a meeting with incredible families -- just incredible families that have been through so much. The families of Ahmaud Arbery, Botham Jean, Antwon Rose, Jemel Roberson, Atatiana Jefferson, Michael Dean, Darius Tarver, Cameron Lamb and Everett Palmer,” Trump said during the news conference.
If you want to receive Allegheny County news alerts, please download our WPXI News App . You can also follow WPXI on Facebook and Twitter .
President Trump called the names of those who died at the hands of police right before signing an executive order on police reform.
Rose, who was 17 years old at the time, ran from a traffic stop in June 2018. He was shot and killed by former East Pittsburgh police officer Michael Rosfeld. Rosfeld was found not guilty of criminal homicide in March.
“Many believe that proper training might have prevented the tragic deaths of Antwon Rose and Botham Jean,” Trump said.
But on social media, a post on Antwon Rose’s mom’s Facebook page said she never met with the president, but instead went to Washington to speak with senators that could have an impact.
PLEASE SHARE: I AM NOT IN THE WHITE HOUSE, I CHOSE NOT TO MEET THEIR PRESIDENT! I CAME TO WASHINGTON TO MEET AND SPEAK...
Posted by Michelle Kenney on Tuesday, June 16, 2020
“Why President Trump is referencing Antwon Rose? I haven’t a clue. I think it’s a tribute to the notoriety and attention that Antwon’s death did bring to local policing, and that’s a positive thing," said Beth Pittinger, the executive director of Pittsburgh’s Citizen Police Review Board.
The order calls for no more chokeholds unless an officer’s life is in danger and a database to track officers' indiscretions.
Pittinger said bringing Rose’s story to a national level could bring change.
“All of those things are going to make a difference in how policing goes forward but we cannot ignore what we have in front of us right now,” Pittinger said. “I think anything that comes out for discussion purposes now is important.”
