By Margherita Cole on June 8, 2020
This post may contain affiliate links. If you make a purchase, My Modern Met may earn an affiliate commission. Please read our disclosure for more info.
While some contemporary creatives carry on the tradition of botanical illustration in meticulous paintings of flora , artist Tania Lissova has taken on the special challenge of recreating flowers as tiny paper cutouts. Although small, these lovely blooms are composed of several individual hand-cut pieces that are glued together with precise care. If you look closely, you’ll see that Lissova has even alternated the color of paper at places to give her plants three-dimensional “shading.”
Within her beautiful bouquets are stems of daffodils, daisies, peonies, sunflowers, pansies, bluebells, and more. Once she’s grown an abundant garden of flowers, the artist uses them in vibrant arrangements that she sells through her Etsy shop. Her popular Floral Composition collage features a varying number of delicate hand-cut flowers that are glued to starch white paper. Lissova has also found a whimsical way to “plant” her botanical pieces. The Envelope Full of Wildflowers includes 13 of her unique paper flowers that are glued to an open envelope—as though the stationery overflows with life.
In addition to her series of paper flower bouquets, Lissova also cuts adorable indoor houseplants, such as dragon trees, ficus, and different types of succulents. Just as the floral bouquets received their own special wrapping paper and string, Lissova’s plants are placed in their own unique pots. Some are more minimalist in washes of grey or white, while others are adorned with woven basket patterns and chevron prints. The Russian artist eventually gives these potted plants homes in her layered collages of indoor spaces .
You can purchase Lissova’s hand-cut paper plant arrangements via her Etsy shop, and keep up to date with her latest creations by following her on Instagram .
Russian artist Tania Lissova creates charming hand-cut paper plants.
Each piece is made up of several individual pieces that are glued together for a 3D effect.
Lissova also arranges her paper plants in elegant compositions.
My Modern Met granted permission to feature photos by Tania Lissova.
