Debuting in the "Elseworlds" crossover, Ruby Rose's Batwoman has been a prominent part of the Arrowverse since late 2018. In that time, Kate Kane led a season of her solo series, became one of the Paragons that saved the multiverse and joined the pseudo-Justice League. But even with all that under her belt, when Batwoman returns next year, Kate Kane won't be at the helm.
Following a mutual split with The CW, Rose has decided to walk away from the Arrowverse. And with a lead role to fill, the higher-ups have elected to bring in an entirely new character rather than recast Kate Kate. So, with Rose's time as Batwoman over, let's look back at some of her best moments in the cowl.
Continue scrolling to keep reading Click the button below to start this article in quick view.
Ahead of The CW's "Elseworlds" event, it was announced that Batwoman would be joining the Arrowverse and she would be played by Orange Is the New Black actress Ruby Rose. While the character debuted at the end of the crossover's first episode, she didn't truly make her presence known until the second. When Barry, Kara and Oliver travel to Gotham City in search of the Book of Destiny, they run into Kate Kane, who allows them to use a Wayne Enterprises building to plan their next move. However, after a prison break at Arkham Asylum leaves the heroes in trouble, Batwoman appears in spectacular fashion, saving Barry and Oliver from the effects of Scarecrow's Fear Toxin.
Though the character didn't appear in the final episode of the crossover, Batwoman had already left her stamp on the Arrowverse. Her "Elseworlds" debut ranks among the franchise's best, showing just a glimpse of what was to come from DCTV's newest hero.
Batwoman's first episode sees Kate Kane return to Gotham City from a trip abroad after her friend, Sophie, is kidnapped by the Wonderland Gang. After her father dismisses her request to help in the rescue mission, Kate discovers that her cousin, Bruce Wayne, was operating as the Batman. She then dons a modified version of his suit and rescues Sophie from the villainous Alice.
Seeing Kate fight crime using Batman's suit was a treat for fans of the character, and having it happen in the show's debut episode made it that much sweeter. From time to time, Arrowverse shows can drag out a character embracing their heroic side, but that was never the case with Batwoman.
Kate Kane's role in "Crisis On Infinite Earths" was more substantial than many fans anticipated given the character was entering only her second crossover. After being whisked away from Gotham to help save the multiverse, Kate joins up with the Arrowverse's biggest heroes to hunt down the seven Paragons. She and Supergirl head to Earth-99 in search of that universe's Batman, only to find a broken, crazed Bruce Wayne. After it becomes clear that Bruce intends to hurt Kara using Kryptonite, Kate is forced to confront the Bat, and he dies in the ensuing conflict.
When Kate and Kara return to the Waverider, the Monitor informs Batwoman that she is the Paragon of Courage. It takes some convincing, but by the climax of "Crisis," Kate has embraced her destiny as a Paragon and helps her friends to save the multiverse. The crossover put a lot on Kate's shoulders, but she came out the other side a better character.
At the conclusion of "Crisis On Infinite Earths," the Anti-Monitor was defeated and the multiverse was condensed into Earth-Prime. But even with the threat gone, the heroes of the Arrowverse decided to come together to create a response team if the universe ever needed them again. With a table set for eight, this universe's version of the Justice League was formed.
While this moment might seem minor for Kate, it showed just how far her character had come since fans first met her. Batwoman started off as a lone crimefighter who was apprehensive about working with others, and that's what made this event so monumental for her -- and the Arrowverse as a whole.
Following "Crisis," Kate went back to Gotham to attempt to bring Alice back to the side of good. But before she could get to that, Kate meets Parker Torres, a young girl struggling with her queer identity. After Alice threatens to kill both Kate and Parker if her sister doesn't reveal who she is to the world, Batwoman unmasks in front of Parker. The young girl is shocked that an openly lesbian woman was operating as a superhero all this time, and vows to embrace her own sexuality. Kate then takes things a step further by doing an interview with Kara for Catco magazine where she tells the whole world that Batwoman is a lesbian.
A moment of empowerment like this is hard to come by in mainstream television -- and even harder in the superhero genre. Kate being a lesbian has always been an important part of her character, and seeing her embrace it on screen was something that fans of the characters deserved.
Returning to The CW in January 2021, Batwoman stars Rachel Skarsten, Meagan Tandy, Camrus Johnson, Dougray Scott and Nicole Kang. The series airs Sundays at 8 p.m. ET/PT.
