Ruby Rose is gone from Arrowverse's Batwoman TV show, but what does that mean for these storylines involving Alice, Bruce Wayne & more?
The announcement that Ruby Rose would be departing from The CW’s Batwoman was a shocking one, but it wasn’t nearly as surprising as the news that the Arrowverse would be replacing its Batwoman altogether, doing away with Kate Kane’s character and having a new person try on the Batsuit.
With all the changes surrounding the show’s lead, it seems many of the first season’s storylines have been rendered moot heading into season two — especially since so much of the series' conflict has revolved around Kate’s interpersonal relationships. Here are 10 storylines that will probably never be resolved now that Ruby — and Kate — have exited the show.
The relationship between Kate and her twin sister Alice has been a focal point of Batwoman, but one has to wonder if Alice remains a compelling villain without Kate around.
The series left off with Alice determined to enact revenge on her sister — even at the cost of everything and everyone she loves — but without that motivation, what will drive her as one of the show’s big bads? Alice will need a new character arc with Kate out of the picture, and hopefully that won't push her to the sidelines.
Kate’s ex-girlfriend Sophie has plenty going on even without her unresolved feelings toward both Kate and Batwoman, but it’s a shame the series won’t be able to delve further into the tensions between these two characters.
While it's somewhat of a relief that Kate won't be shoved into a love triangle with Sophie and Julia, it's still a shame these two will never get to work things out with one another. (It's also unlikely the new Batwoman will be smitten with Sophie, which could make things awkward, given that Sophie never discovered who was behind the mask.)
Kate and her father had a rocky relationship with one another during season one, and part of that can be attributed to Jacob’s hostility toward Batwoman. Although he had no idea it was Kate beneath the mask and wig, Kate took her father’s disapproval to heart, especially after he betrayed her superhero persona at the end of the season.
While Jacob will no doubt use his position as Commander of the Crows to thwart the new Batwoman , fans will never get to see Kate work through his rejection — and honestly, that's a shame.
Kate’s relationship with her stepsister Mary grew over the course of Batwoman’s first season, eventually leading to Mary becoming a part of Team Batwoman — even if it took a lot of convincing on Kate’s part.
The series seemed to be building Mary up to a bigger role, but now one has to wonder how she’ll be relevant to the show at all. It’s possible her friendship with Luke will enable her to stick around, but whether the new Batwoman will accept Mary as part of the team so willingly is another story.
Although Kate’s fling with Reagan wasn’t integral to Batwoman’s plot, it was fun to see the two interact with one another, especially after Reagan betrayed Kate and stole Lucius’ journal. It certainly seemed they might run into each other again somewhere down the line, but the new Batwoman is unlikely to even know who Reagan is.
With that in mind, fans can assume they won’t be seeing this character again anytime soon. (And if they do, it won't resolve any of the tensions between her and Kate.)
The CW’s Crisis on Infinite Earths crossover built up a friendship between Kate and Kara, with the latter gifting Kate a piece of Kryptonite that was sure to be important to Batwoman’s plot in season two. As Kate already made the decision to keep the Kryptonite during the first-season finale, it’s possible its existence will still come to haunt the new Batwoman. But then, who will want to use it against her when Alice has no issues with whoever replaces Kate?
Also, let's just put it out there: Introducing the new Batwoman to the rest of the Arrowverse all over again — Kara included — sounds just plain exhausting.
Julia Pennyworth revealed that she’d been working with the show’s next big bad — Safiyah Sohail -- in order to protect Kate, but it seems either Julia was lying or she'd been doublecrossed by Safiyah. While there will no doubt still be tensions between Julia and Safiyah going forward -- especially after the latter's veiled threat toward Sophie -- Kate's disappearance takes some of the suspense out of this storyline.
Without ties to both the hero and the villain, Julia could easily remove herself from the conflict entirely. (Or she could make amends with Safiyah, which might actually be interesting.)
There's no guarantee that Batwoman intended to have Parker appear in more episodes after season one , but removing Kate from the picture seems to remove any reason for the teen to return. Although Parker could easily have become a sidekick of sorts to Kate, it's unlikely she'd form a bond with the new Batwoman.
Sadly, this screams missed opportunity, but that's the case with many of the characters connected to Kate. Hopefully, the series will find a way to weave whoever replaces her into these characters' worlds instead of simply writing them out of the story.
When Kate saved Luke and Julia from Arkham Asylum at the end of season one, her arrival created a domino effect that eventually led to Alice freeing all of the dangerous prisoners being held there. Those prisoners began wreaking havoc on Gotham during the last few episodes of the season, and it seemed Kate felt an obligation to right her wrong by hunting the criminals down.
While the new Batwoman will obviously still be determined to put villains behind bars, she probably won't feel the same responsibility to return Arkham's prisoners to their cells -- and that's assuming the show will even focus on the Arkham breakout after the city's hero goes missing.
The first season of Batwoman left fans on a massive cliffhanger, revealing Alice’s plan to give Tommy Elliot Bruce Wayne’s face — and have him infiltrate Team Batwoman and destroy it from the inside.
This plotline is significantly less impactful without Kate, who is related to both Alice and Bruce, but that’s not the only reason it may not be relevant any longer. With the new season supposedly revolving around Kate’s disappearance, one has to wonder if the showrunners are skipping this twist entirely — particularly if there’s a time jump between seasons one and two. So much for that epic cliffhanger.
