The father of five sat with his oldest son, Phillip, who is entering his third season with the Denver Broncos after back-to-back 1,000-yard campaigns and a Pro Bowl nod in 2018. At that time, though, Phillip had recently torn his ACL, ending his senior season at South High School. The two listened to the head coach as he guaranteed Phillip's scholarship would still be honored. The father and son felt like a weight had been lifted off their shoulders when they heard those words. Many other scholarship offers had disappeared after Phillip suffered the injury, but they were given assurance from the man leading the most prominent football program in the state that they could still count on him.
Kyle Shanahan is widely considered one of the best offensive minds in the NFL after guiding the San Francisco 49ers to an appearance in Super Bowl LIV. His dynamic scheme looked unstoppable at times with a punishing running game and complementary pass attack that kept defenders on their heels.
Will Ronald Jones, Bucs rushing improve with Brady?
Since 2016, the Buccaneers rank first in passing yards per game (285.3 yards per game) and 30th in rushing (95.5), per NFL Research. Not since 2015 and Doug Martin has there been a Buccaneers runner to hit 1,000 yards rushing – which is tied for fourth as the longest active droughts, according to NFL Research.
Plenty of history for fathers, sons and NFL football
It's a lineage that was celebrated amid first-ever fashion in the second-to-last game of the 2019 NFL season, as San Francisco 49ers coach Kyle Shanahan went right past his father Mike's handshake attempt and in for the hug in the aftermath of the Niners' NFC Conference Championship win over the Packers .
Joe Namath, Joe Montana, Peyton Manning , Brett Favre -- all ended their careers playing in a uniform other than the one in which they began their journey to the Pro Football Hall of Fame. Tom Brady became the latest legend to illustrate the point that it has become far less common than it was in the past for elite players to wear just one jersey throughout their careers.
