Big toughies perfect for Sydney: the forgotten roses of Alister Clark
Most of the roses at Green E Roses nursery are bare sticks this late in the season, but a few – ‘Mary Guthrie’, ‘Marjory Palmer’ and ‘Lorraine Lee’ – are still producing the odd bloom. These are all roses bred in the early decades of the 20th century by Australia's most famous rose breeder you’ve never heard of: Alister Clark.
Clark was charming, good-looking and clever and, thanks to the wealth of his wife, he never had to make a living. Rose breeding was one of his passions (he also bred daffodils, played polo, loved horse racing and was chair of the Moonee Valley Racing Club). His aim was to create roses for Australian conditions that would thrive without chemicals or extravagant water.
The Alister Clark 'Felix' rose.
He registered more than 150 varieties and donated most of them to state rose societies who propagated and shared them. This largesse saw Clark roses widely planted in the years between the wars. They skirted the bandstand in regional parks, decorated the median strip in main streets, and lounged over countless outdoor dunnies. The roses were tough, carefree and floriferous.
But Clark’s generous gesture ultimately saw his roses sink from sight. With no company to promote them, Clark’s roses faded from garden consciousness in the late 20th century. The fall was abetted by the fashion for hybrid teas and the fact that many of Clark’s roses bloomed only in spring and grew very big, courtesy of Rosa gigantea parentage.
The Alister Clark Memorial Garden in Bulla, Victoria
The Clark roses that remained popular include the repeat-flowering crimson-bloomed climber ‘Black Boy’ and long-flowering apricot-pink ‘Lorraine Lee’, which is also easiest to manage as a climber. Brigitta Greene, of Green E Roses, thinks others in the Clark repertoire deserve a place in Sydney gardens. She prefers the single, or semi-double types, such as ‘Mary Guthrie’, a small grower with rich pink single blooms, and ‘Squatters Dream’, a tall bush rose with saffron yellow flowers.
Greene says the Alister Clarks are the toughest roses they grow. “We have them in a really difficult position, under pine trees with huge roots where they hardly ever get watered and get blasted with hot afternoon westerly sun in the summer. And they have done really well.”
Green E grows all its roses in pots, grafted onto multiflora rootstock. Its next batch of Clarks will be ready in summer.
Meanwhile, you can visit a living catalogue of Clark roses at the Alister Clark Memorial Garden at Bulla, ten minutes from Tullamarine Airport in Victoria, where the roses are charmingly planted behind a bluestone cottage around curving paths and arbours. The show peaks in November, when everything is in bloom and the fragrance is heady. The garden used to be open all the time, but after some of the rare roses were stolen, the gates are now locked – except on the Saturday after Melbourne Cup, November 7.
