NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA - DECEMBER 09: Derrick Rose #25 of the Detroit Pistons celebrates a game-winning score with Blake Griffin #23 against the New Orleans Pelicans at the Smoothie King Center on December 09, 2019 in New Orleans, Louisiana. NOTE TO USER: User expressly acknowledges and agrees that, by downloading and or using this Photograph, user is consenting to the terms and conditions of the Getty Images License Agreement. (Photo by Jonathan Bachman/Getty Images)
Bleacher Report proposed a trade for each team that wasn’t invited to Orlando. The Detroit Pistons trade was certainly interesting.
The Detroit Pistons are one of the eight total teams that were left out of continuation of the NBA season. While there was still technically something to pay for with these teams, it’s in safety’s best interest to keep them at home.
So, fans of each of those teams will be pretty bored for the next few months, as the 2020-2021 season isn’t set to pick up until December .
Bleacher Report kept these fans in mind and created one trade for every single team stuck at home.
Detroit’s proposal was interesting to say the least. Blake Griffin and Derrick Rose get sent to the Chicago Bulls in exchange for Thad Young and Otto Porter Jr. There were no draft picks involved.
At first glance, Pistons fans would naturally be a bit irritated at the lackluster return for their top two players. It’d be one thing if there was at least one draft pick involved, but maybe if this were a real scenario, there would be.
In reality, what this does for Detroit is continue to shed salary. As the author of the article at hand (Andy Bailey) correctly notes, if Griffin can’t return to at least 85-90 percent of the player that we was during the 2018-2019 campaign, then his remaining salary will be quite the load.
Admittedly, even with the size of his contract, it’s really not all that damaging to Detroit’s cap situation. They’re set to have around $30 million in open cap space this season alone, and it’s set to go up as the seasons move along. (Assuming COVID-19 doesn’t have future financial implications for the league, which it likely will)
