A male slow worm. Slow worms are one of the UK’s six reptile species.
Under a small, sun-baked mat, a curled metallic-gold slow worm lies basking in the heat, the dark stripe running down its body revealing its youth. Sensing attention, it begins to wriggle away, revealing a companion, which speeds rapidly into the grasses in the opposite direction.
After a winter of social distancing, slow worms – a type of legless lizard that grows up to half a metre long and is often mistaken for a snake – have been venturing out of hibernation to enjoy warming their cold-blooded bodies in the spring sun.
Picnics may be out for now, but an assortment of rugs and mats placed around Sutton Ecology Centre, a secluded two-hectare nature reserve tucked away behind a main road in Carshalton, south London , are playing host to a more subterranean kind of socialising.
The amorous slow worms, which come in an array of polished silvers, golds and browns depending on age and gender, mate for up to 10 hours at a time in May; there’s a good chance that peeling back the corner of one of the mats in the centre during peak season will reveal two entwined.
“It is always a treat to find one,” says Barbara O’Keeffe, a retired local resident who has volunteered at the site for eight years. “When you gently pull back one of the mats to look, for a second you think there’s nothing there, then there’s a glint of gold.”
What is wild cities week?
This week, the Guardian's Age of Extinction site is looking at biodiversity in cities and urban areas around the world, shining a spotlight on the under-appreciated world of nature hidden among the highrises and busy roads.
Around 55% of the world’s population live in urban areas and that number is projected to rise to 68% by 2050. Nature’s role in the wellbeing and happiness of billions of people will be more important than ever. While urbanisation is a major driver of biodiversity loss, many conservationists and town planners are trying to make built-up areas more nature-friendly. The role of green spaces in urban areas has even been formalised in a draft UN agreement to halt and reverse biodiversity loss, often referred to as the Paris agreement for nature.
The Covid-19 outbreak has seen cities and towns across the world go into lockdown which has enabled wildlife such as wild boar, deer, monkeys, foxes and even lions to venture into territory previously dominated by humans. It has also offered us the chance to notice and appreciate the natural world in cities in an unprecedented way.
In this special series of reports we'll be looking at how animals and plants adapt to city life, what to look out for right now and how we can encourage more wild cities in the future.
Thank you for your feedback.
Though they are rarely seen out in the open, slow worms are common throughout the UK. But the ecology centre – which packs in woodlands, wildflower meadows, and a pond currently teeming with tadpoles and wildfowl chicks – is a hotspot.
“It is positioned at the point where the chalky North Downs meets London clay, in an area fed by one of only about 200 chalk streams in the world,” says David Warburton, senior biodiversity officer for the London Borough of Sutton, which owns the centre. “The site is ideal for reptiles such as slow worms. We have a really healthy population of them, but they are isolated by surrounding roads and housing.”
The reptiles – which live for up to 30 years (the oldest on record was a captive 54-year-old male in Copenhagen zoo) – feast on slugs, snails and insects. In turn they provide food for various birds, as well as badgers and hedgehogs – numbers of which have declined dramatically in the past two decades.
Like all six of the UK’s reptile species , slow worms are protected by the Wildlife and Countryside Act, making it illegal to intentionally kill, injure or sell them. But this doesn’t stop them regularly falling victim to carelessly wielded shovels, a risk that could increase as lockdown increases the amount of time people spend in their gardens during the slow worm mating season.
