By Dayna Farrington | Health | Published:
More than 4,500 counselling sessions were carried out NSPCC's Childline service in the West Midlands as children struggle with suicidal thoughts and feelings, new figures have revealed.
In 2018/19, Childline delivered 24,447 counselling sessions to young people – a three-year increase of 25 per cent.
It means, on average, 67 children a day are receiving help from the service.
Childline's West Midlands base in Birmingham delivered 4,660 of those counselling sessions in 2018/19 to young people from across the country.
Of the national total, most of those reaching out were teenagers, but there has also been a rise in under 11's receiving help – a rise of 87 per cent since 2015/16.
Young people contacting Childline with suicidal thoughts and feelings cited specific concerns about mental health, self-harm, family relationships and problems at school and college. Girls were more likely to talk about these feelings, with five times as many receiving counselling sessions than boys.
NSPCC has this week launched a nationwide campaign – KIDS In Real Life – urging people to help them save a child's life. It is highlighting that with so much of childhood today happening online, there are more ways than ever for children to hide how they really feel.
The NSPCC is calling on people to show their support through a ‘Pledge to Protect’ and make a donation to fund vital services like Childline which are there for children and teenagers when they have nowhere else to turn.
The campaign is being brought to life by a series of films and adverts to raise awareness of the struggles many children and teenagers face. The stories of children and young people featured throughout the campaign are based on real life experiences of young people who have contacted the NSPCC.
Hollie, who suffered from chronic anxiety as a teenager which led her to try and take her own life, said she was saved by Childline.
She said: "Following a suicide attempt I contacted Childline and spoke to a counsellor about how I was feeling. It was that conversation that stopped me from trying to take my life again when I got off the phone.
“Over the next couple of years, I stopped talking, walking, eating and taking care of myself. There were also more stays in hospital.
"Yet despite not talking to anyone, I would often call Childline and chat to a counsellor when I was feeling low. The service was my lifeline during my darkest hours.”
Esther Rantzen, founder and president of Childline, added: "Over the last 10 years we have seen a rise in the number of children describing their feelings of such intense unhappiness that they tell Childline they want to end their own lives.
"It is deeply disturbing that we have reached a point where, on average, 67 children a day are receiving help for suicidal thoughts and feelings.
“This new campaign highlights that many of these profoundly unhappy young people hide their feelings to those around them online, bottling up their suicidal thoughts which may become overwhelming."
