Everyone experiences feelings of sadness occasionally, but depression is different. It persists over time and can cause a variety of other symptoms.
Depression is a medical condition that affects more than 300 million people globally , according to the World Health Organization (WHO). People sometimes call it clinical depression or major depressive disorder.
In this article, learn about the common symptoms of depression, as well as the treatment options and when to seek help.
There are several different types of depression, and the symptoms vary among individuals.
While anyone can experience some of these symptoms from time to time, a doctor will only diagnose depression when a certain cluster of symptoms appear, and they persist for 2 weeks or longer.
Mood changes are one of the most common symptoms of depression. A person who has depression may feel sad or down for long periods.
They may also say that they feel “empty” or unable to feel joy or happiness. Some people may describe this sadness as despair.
Depression can make people feel hopeless, as though there is no foreseeable end to how they are feeling.
A person may also feel helpless. They may say or think that no one can help them get better and that they will always feel depressed.
A person who has depression may feel that they are worthless or have no meaning in their life.
They may believe that they are a burden to others or that the world or their family is better off without them.
Guilt is a normal reaction after a person says or does something that they regret, but people with depression may have ongoing feelings of guilt that are inappropriate or disproportionate to their situation.
They may focus a lot of energy on this guilt and feel bad about themselves and things that they have said or done — even events that have long since passed.
Some people with depression lose interest in things that they used to enjoy, such as sports, going out with friends, music, or sexual activity. They may turn down offers or opportunities to do activities or be with others.
A person with depression may seem to be angry with others. They may become easily annoyed and irritated.
The National Institutes of Mental Health state that men are more likely than women to experience irritability and anger as symptoms of depression. However, these symptoms may also occur in women and children.
Irritability also has links with other symptoms of depression. For example, if a person is not sleeping well and feels tired, they may be more prone to irritability.
Some people with depression may find it difficult to get up in the morning because they feel exhausted and run down.
They may feel too fatigued to do everyday tasks, such as going to work or cooking meals. They may spend a lot of time at home resting or sleeping.
The fatigue of depression can make a person feel as though they are always tired, despite getting enough sleep at night. However, others with depression do experience poor sleep.
Sometimes, a person with depression may be unable to sleep well, potentially having trouble either falling or staying asleep. They may stay up very late at night or wake up very early in the morning.
A person with depression may experience mood changes.
Depression can interfere with a person’s cognitive abilities. They may have trouble focusing or concentrating on personal or professional matters. They may also struggle to make decisions, including small, everyday choices.
People with depression may also find that they cannot remember things as well as they did previously. They may forget appointments or commitments and might not recall things that they said or did recently.
People with depression may lose their desire and appetite for food, which can cause weight loss. They may have little interest in eating and go for long periods without food.
Some people may eat more when they are depressed. Food can become a comfort mechanism for negative feelings or a way to deal with boredom or being alone.
Depression can make it difficult for people to feel motivated to get outside or exercise. Combined with an increase in food intake, this can lead to weight gain.
A person with depression may experience persistent physical symptoms that do not respond to treatment.
