A Glasgow University survey is examining UK adults’ responses to the coronavirus crisis, including levels of anxiety, depression and stress.
People who feel trapped and lonely during the coronavirus lockdown must be swiftly identified and given the help they need, one of the experts leading the UK’s assessment of the outbreak’s psychological impact has said.
Prof Rory O’Connor, of the University of Glasgow’s institute of health and wellbeing, has overseen what is believed to be the largest nationally representative survey of the adult population’s response to the crisis.
“Understandably, the initial response was about the physical containment of the virus, but we need to now ensure that we are protecting people’s mental health,” he said. “We do know from an initial snapshot survey that people are reporting elevated levels of anxiety, depression and stress. That’s why it’s so urgent that we identify who is vulnerable so we can put measures in place.”
But he cautioned that, while much of the support offered was likely to be digital while physical distancing continues, we must still ensure those interventions have been properly trialled: “One of my concerns is that in our rush to be supportive there’s this widespread rollout of digital technologies that are not evidence-based.”
The survey of 3,077 UK adults recruited according to age, sex and socioeconomic background is being led by the University of Glasgow in collaboration with Samaritans and the Scottish Association for Mental Health .
The survey is exploring new territory, O’Connor said. “We know from research into Sars in China that there can be a mental health impact, but we don’t know who is likely to be affected.”
With interim findings expected in the next few weeks, O’Connor is hopeful that researchers can gain an impression of the impact of lockdown, along with indications about the groups of people who need immediate support.
Central to this, said O’Connor, was understanding what the factors are that predict feelings of loneliness and entrapment in some people but not others.
“What’s the difference between people who are socially isolated and do feel lonely, and those who don’t? If you look at the research on loneliness, it is such a strong predictor of death by physical causes as well as death by suicide.
“Another factor to understand is that of entrapment. People feel trapped by mental pain, but in this current context they are feeling physical entrapment. What is the interface between lockdown measures and psychological entrapment? Again, we know entrapment is such an important predictor of depression and suicidal thoughts and behaviour.”
As regards entrapment, for example, participants will be asked to rate on a sliding scale the extent to which the statements relate to them, such as “I feel powerless to change things” and “I feel trapped inside myself”.
The respondents will be surveyed six times over six months, completing a range of questions covering their background, living arrangements, lifestyle factors such as drinking and exercise, mental health and wellbeing, their experience of Covid-19, financial issues, as well as any pre-existing health problems. They will also be asked about feelings of entrapment, loneliness and other psychological variables.
O’Connor was one of a group of experts who wrote in the journal Lancet Psychiatry last week highlighting the need for a thorough and coordinated programme of research into the potentially profound and long-lasting impact of both the virus itself and the experience of lockdown and other measures on the population’s mental health.
While the team will have a much clearer picture after six months, O’Connor is certain that the economic consequences, already felt by so many, will have a significant effect. “Our feeling is, if there is an impact, it will be much longer term: there will be a short-term impact, but it will really be when the economic consequences kick in.
“We know this will have a disproportionate effect on people who are already vulnerable – that could be having pre-existing mental health problems, but it could also mean those who are feeling trapped, or those experiencing financial hardship. Now we are trying to get a sense of who we need to identify and then how they can best be protected.”
