From New York to the Netherlands and far beyond, the flower trade is in a state of crisis
The arrival of spring is one of the few things the coronavirus has so far proven unable to disrupt. And while that may be welcome news for those of us who have been waiting for more colorful views from our quarantine windows, it's a sore subject for participants in the multibillion-dollar global flower trade. The industry, which is an excellent example of just how globalized our world has grown to be, is in the midst of a pandemic-induced free fall with no immediate end in sight, as Bloomberg reports.
COVID-19 has put an indefinite pause on various activities—from everyday events to design industry mainstays such as home stagings, decorator show houses, and photo shoots. As such, this sudden halt in activity has caused floral demand to wilt to previously unthinkable levels. It's a phenomenon that's touched every link within the $8.5 billion industry's globalized supply chain, from the florists who place wholesale orders to the massive auction houses of the Netherlands to the farmers around the world who have no outlet for a product that stubbornly refuses to stop growing. Laura Clare, a New Jersey florist who normally orders at least $5,000 a week from wholesalers but is now in search of a Small Business Administration loan, described the situation to Bloomberg as totally unprecedented. “I’ve been through 9/11, I’ve been through Hurricane Irene, Hurricane Sandy,” she said. “I’ve never seen anything like this before.”
Buy now for unlimited access and all of the benefits that only members get to experience.
The flower auction houses of the Netherlands, a clearinghouse through which 40% of the world’s flowers pass, are likely feeling the same way. Royal FloraHolland , which manages four massive auction sites that generally inspire more than 100,000 daily transactions, saw activity grind to a disturbing halt in mid-March. As rose prices cratered to $.08 a stem on March 16, the auction firm realized it had no choice but to destroy almost 70% of its usual supply, a process that took a week and a half at its Naaldwijk facility. With once-bustling auction halls all but empty, the company now expects a cumulative loss in the neighborhood of $2 billion.
Unsurprisingly, the flower market’s swift collapse has created problems at cultivation sources. Large rose growers like Nini Flowers in Kenya have had to cope with lost sales amid fixed cultivation costs, a situation made even more painful given that staff have had to harvest flowers in order to destroy them. If the situation persists, the estimated 150,000 already struggling workers on Kenyan flower farms will see their jobs disappear.
The floral industry is far from unique in experiencing a sudden pandemic-induced collapse that’s wreaked havoc on supply chains. American farmers have had to dump various crops that can’t make it to market in time before they perish. Elsewhere, furniture retailers , who depend on brick-and-mortar purchases, are struggling at levels that not even a surge in online sales can help counterbalance.
Our website, archdigest.com, offers constant original coverage of the interior design and architecture worlds, new shops and products, travel destinations, art and cultural events, celebrity style, and high-end real estate as well as access to print features and images from the AD archives.
