‘You buy a guitar and it burns like a coal in your hand’ … Love fronting Hole in 1995. Photograph: Ian Dickson/REX/Shutterstock
Understanding the mechanics of songwriting, and finding ways to channel influences and experiences, is important – but attitude counts too. “Julian told us to live your life as if you’re being followed by a movie camera,” Barbur later said. “I remember Courtney started walking very self-assuredly, head up, fast.”
A decade later, when Love was the frontwoman of Hole and married to Nirvana’s Kurt Cobain, Cope took out an advert in the NME that said of her: “Free us from Nancy Spungen-fixated heroin A-holes who cling to our greatest groups and suck out their brains.” What was it that had got under Cope’s skin? “She was always in your face,” says Connor. “I was able to detach myself, whereas she lasered in on him. I can understand it oppressing him.”
Barbur is less forgiving. “Julian was crazy. It was part of the charm. I don’t want to be a bitch, but maybe by this point she’d got a little famous and he’d got a little bit bitter. He hadn’t seen her since she was 17, 18. He probably saw this bratty, obnoxious girl was now a superstar pretty much, and thought, ‘Damn her.’ I don’t know. She really adored Julian.”
Love wrote to Cope and said that his ad had made her violently ill: “Imagine that it’s 1983, 82, 81 and 80, you’re a teenage piece of white trash and not even remotely decorative, but you love the great rock dream and it’s all you’ve got … And you buy a guitar and it burns like a coal in your hand and you feel some power and for once it isn’t the power of being made fun of or picked on, it’s […] the power to change the fucking world.”
I suggest to Connor that if Love had been a bloke with handfuls of drugs, bowling through life all mouthy and opinionated, then she’d have been treated like some hero from a Kerouac novel. “Undoubtedly. We were very young and so was she. And being in your face like that, that was new. We were quiet young fellas, it was a closed little network.”
