A banner will be unveiled to honor former Wake Forest basketball coach Dave Odom before the Deacons' game against Georgia Tech on Wednesday night.
Dave Odom takes a seat in Joel Coliseum’s media room in a blue sweater — don’t worry, neither hated shade — and lets you know he’s ready for questions with an upbeat declaration: “All right, here we go, come on, throw it to me!”
So the first question, as broad as possible: What is Wednesday night going to mean to Odom?
And that’s when Odom, rarely one short on what to say, doesn’t have the “word capacity” to explain that.
“I think I’ll know more about it when I walk out on the court," Odom said this week. "I’ll get a better sense for what it’s like. I know it’s special, I know it’s going to be heartfelt. And I know that, just from, you know, a certain amount of introspection right now, it’s going to be very difficult to get through it without a swell of emotion.”
A banner will be raised to honor the former Wake Forest coach before Wednesday night’s game against Georgia Tech, and the 1994-95 Deacons team, which won the school’s first ACC championship since 1962, will be honored at halftime.
Odom's teams were 240-132 in his 12 seasons at Wake Forest from 1989 to 2001, his crowning achievements being back-to-back ACC titles in 1995 and ’96.
But back then he wasn’t thinking at that time of having his banner raised one day at the Joel, obviously — and he’s fully aware that he didn’t get there alone.
“The thing that I’ve thought about since (athletics director) John Currie came to me and said, ‘We’d like to do this,’ the thing I know is that I certainly didn’t get here by myself,” Odom said. “Every staff I ever had was stellar.
Dave Odom’s teams went 240-132 in his 12 seasons at Wake Forest from 1989 to 2001. He and his 1994-95 team will be honored tonight.
“All of the players were committed and good and skilled and they got better and they worked hard and they committed themselves to excellence, and they got beyond being afraid, which I think was really important. I mean, they played anybody, anytime, anywhere.”
Odom says and means that about his whole team from that breakthrough season, but two obvious names come to the forefront: Tim Duncan and Randolph Childress.
Childress is ready to be a part of a night that’s “long overdue,” he said.
“I’m just honored that I’m able to be here, a part of it. Wish I could be more with the festivities and not with the game, to be honest,” Childress said. “I’m super happy for him, he’s so deserving of everything and I’m happy that a lot of our guys are able to come back.
“We’re going to have a pretty big turnout, a lot of guys are making a concerted effort to get here and that’s not an easy thing to do in the middle of the week with families and everything else.”
Childress is the only player who seems guaranteed to be at Wednesday night’s festivities, but it sounds like the program will welcome back plenty of players and staff who were part of the program.
“Listen, when you’re dealing at this level, you don’t know if anybody is going to be here,” Odom said. “Muggsy Bogues called the other day, he said, ‘Coach, I’m coming. I think.’ I said, ‘Whaddya mean, you think?’
“He said, well the Hornets are out in Chicago, I’m doing TV, but I’ve got a plane that’s going to get me back. I think.
“I’m not verifying or saying that anybody is going to be here. I think the one that’s absolutely positive is Randolph. He’s already here. But we’re hopeful that they’ll all make it.”
And Odom can’t wait to see them.
“February is a love month, it’s a sharing month," he said. "And that’s what we do, we share. It’ll be special to have those guys here with me. It wouldn’t be quite the same if they couldn’t get here. I mean, it would still be special.
“But those guys were right at the … point of making it happen for me. It’s going to be really good, I really think it’s going to be good.”
Journal file photo by Christine Rucker -- 12/07/00 -- Wake Forest University coach Dave Odom.
Photo by Allen Aycock -- Wake's coach Dave Odom watches the action from the bench. dit spt wake17 6 ayc Head coach Dave Odom, flanked by Ernie Nestor (left) and Frank Haith, says good assistants are important to a program.
Journal Photo by Ted Richardson -- 12/16/2000 -- Wake Forest University Coach Dave Odom put Rafael Vidaurreta (#41) into the lineup for the first time this season during the first half against Georgia. Vidaurreta had been out due to a recent knee surgery.
Interim coach for Duke, Pete Gaudet, left, talks with Wake Forest head coach Dave Odom Wednesday, Jan. 11, 1995, before the game in Winston-Salem, N.C. Gaudet is filling in indefinitely while Duke's head coach Mike Krzyzewski is recovering from back surgery.
Journal Photo By Chris English -- 11/08/00 -- Wake Forest's Head Coach Dave Odom, leans as he watches a shot roll out of the basket during Wednesday night matchup with Club Ventspils of Latvia.
Journal Photo By Chris English -- 03/09/01 -- Wake's Head coach Dave Odom watches the final seconds roll of the clock. Wake got beat by Maryland.
Journal photo by Christine Rucker -- 03/05/99 -- 3rd game in the Atlantic Coast Conference at the Charlotte Coliseum. Wake Forest vs. NC State. Wake Forest Coach Dave Odom talks to one of his players during the first half of the game, after several fouls at that point had brought them up to nine team fouls. The score at halftime, 27-27.
Journal Photo By Chris English -- 11/30/99 -- Wake Forest head coach Dave Odom celebrates a halftime edge at the end of overtime at the Joel Coliseum in Winston-Salem.
Photo by:Christine Rucker -- 1/2/99 -- Coach Odom talks with Darius Songaila during time out in the second half of game against Va.
Photo by Chris English -- 2/6/01 -- Wake Forest head coach Dave Odom disputes a call.
Journal photo by Jennifer Rotenizer -- 09/27/08 -- Dave Odom (from left), Len Mattiace, Hunter Kemper, Tim Duncan and Ernie Accorsi were inducted into the N.C. Sports Hall of Fame on Saturday during half-time of the Wake Forest game against Navy.
Journal Photo By Christine Rucker -- 2/6/01 -- Coach Dave Odom questions a call in the second half of game against Carolina.
Journal photo by Christine Rucker -- 03/05/99 -- 3rd game in the Atlantic Coast Conference at the Charlotte Coliseum, Wake Forest vs. NC State, second half. Coach Dave Odom reacts to one of Robert O'Kelley's turnovers to loose the ball to NCState, O'Kelley made 11 turnovers, loosing the ball, the highest in ACC history.
Journal Photo Chris English -- 03/10/00 -- WFU's Head Coach Dave Odom reacts to a call during the second half. Wake went on to defeat UNC.
