Jun 19, 2020 at 16:35 pm UTC / Last Updated at Jun 19, 2020 at 16:54 pm UTC
Demi Rose just lit up IG in the tiniest bikini with a cowboy hat to top it off. The 25-year-old model and social media sensation has made headlines amid COVID-19 for complaining that she has "crochet bikinis" she can't wear – Demi hadn't gone crochet with her Thursday look, but she'd definitely knocked out another swimwear snap. The Brit, followed by 14.1 million on her Instagram, even took it down the full cowgirl route, rocking faded jeans and cowboy boots. Rainy London may be the brunette's quarantine base, but Demi knows how to turn up the Wild Wild West vibe.
Related to what you're reading:
Scroll for a snippet from the story that comes less than a month after Demi – who survived anorexia nervosa – was body-shamed for gaining "weight" during lock-down. The model, who once weighed only 80 pounds, was seen showing off her stunning curves and flat stomach in selfie mode as she stood outdoors and peeping the camera from under a black cowboy hat. The Birmingham, U.K. native had her cleavage on show via a black-and-gold bikini top – perfect curled hair and a direct gaze completed the look. More of her insane bikini body below.
Not A Fan Of Lock-Down, Can't Wear Her 'Crochet Bikini Stuff'
Demi, who recently went fully nude , has been speaking out about the COVID-19 pandemic. Earlier this year, she admitted her frustrations, saying: "All I have with me is crochet stuff and bikinis. I'm sick of wearing all the other stuff that I bought that is loungey. What is your bet that this will be over in June, July, August... What do you think, like never?" The words came shortly after Demi expressed anxiety over "bare" grocery shelves at British chain Sainsbury. The model has also revealed the unusual food habits she keeps.
Demi's Instagram stories will show her love of smoothies and working out. Meanwhile, late 2018 brought the model in candid mode as she said: "My figure just gains weight so fast. Any bad thing I eat my body isn't used to it and just puts on the weight. That means no birthday cake" She added: "All I've eaten today is nuts. I've managed to eat a whole pot. I feel guilty as there's a lot of fat in the nuts. That's my treat. So I'm happy." Scroll for that mind-blowing snakeskin bikini photo.
Related to what you're reading:
