British model and social media sensation Demi Rose has been brightening her fans' dark quarantine days with posts that electrify all, including Instagram. Her 14.1 million Instagram fans are always in for a treat, and this weekend was no different, with Demi posting a series of pictures that showed her on a beach, wearing what her mama gave her, and of course, beautiful swimsuits that left little to the imagination. Fans dub her a goddess, and with that body, they aren't missing the mark by much.
Related to what you're reading:
Her latest post is a series of three pictures showing her gorgeous body in a gold wrap swimsuit that was nearly see-through. She captioned the post as "Summer 2020 isn’t canceled babies" and fans called her a summer goddess.  Another fan commented that they could not believe how beautiful she was, which should have been a balm to her after she was trolled for having put on weight during the quarantine, which is all hogwash if you look at those spectacular curves.
Demi Rose is over it all though, as one of her posts says so pretty clearly. She wrote, "I’m over people shaming people for how they look, I’m over people that aren’t pure and transparent, I’m over lockdown, I’m over not being able to connect with all my friends, I’m over a lot. But I’m not over loving as freely and as openly as I can, appreciating all that is, letting go of what doesn’t serve me, and having faith in all that’s to come. What are you over?" Noone is over her though, not on Instagram at least.
The latest posts of Demi Rose hark back to the time when she used to travel all over the world, posting exotic pictures of locales she visited. While it all stopped because of the lockdown, she still has been making the best use of her home, studios and other locations to shoot pictures that are getting hotter by the day, and exposing more and more of those delicious curves that fans cannot get enough of. As one fan rightly commented on one of her posts, "you would look good in a potato sack."
Related to what you're reading:
