Despite suffering a slew of injuries, becoming a journeyman and being written off by just about everyone in the basketball world, Detroit Pistons point guard Derrick Rose has been on an absolute tear throughout the 2019-20 regular season. Especially red hot at the moment, Rose has put up gaudy individual numbers in addition to keeping the Pistons afloat in the Eastern Conference standings.
Because of Rose’s reemergence this season, the 10th place Pistons will ultimately have a decision to make in the coming weeks. Will Detroit decide to trade Rose in order to bolster the team’s draft capital and the future of its roster going forward?
Although only time will tell whether or not “D-Rose” is eventually moved by the Pistons, there will definitely be more than just a few suitors waiting in line to potentially acquire the veteran signal-caller. Of those interested franchises from around the league, there are three, in particular, that stands out the most — all three of which remain in the thick of the NBA playoff picture with 2020 officially upon us.
Of course, the Philadelphia 76ers have Ben Simmons at the point guard position with the Australian signal-caller quickly transforming into one of the best in the league at his position. However, with starting center Joel Embiid once again unable to stay healthy, both Simmons and the 76ers as a whole can use as much help as they can get on the offensive end of the floor these days.
Detroit Pistons point guard Derrick Rose would add to the 76ers in more ways than one as well as the Chicago Bulls legend would add some offense, a veteran leader in the locker room and additional postseason experience when the time comes.
It has reached that point in the regular season when the already loaded teams stock up on even more talent ahead of the postseason. For the first-place Los Angeles Lakers , who have dominated the Western Conference all year long, that time of the year is rapidly approaching.
With superstar forward, LeBron James and former New Orleans Pelicans big man Anthony Davis currently thriving alongside one another in Los Angeles, adding a veteran player at a premier position like Detroit Pistons point guard Derrick Rose would only deepen the team’s roster ahead of the postseason. With James playing a lot of point guard alongside another veteran in Rajon Rondo, Rose would provide the Lakers with an additional scoring threat as Rondo’s game focuses primarily on assists and sneaky rebounds.
Of the three teams on this list, the San Antonio Spurs are probably the least likely to make a deal of this magnitude ahead of this year’s trade deadline. However, it is impossible to count out longtime Spurs head coach Gregg Popovich, especially with San Antonio just on the outside looking in at the current playoff picture in the Western Conference.
As it stands today, the Spurs sit in ninth place in the Western Conference standings and could use a boost for the back end of the 2019-20 regular season. Adding an explosive player like Detroit Pistons point guard Derrick Rose would immediately bolster San Antonio’s roster for the final stretch of the year.
