On Friday Bleacher Report released a list ranking every NBA MVP since 2000 . Derrick Rose, still the youngest MVP in league history, came in at No. 19 on the list. Rose's ranking placed him one spot ahead of Allen Iverson's 2001 MVP campaign and one spot behind Steve Nash's second MVP season in 2006.
In the 2010-11 season, the Bulls won 62 games and were the No. 1 seed in the Eastern Conference over the LeBron James-led Miami Heat. That season was Rose's third in the league and the then-22-year-old averaged a robust 25.0 points and 7.7 assists per game while maintaining a 55.0% true shooting percentage.
Two minutes of Derrick Rose just carving up the defense and finishing below the rim during his 2010-2011 MVP season.
— Timeless Sports (@timelesssports_) April 18, 2020
Though Rose's individual 2010-11 season was excellent, the team itself was propped up by an elite defense. On top of that, a staple of the Tom Thibodeau era Bulls was the ability to succeed no matter who was in the lineup, a true "next man up" mentality. To that point, Bleacher Report's list notes that the 2010-11 Bulls posted a plus-5.8 net rating when Rose was off the floor, further evidence of how good the team was sans Rose.
Rose is still no doubt one of the most impressive MVPs in league history. A 22-year-old guard from Chicago helped bring his hometown franchise back to the forefront of the NBA title conversation, and that amazing feat was enough to place Rose ahead of the only guard on Bleacher Report's list with a lower true shooting percentage in Iverson.
In recent weeks, dialogue surrounding the return of basketball has centered on one vital consideration: Whether jumpstarting the NBA and WNBA seasons would distract from the fight for social justice.
On Friday, Renee Montgomery of the Atlanta Dream became the first post-pandemic player from either league to announce she would sit out the WNBA’s 2020 campaign, which is currently scheduled to begin in late July at the IMG Academy in Bradenton, Fla., to continue pursuing social justice reform . (Note: In January, Maya Moore announced her intent to skip a second straight season to continue her work in the area of criminal justice reform .)
In the NBA, Kyrie Irving, Dwight Howard and Avery Bradley — among others — have spearheaded a push to consider the possibility that sports returning might expedite a return to normalcy the country can’t currently afford, and draw players away from the opportunity to take action in their communities.
— Jill Martin (@ByJillMartin) June 14, 2020
Others, like Ed Davis of the Utah Jazz , have argued the merits of playing ball, particularly given the possibly irrevocable financial ramifications of leaving the season unfinished.
Some have also argued there is potential for both leagues to leverage their spot at the center of the American sports universe to bring increased awareness to the fight against racial injustice. The NBA has pledged to concoct a plan in conjunction with the NBPA to that end, and WNBPA President Nneka Ogwumike said in a statement that announced the beginning of the league’s restart plan that the WNBA would use its season to “amplify our collective voice,” citing past advocacy for Black Lives Matter, the LGBTQ+ community, gun control, voting rights, #MeToo and mental health.
Now, Angel McCoughtry of the Las Vegas Aces has posited a concrete idea of a way to bring that mission onto the court. McCoughtry posted on her Instagram account multiple prototype designs of her Aces No. 35 jersey — one marked by Breonna Taylor’s name, one with George Floyd’s and one with “Black Lives Matter.”
