A family-run rose growing firm has stopped commercially breeding the flowers after more than 140 years.
Dickson Roses in Newtownards, County Down, closed that part of the business last year.
The firm was founded in 1836 and was granted a Royal Warrant by Queen Victoria in 1885. The breeding business began in 1879.
But owner, Colin Dickson, who is now in his 60s, said his two daughters wanted to pursue different career paths and would not be working for the firm.
Tara graduated in fashion design from De Montfort University and Lauren graduated in psychology from Queen's University, Belfast.
"Last year was my last year doing cross-pollinating on a commercial basis," Mr Dickson told BBC News NI.
"It takes between eight and 10 years from the cross-pollination stage to commerce. This means that there are sufficient varieties to evaluate and potentially introduce for several years to come."
Image caption Lauren Dickson (left) recently graduated in psychology, while Tara graduated in fashion design
But there "won't be anyone following" him on, he added.
While he said this was a pity, he understood his daughters' choices.
However Mr Dickson said: "The other aspects of the business will remain unchanged -  I will be growing and selling roses, offering roses for naming, licensing and introducing roses at home and overseas for some time yet."
Dickson's specialises in creating new varieties of roses, exporting its creations across the world.
It has also racked up numerous awards. Lovestruck, a Dickson-bred rose, won a UK Rose of the Year award in 2018.
Dickson Roses also have a strong track record at Belfast's Rose Week every July.
The company was founded in 1836 but it was the second generation - Mr Dickson's great-great grandfather George - who began breeding in 1879.
But in recent years the firm has felt the squeeze of changing times in the industry.
"When I first started in 1977, there were about 330 growers and, at the last count, there are only 33 in the UK," said Mr Dickson.
Mr Dickson maintains that roses remain a major force in the floral market, with UK breeders producing an estimated 7m roses each year.
Image caption Colin Dickson with a bed of his Racy Lady roses in Wellington, New Zealand, in January 2017
"Roses are still, I would say, Britain's favourite flower," he said.
But smaller, family-run firms like his sometimes find themselves being priced out of the market.
"Some have people retiring, some have died," he said.
But rose lovers can still see displays of Dickson breeds.
The company has a display at the Summer Rose Fair at Sir Thomas and Lady Dixon Park in south Belfast, where more than 45,000 roses will be on show until next month.
