The creative world outside of the M25 is thriving. These awards identify, reward and celebrate the best work across advertising, digital and design from outside London. Big or small, old or new, anyone can enter - providing the client or agency is headquartered outside the M25.
Past winners have included: Bray Leino, Cheetham Bell, The Leith Agency, One Black Bear, BBC Creative, B&W Studio, Havas Lynx, Chapter, McCann Manchester, TBWA Manchester, Rees Bradley Hepburn, Gerry Farrell Inc, Silver Agency, Baxter and Bailey, MadeBrave, Thompson Brand Partners, Split, Forever Beta and Contagious – to name just a few.
Who is on this year's jury?
Below is a breakdown of just eight members of the judging panel. More will be added daily.
Having been in the Media & Marketing industry for over 30 years, my biggest achievement to date has been launching Inferno (one of London's leading integrated agencies), and watching it grow year-on-year. I'm told that my key speciality is business lunches, and I can't really argue with that! On the more serious side, new business and networking are my cups of tea. As a Founding Partner I also look after young talent and nurture our future industry superstars. I like the personal touch and have successfully seen through the acquisition/transaction of Inferno into FCB (IPG) and one thing about me that isn’t commonly known. I used to be a professional football player!
Increasingly, the brightest and the best aren't exclusively found in London. There are gems (some hidden) all over the place, generating outstanding work for Clients, and these awards showcase that. I want to see work that works - a perennial but often overlooked criteria for judges and to see entries that emotionally connect with audiences as a way to persuade them to take action.
Having been hired by Sir John Hegarty at BBH, Galton went on to create effective, award winning campaigns for brands such as Levi’s, Sony and Audi. He then moved to Leagas Delaney to become head of art and partner to Tim Delaney. In 1999, Galton started his own agency, Hooper Galton, which after 12 successful years was acquired by VCCP. He is also founder of Bang Said The Gun, and more recently Beehive.
The Roses are Noel Gallagher sticking two fingers up to the world. What I want to see is bold, intuitive thinking at its best. Something that makes me look. If you don’t grab the attention, everything else is irrelevant.
Bedwell is managing director of independent creative agency, Above+Beyond, working with the likes of Subway, Amazon and Pilgrims Choice. Starting out at BBH on the Levi’s and British Airways accounts, he embarked upon a career that seen him work with a diverse range of clients including PlayStation, Guinness, MasterCard, Unilever (Lynx) and EA Games, at agencies including Wieden+Kennedy, Mother, AMVBBDO and McCann London.
Something that hits me in the gut straight away and then makes a whole heap of sense in my head afterwards. Distinctive and modern creative solutions that stand out from the sea of lazy sameness that’s rive within so many categories right now, smartly grounded in being a credible (and ownable) thing for that brand to be doing, linked to clear business or communications objectives. No creativity or innovation for its own sake please and certainly not shamelessly jumping on the latest bandwagon.
Chauhan has worked in the UK and Australia over the past 15 yers, on digital and integrated campaigns for household name brands. She has a grounding in everything from coding and strategy to creative concept and content production. In line with the rapid evolution of digital and content over the last decade, Chauhan has curated and led diverse teams that sit within the overall integrated agency offering, ensuring ongoing business relevancy.
I’d love to see entries that are having a positive impact on real people. The strongest work out there cuts through the advertising noise and has a message that resonates with us on a human level. Beyond the short-term, I’d like to see work that leaves a lasting impression.
Fataar is the founder of Platform13. She has over two decades of experience, from her 10 year first youth oriented boutique agency, Spin, a stint at corporate powerhouse Edelman and in senior roles at both sportswear giant, adidas Originals (global) and Diageo (Europe) giving her a unique ability to speak entrepreneurial, cultural and corporate fluently, enabling a sometimes new, but always credible conversation between brands and their audiences.
London has long been the focus of awards and creativity. But we all know, there is advertising, design and digital talent beyond the M25, whether in a big agency, a smaller shop or collective. I'll be looking for original thought with a simple comprehensive message packaged in creativity and cultural relevance. If you want to stand out, make sure it's easy to understand and compelling. As I always say, thumbstopping. No faff.
Jones has been in advertising for nearly 14 years. She learnt her craft in direct and digital marketing at HTW and Dare and later at McCann and Ogilvy. Highlights include tattooing someone to sell a video game and having Messi hug random strangers to sell shampoo. After 3 years in Amsterdam working on Emirates and P&G, she moved back to London in 2016 creating global brand strategy for Dove and Hellmann’s. She joined St Luke’s in 2018 and is planning director on Very.co.uk, KP Nuts and Montezuma’s chocolate.
I’m thrilled to be judging this year’s Roses awards and excited to see work from all over the UK. Awards like Roses are vital for our industry, they remind us there is life outside London and it’s especially important to show young people wanting to break into advertising that you don’t have to fork out for eye wateringly expensive London rents to be part of making great creative work.
The Drum Roses Awards celebrate the best creative work outside the M25, striving to find the hidden gems in advertising, design and digital.
