Mine and I still walk, and we talk a whole lot more.
Dr. Horowitz is a cognitive scientist who studies dogs.
Next to me on the couch, one of my dogs twitches his feet and curls his lower lip in his sleep. His tail thumps on a soft pillow. An “urph” — maybe a stifled bark — escapes his mouth and he wakes himself up, looking at me accusingly. “That was you!” I tell him.
As a writer and dog-cognition researcher, I can — and do — spend the greatest part of the day observing dogs, talking to dogs and hanging out beside my dog while working. And now, in this extraordinary time, many more of us find ourselves working at home with our dogs full time. Good for us — and great for the dogs.
Quarantine, and even social distancing, is meant to impose an isolation that most of us, as a highly social species, work hard throughout our lives to avoid. Even the most introverted of us need company — some touchstone of a shared existence through time. In reflecting on our changed society, the isolation of the elderly and the sick seems especially cruel. In many places, older residents quarantined in nursing homes cannot have visitors, and are suffering not just from potentially fatal infections but also from the loss of the company of their family members and the comfort of their presence and touch — a biological urge.
Our drive to keep animals, dogs in particular, strikes me as similar in nature: Their simple presence, and their willingness to be touched, is viscerally satisfying. Time spent reading on the couch is massively improved by a dog’s head resting on my leg; a warm, snuffling muzzle directed at me is instantly calming. Social media abounds with images of dogs (some bemused, some wagging their tails so hard as to sprain them ) alongside their isolated persons: Dogs are now our proxy for other humans.
There are some 90 million dogs in the United States, and in some ways, we have treated dogs as quasi-people all along. Contemporary dogs in Western households live inside and join us on our walks, in our repose with a book or in front of the TV — they even sleep with us. We talk to our dogs as though they not only understand us, but also care deeply about what we say.
Still, our current situation highlights that, as indulged, attired and birthday-party-feted as the average owned dog is in the United States, many dogs are ordinarily in a daily condition of social isolation. Unless owners are able to work from home, or their home is their work, their sociable canids must stay captive and alone for the majority of their days. Now, the coronavirus quarantine, by imposing similar hardship on us, is actually giving dogs something that they’ve deserved all along: more of our companionship.
And so I was alarmed by the news that after a 17-year-old Pomeranian in Hong Kong whose owner had Covid-19 tested “ weak positive ” for the coronavirus, the dog was quarantined in a state facility and died a few days after returning home (officially virus-free). I worried that we would suddenly feel we should be distanced from our pets.
Given the dog’s lack of symptoms, it appeared that the Pomeranian might simply have been carrying the virus much like a “ doorknob or a piece of tissue ” might, as one reporter explained. On the one hand, it is a relief if dogs are only carriers, rather than infected themselves. On the other hand, to relegate them to the status of a subway pole is to knock them over to the side of objects, not family members.
Legally, dogs are considered property , despite their roles in our lives. What happens to property when it is found to be dangerous, or no longer useful? Objects are given up, thrown out, discarded. After a second dog tested positive in Hong Kong (again without symptoms and again the dog of an owner with Covid-19), city authorities admonished people not to abandon their pets.
So what should we do with our dogs, now that we find ourselves in their near-constant company, eyeballed by them as we move through our homes? For now, at least, we still ought to walk them outdoors: We can all use the fresh air, and the dogs, at least, can collect the smells of the day. Some countries have reached the point where all movement outside is restricted, but even in those places walking the dog is allowed as an essential exemption.
If you’re worried that your dogs — like doorknobs — may be touched by people who are infected, bathe them with soap after the walk. Then, once home, make the most of the chance to fill their days with engagements: bouts of play , treat-finding games or simply being in contact — all of which is health-giving to both dog and person.
In the United States, shelters that recently put out calls seeking foster care for homeless animals reported being inundated with applicants : evidence that the value of a pet’s company is well known. When we emerge from this crisis and normalcy is resuscitated, we will have a chance to reappraise how we want to conduct our lives.
I hope we will maintain some of our current abnormal condition: giving our dogs the companionship they need. I hope we will come out of this with a fuller appreciation of the privilege that it is to keep the company of animals.
Alexandra Horowitz ( @DogUmwelt ) runs the Dog Cognition Lab at Barnard College and is the author of “ Our Dogs, Ourselves: The Story of a Singular Bond .”
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com .
