Lwal Uguak left his home in Edmonton to attend a protest downtown, because he believes the issues of racism and policing need to be addressed in Canada, as well as the U.S.
Uguak’s size, 6 feet 5 and 270 pounds, gives away that he is an athlete, a football player, but he is not a household name at this point in his career, two years as a first-string defensive lineman at UConn behind him.
“You know how sports works,” Uguak says. “The best player is the one that gets the most attention. I went to a protest two weeks ago at one of our rallies here in Edmonton, and I made a sign that said basically, ‘Why do most white people only care about Black people when they’re an athlete, when they’re doing something that’s entertainment for them?‘”
Uguak has a voice and means to use it, as do his UConn teammates. The football program produced a video and pushed it out via social media on Juneteenth.
“We said that we wanted to use our platform to make a change,” tight end Jay Rose, from Southington, says, “and a couple of us talked about ideas, what we wanted to say. We wanted to make it a heart-felt thing so people feel that it’s real. That’s what we wanted most out of it, for people to feel it.”
Linsey Lemoine, assistant director of video services, put together the 66-second video. It begins with Uguak: “Change is coming.”
One by one, players appear. “Why wait for a change when you can be the change? … We all have to be a part of the change.” Players and coaches repeat the core sentence in unison: “Enough is enough”
Coach Randy Edsall appears: “Racial and social injustice has been around for way too long. It’s time for all of us to come together as one to work to eliminate these injustices,” he says.
Defensive back Jaylen Jones has the last word: “The way I wear my hair shouldn’t matter. … The way I wear my clothes shouldn’t matter. … The tattoos I have on my skin shouldn’t matter. … Black lives matter.”
We all know the UConn football program has not won many games, or drawn droves of fans in recent years, and there are those who believe for these reasons the school should consider dropping it. Inserting my two cents here: The current fiscal realities are harsh, and we may learn this week that UConn will have to eliminate some programs, possibly track and field or golf. There will and should be agonizing over these decisions, because it should never be forgotten that there is more value in any program than can be weighed in its record or revenue. There is value in how it changes lives and develops young people, more important than ever during these tumultuous times, pushing them to grow up fast, to look at the world beyond their insulated environments and giving them the confidence and opportunities to speak out about it.
So the football Huskies are 6-30 the last three years and no longer play in a conference? That doesn’t mean they can’t make a difference. It doesn’t take a Power Five program to express a powerful message.
“As everything was going on, we had team meetings,” Uguak says, “and we were talking about some ways we can, as a team, talk about how much we care and how we’re going to do things in the future to help us bring more attention to situations like this, the Black Lives Matter movement. It was just time. We couldn’t just sit still and let everything play out without having a part in making a change.”
UConn's Lwal Uguak (98) in action against Cincinnati in 2018. (Brad Horrigan / Hartford Courant)
As the COVID-19 crisis continues to impact our lives, and the movement ignited by the death of George Floyd gains momentum, college football is increasingly under a microscope.
UConn players will be allowed back on campus for voluntary workouts July 1. Where players have been gathering, there have been virus outbreaks, most notably Clemson, in which there were 28 positive tests reported. At UCLA, players signed a letter calling for third-party oversight to ensure health and safety guidelines are followed and enforced. At Oklahoma State, after a photograph of coach Mike Gundy wearing a One America News network shirt appeared on social media, star running back Chuba Hubbard called it “completely insensitive to everything going on in society” and vowed to do nothing with the university until things “change.” Gundy apologized , saying he wasn’t aware of OAN’s takes on the Black Lives Matter movement.
So when football does return, old assumptions will be challenged, trust and unity will be tested and scrutinized — among teammates, between Black players and white coaches, between athletes and institutions. Edsall’s participation in the video was important to his players.
“We, as a team, trust him, that he has our back for sure,” Uguak says. “Ever since these situations have occurred, I’d say we trust him even a little more now. We’ve had meetings and the way we’re planning everything out, we know exactly what is going on. With our training staff, we feel safe. We’ve seen what happened at Houston and Clemson, but we have a lot of trust with our coach. We know that he has our back.”
Uguak took note of the reaction to Hubbard, who is also from the Edmonton area, when he spoke out at Oklahoma State.
“You saw how quickly people did not like how he reacted to that situation,” Uguak said. “That’s the best player on Oklahoma State, and the way they reacted to him speaking up about an issue that was obviously affecting him, it was all negative. So what do you do?”
Uguak says UConn players have not yet discussed how they will handle the national anthem when the Huskies next line up to play a game, but he is determined, with his team’s support, to use the platform they have to call for meaningful change.
“The things going on in the world definitely brought us all closer,” Rose says. “It opened up a lot of windows for us to feel comfortable talking about what’s going on in the world. These are probably going to be things we talk about all year long.”
Mike Anthony: UConn women’s basketball players’ message on protests, race and change are inspiring »
The team’s video closes with the message, “It’s about more than football.” Colin Kaepernick’s absence from the game is on Uguak’s mind, and so is Fox News commentator Laura Ingraham’s “shut up and dribble” admonition to LeBron James. There will eventually be a time for the Huskies to focus on football, but they will not be wearing blinders. Too much has happened.
