A SWIMMING coach who dedicated his life to teaching youngsters how to swim has died.
Nigel Davis, 42 from Gosport, was taken to Queen Alexandra Hospital in Cosham on Thursday after collapsing at the home he shares with his father in Selsey Avenue, Elson.
Once at Queen Alexandra Hospital, scans found multiple tumours in his brain, and he died the following day.
The assistant head coach for Gosport Dolphins Swimming Club, Nigel has been remembered as a kind-hearted and caring man, for whom no job was too small.
Nigel Davis at the Isle of Wight Festival. Nigel, a coach for the Gosport Dolphins Swimming Club, died last Friday. Picture: Zoe Benfield
Sorry, there seem to be some issues. Please try again later.
Now, tributes have been paid by some of those who were closest to him, along with dozens of flowers at Gosport Leisure Centre.
Zoe Benfield, 40 from Portsmouth, knew Nigel for almost two decades.
In that time, the pair would regularly go to festivals together, and she even had him as a witness at her wedding.
Flowers were laid outside Gosport Leisure Centre, on Monday, June 22, after the death of swimming coach Nigel Davis. Picture: Sarah Standing (220620-225)
She said: ‘We met as lifeguards in Brockhurst and he was just so much fun – the life and soul of anywhere he went.
‘He was one of those people you couldn’t say a bad word about, and has been a huge part of my life.
‘Since lockdown started I haven’t been able to see him, and now my little girl has lost her “Uncle Nigel” too.’
When he wasn’t teaching youngsters how to swim, Nigel would spend his free time up at Fratton Park, supporting Portsmouth FC as a season ticket holder.
Nigel Davis, a huge Portsmouth FC fan, celebrating the Blues' promotion to League One. Picture: Supplied
On Twitter, Pompey player Ronan Curtis paid tribute, sending his condolences to Nigel’s family and friends.
Gosport Dolphins’ head coach, Maurice Redpath, said his death is a massive loss to the local community.
He said: ‘It’s hard to put into words just how I am feeling.
‘Nigel was hugely passionate about swimming and always had a smile on his face.
‘He was very much the optimist – he always wanted to make the kids better swimmers, but also make them better people.
Following Nigel’s death, flowers have been laid outside Gosport Leisure Centre in Forest Way, where the Dolphins Swimming Club trains.
Those closest to Nigel, who did not have children, say he treated the young swimmers like they were his own.
Thank you for reading this story on portsmouth.co.uk . While I have your attention, I also have an important request to make of you.
With the coronavirus lockdown having a major impact on many of our advertisers - and consequently the revenue we receive - we are more reliant than ever on you taking out a digital subscription.
Subscribe to portsmouth.co.uk and enjoy unlimited access to local news and information online and on our app. With a digital subscription, you can read more than 5 articles, see fewer ads, enjoy faster load times, and get access to exclusive newsletters and content. Visit our Subscription page now to sign up.
Our journalism costs money and we rely on advertising, print and digital revenues to help to support them. By supporting us, we are able to support you in providing trusted, fact-checked content for this website.
