Dan Gainor: NBC and Google try to censor conservative websites, endangering free expression
Some experts consider this crisis lethargy a socio-political condition. An organic by-product, of large groups of people living in chronic fear or feeling like they are living in a war zone without an observable enemy.
In many ways, this crisis fatigue is a natural response to the repeated warnings about impending disasters and catastrophes. The social distancing and separation we are experiencing, only make this personal pain feel more intense.
The layering of crisis upon crisis is not only emotionally exhausting, but it also reduces our feelings of social achievement and sense of national resiliency.
Although the world is in an uncertain state, there are still strategies we can incorporate into our lives that will help us navigate through this persistent yet expectantly temporary storm.
When life feels entirely out of control, that’s when we need to take control of what we can.
Have a scheduled time to wake up and go to sleep.
Eat well and exercise regularly; it works wonders to help our body and mind feel its best.
Take deep breaths to manage overwhelming feelings of anxiety. Deep, slow breathing has the power to clear our mind and reset our internal chemistry, so we can be our most centered self.
This is not the time to write one’s unedited thoughts on social media; this will only make things worse and who needs that? One of the most important things we can do is reach out to those we love and to whom we feel connected.
Social distancing may be interfering with our ability to see each other in person, but it doesn’t have to prevent us from showing up for each other emotionally; here is where FaceTime and Zoom can add a positive, personal feel.
During times of great stress, remember, everything that has a beginning also has an end. This too shall pass. But until it does, let’s look for the opportunities for growth to become an even better version of ourselves before this unparalleled year challenged us all.
Robi Ludwig, Psy.D. is a nationally known psychotherapist, award-winning reporter and author. She is the creator and host of Facebook Watch's "Talking Live with Dr. Robi Ludwig" and is on the Medical Advisory Board and a contributor for Bella Magazine. She is the author of " Till Death Do Us Part: Love, Marriage, and the Mind of the Killer Spouse " and "Your Best Age Is Now."
Get the recap of top opinion commentary and original content throughout the week.
