Antwon, an unarmed black teenager, was fatally shot last year by a white officer during a traffic stop in East Pittsburgh, Pa.
Antwon Rose’s mother, Michelle Kenney, center, with family and friends at a vigil for Antwon in March.Credit...Stephanie Strasburg/Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, via Associated Press
A $2 million settlement has been reached in the federal civil rights lawsuit filed by the family of Antwon Rose, an unarmed black teenager who was killed last year by a white police officer during a traffic stop in East Pittsburgh, Pa., a lawyer for the family confirmed Tuesday night.
The lawyer, S. Lee Merritt, said the amount was the maximum that East Pittsburgh could pay under its insurance policy.
The law firms representing the family, Rabner Law Offices and McEldrew Young, will receive $400,000 each as well as reimbursement costs, The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported , citing Allegheny County court records.
Mr. Merritt said the Rose family “wasn’t particularly happy’’ with the settlement, “but it was the most the city could do.”
“The goal for the lawsuit,’’ he said, “was to come up with a figure that would cause police officers in the East Pittsburgh area to think before they pull the trigger and force the city to consider better training.”
Mary Carol Kennedy, an East Pittsburgh council member, said borough officials would not comment on the settlement. Lawyers for East Pittsburgh and for the officer, Michael Rosfeld, did not respond to requests for comment on Tuesday night.
Antwon RoseCredit...John Fetterman for Lieutenant Governor, via Associated Press
The settlement came seven months after Mr. Rosfeld, who had been charged with criminal homicide , was acquitted on all counts in connection with the shooting. The verdict came after a four-day trial in downtown Pittsburgh and less than four hours of jury deliberation.
The shooting happened on June 19, 2018, after Mr. Rosfeld pulled over a Chevrolet Cruze in which Antwon was a passenger because the car matched the description of one involved in a nearby drive-by shooting that had occurred 10 minutes earlier.
As Mr. Rosfeld placed handcuffs on the driver, and Antwon and another passenger jumped out of the vehicle and turned to run away. Mr. Rosfeld shot him in the face, elbow and back. A video of the encounter was widely viewed on the internet and led to days of protests.
In August 2018, Michelle Kenney and Antwon Rose, Sr. — Antwon’s parents — filed the federal civil rights lawsuit against East Pittsburgh and Mr. Rosfeld, accusing Mr. Rosfeld of using excessive and deadly force and the borough’s policymakers of improperly training police officers and failing to protect their son.
Fred Rabner, another lawyer for the Rose family, said on Tuesday that the matter had been settled amicably.
“It has been a great honor working towards achieving justice for the family and supporters of Antwon Rose II,” he added.
A United States District Court judge signed a stipulation on Tuesday dismissing the lawsuit with prejudice, which means the claims cannot be filed again. The order was signed by all parties.
A court-appointed administrator is currently managing Antwon’s estate after a probate dispute between Mr. Rose and Ms. Kenney, according to Mr. Merritt.
Ms. Kenney said in a Facebook post on Tuesday that this is not what she wanted. She later said her name was not on the paperwork and that she had never spoken to the executor of her son’s estate.
