Pausing before reacting can help a person control their anger.
Everyone has a reaction to anger, but some techniques can help ensure the anger does not get out of control.
Strategies for managing anger include:
Recognizing the warning signs. Being aware of the changes in the body, emotions, and behaviors that result from anger can help someone decide how they want to react to a situation before they act.
Pausing before reacting. Walking away from the situation can buy the person some time to think and take back control.
Counting to 10. Taking a few seconds to count slowly to 10 can reduce the intensity of the anger.
Releasing tension in the body. To release tension, unclench the jaw, drop the shoulders, and uncross the arms and legs. Roll the shoulders back and stretch the neck to either side if holding tension here.
Listening. It can be easy to jump to conclusions when angry. If having a heated discussion, take some time to stop and listen before replying.
Exercising. Doing cardiovascular exercises such as running, cycling, or swimming can help release the energy that might otherwise become aggression.
Finding a distraction. Listening to music, dancing, going for a walk, writing in a journal, or just taking a shower can all help prevent anger from escalating.
Changing negative thought patterns. In the heat of the moment, the situation can seem much worse than it really is. A method called cognitive restructuring can help people challenge and replace angry thoughts.
Using relaxation techniques. Using relaxation strategies, such as deep breathing and progressive muscle relaxation, may help alleviate feelings of anger.
If a person’s anger is affecting their relationships, work, and other areas of their life, they may wish to seek advice from a doctor.
Indicators that anger has become a problem include:
Some of the disruptive ways a person might express anger include:
Passive aggression: This can include ignoring people, refusing to do tasks, and being sarcastic but not explicitly saying anything angry or aggressive.
In these cases, it is important to seek support and treatment. Expressing anger through aggression and violence can harm friendships, family relationships, and relationships with coworkers, and it may have serious consequences.
Taking anger management classes may help a person with anger issues.
A family doctor will make an assessment and determine whether a person’s difficulties with anger are related to a physical condition or a mental health issue.
If it is a mental health concern, a doctor will most likely refer the person to a psychologist, psychiatrist, or counselor.
Making a thorough diagnosis can help them recommend the best line of treatment.
Possible treatments for difficulties with anger management include:
