Isolation is hazardous to your health. The term ‘social distancing’ doesn’t help
Is the phrase “social distancing” sending the wrong message to millions of Americans struggling to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic? Some experts think so.
Dr. Jay Buckey , a former NASA astronaut who now works at the Dartmouth Geisel College of Medicine, has spent the past decade developing an online tool to help people manage the psychological fallout from a different type of isolation: the stress, depression and interpersonal conflict that can occur on a long-term spaceflight.
“Living in isolation and confinement with a small number of people for a long time is a psychological challenge,” he said.
That’s something billions of people have been learning  first-hand on Earth.
Buckey’s experience with astronauts suggests that many of the issues that emerge in isolation are sharper versions of the problems we experience in daily life.
“Maybe you were already stressed about something, but you had outlets that were working for you, and now you are cut off from them,” he said.
The tool he created, called PATH , is designed to help users manage difficult emotions. Based on behavioral therapy, it helps people look clearly at how they are thinking about a situation and understand how that thinking influences the actions they take. (Though designed for astronauts, PATH is available for free to the Earth-bound public as well.)
Another analog for our current state can  be found in the experience of those who spent time in the Antarctic with a small group of people for a long period, said Larry Palinkas , a professor at the School of Social Work at the University of Southern California.
Palinkas’ work on the mental health of polar trekkers and those who live in research stations has revealed that one of the hallmarks of adapting to isolation and confinement is a willingness to let go of control.
“You have to be flexible,” he said. “If you are highly demanding of yourself and others, you are going to have a harder time.”
He also found that people tend to be able to manage the first half of their isolation — whether it lasts for two weeks or two years — but when they reach the halfway point, their resolve dips.
“In the first half you conserve your emotional resources, engage in active forms of coping and you do well,” he said. “In the second half, people often experience a letdown.”
One of the profound challenges of our current situation is that no one knows when it will end. “The fear is that our emotional resources will become depleted and we will become physically and mentally exhausted,” he said.
However, living through isolation can have a positive outcome as well, Palinkas said. It’s known as salutogenesis , and it’s the reward that comes from coping with stress and being more self-sufficient.
In one of his early studies, he found that Navy personnel assigned to the Arctic in the 1950s, ’60s and ’70s had fewer hospital admissions and mental health problems when they returned home.
“The idea is if you can survive an experience like this,” he said, “it results in a sense of accomplishment and a feeling like, ‘I can handle anything.’”
Sign up for the latest news, best stories and what they mean for you, plus answers to your questions.
