Florida's COVID-19 cases rose more than 2,000 Sunday; second straight day of record jump
In the Tampa Bay area – 23% of adult ICU beds are available. It’s roughly 18 percent for Hillsborough and Pinellas counties.
TAMPA, Fla. - The Florida Department of Health says the number of known cases of COVID-19 in the state rose by 2,016 since yesterday morning as the virus spreads and as more people are tested across the state. The total number of cases in Florida is now 75,568.
The number of deaths has reached 2,931, an increase of 6 since Saturday's update.
Of the 75,568 cases, 73,650 are Florida residents while 1,918 are non-Florida residents currently in the state.
Bay Area COVID-19 cases by the numbers:
The state is not reporting a total number of "recovered" coronavirus patients or those currently hospitalized. As of Sunday, 11,942 people had been hospitalized for treatment at some point.
A total of 1,409,992 people have been tested in the state as of Sunday-- about 5.7% of the state's population -- according to the Florida Department of Health.
Sunday's total new cases represents the second-largest, single-day increase in new cases since the beginning of the pandemic, and is the second day in a row with new cases topping more than 2,000 per day. Experts say that is partly due to more tests being given, but also a result of reopening the state. The rate of positive tests has also increased slightly during that time period.
Friday, Gov. Ron DeSantis said the recent increases were largely due to spread among farmworkers in the state's rural counties, along with more widespread testing by employers as Floridians return to work.
Before spiking past 2,000, new COVID-19 cases were about 1,000 or more per day for 10 days. Prior to this spike, the state had averaged just over 700 new cases per day in the last 30 days. That’s a level that the health care system can handle, according to Gov. DeSantis. And while the number of new cases has trended up over the last few weeks, the number of deaths has appeared to trend down, though delays in data reporting make interpreting trends from that statistic less reliable.
As Florida continues taking steps to ease restrictions put in place due to the COVID-19 pandemic, health experts say new cases and more deaths are expected .
Editor's note: The number of new cases and deaths reported each day does not necessarily reflect the day that the case was confirmed. The state says some private testing labs dump large batches of test results which include cases from previous days. Stats for today and previous days will likely change in the future as the state reviews more cases and updates retroactive data.
The state's number of deaths represents permanent Florida residents who have died from COVID-19. The number of non-Florida residents who have died from the coronavirus while in the state is not reported.
The Florida Department of Health has a COVID-19 Call Center at 1-866-779-6121. Agents will answer questions around the clock. Questions may also be emailed to covid-19@flhealth.gov . Email responses will be sent during call center hours.
