1of10More than $1 million worth of flowers was destroyed at the San Francisco Flower Mart last week as it prepared to close. Farmers are watching their livelihood wither on the vine.Photo: San Francisco Flower Mart
2of10More than $1 million worth of flowers was destroyed at the San Francisco Flower Mart last week as it prepared to close. Farmers are watching their livelihood wither on the vine.Photo: San Francisco Flower Mart
3of10Florist Jennifer Carruthers works on flower arrangements in her San Francisco garage. She usually works out of the San Francisco Flower Mart, which is closed now because of the coronavirus.Photo: Jessica Christian / The Chronicle
4of10Carruthers usually sells her dried-flower arrangements at farmers’ markets, but right now only fruit and vegetable growers can sell at farmers’ markets. She says she has no way to generate any income during the crisis.Photo: Jessica Christian / The Chronicle
5of10Florist Jennifer Carruthers works on flower arrangements in her San Francisco garage. She usually works out of the San Francisco Flower Mart, which is closed now because of the coronavirus.Photo: Jessica Christian / The Chronicle
6of10Florist Jennifer Carruthers works on flower arrangements in her San Francisco garage. She usually works out of the San Francisco Flower Mart, which is closed now because of the coronavirus.Photo: Jessica Christian / The Chronicle
7of10Flowers are illuminated in a patch of sun in florist Jennifer Carruthers’ garage in San Francisco. Carruthers usually works out of the San Francisco Flower Mart, which is closed now because of the coronavirus.Photo: Jessica Christian / The Chronicle
8of10Florist Jennifer Carruthers works on flower arrangements in her San Francisco garage. She usually works out of the San Francisco Flower Mart, which is closed now because of the coronavirus.Photo: Jessica Christian / The Chronicle
9of10Florist Jennifer Carruthers works on flower arrangements in her San Francisco garage. She usually works out of the San Francisco Flower Mart, which is closed now because of the coronavirus.Photo: Jessica Christian / The Chronicle
10of10Dried flowers hang from the ceiling of florist Jennifer Carruthers’ garage in San Francisco. Florist Jennifer Carruthers usually works out of the San Francisco Flower Mart, which is closed now because of the coronavirus.Photo: Jessica Christian / The Chronicle
On St. Patrick’s Day, San Francisco Supervisor Aaron Peskin got a frantic phone call from Jeanne Boes, the general manager of the San Francisco Flower Mart.
With the wholesale flower market about to be shuttered due to the coronavirus shutdown, said Boes, she and her colleagues had just 48 hours to destroy hundreds of thousands of flowers. She was scrambling to donate as many as possible — to senior centers, police stations, firehouses, friends and neighbors. Could Peskin come get some for City Hall?
He and staffer Sunny Angulo jumped into Peskin’s Toyota Prius and drove over to Sixth and Brannan streets, where they found a 12-foot-high pile of flowers being mulched in the alleyway.
“I put the seat down, backed the car up, and filled it with as many flowers as could fit,” said Peskin. “We went back to City Hall and walked up and down the hallways giving roses to everyone. It was incredibly moving and sad.”
While the coronavirus-fueled layoffs and economic misery have permeated every corner of the Bay Area’s business community, the flower industry has been among the hardest hit. Flower shops and street kiosks — deemed nonessential — are closed. The lucrative spring season — typically a celebratory whirlwind of weddings, gala fundraisers, graduations — has been canceled. Imports from Holland, Ecuador and Colombia, responsible for 80% of the U.S. market, have slowed to a trickle. Farmers are watching their livelihood wither on the vine.
The 118,000-square-foot San Francisco Flower Mart, home to 47 businesses and 350 workers, is dark until further notice. Vendors composted $750,000 to $1 million worth of flowers, Boes said. It’s hard to say how many of the tenants will survive the shutdown, especially if the crisis drags into the late spring. She said the mood was gloomy.
“I watched many of my friends and colleagues leave in tears, wondering when we will come back, and when we do, what will our market look like?” she said.
Frank Biddle, president of the board of CalFlowers, an industry group, said “most of our members have seen business go down between 80% and 100%.” Biddle, who farms flowers and avocados on 60 acres near San Diego, said he has laid off half of his staff of 45. He estimates that he will have to dump 500,000 stems, about 40% of this year’s crop, mostly waxflowers and hot pink boronia.
“We have flowers ready to picked that won’t be picked,” he said. “We are losing a couple of hundred of thousand (dollars) a week.”
California growers are finding that the floral transportation industry has all but shut down, as demand for flowers declines and trucking companies can make more money carting other goods, Biddle said.
“These trucking companies can’t justify taking a load of flowers,” he said. “We have lost our ability to get flowers out of the state, with the exception of FedEx and air shipments.”
Jennifer Carruthers makes wreaths and preserved rose arrangements, most of which she sells at farmers’ markets. Under the state shelter-in-place order, farmers can continue to sell fruits and vegetables — but not flowers — at farmers’ markets. She has a website customers can order through, but that only represents a small portion of her business
“People like me who are artisans and crafters are not able to sell,” she said. “I have no way at this point in time of generating any income. I’m stuck.”
Florist Jennifer Carruthers works on flower arrangements in her San Francisco garage with her dog, Rose, watching. Carruthers usually works out of the San Francisco Flower Mart, which is closed now because of the coronavirus.
Al Filippi, owner of Pacific Coast Evergreen, said that even if the Flower Mart had stayed open he would not have much business. His business supplies the industry with garlands, wreaths and fresh-cut greens. Typically this time of year he would have 20 to 30 orders a week. A third-generation Flower Mart entrepreneur who has worked there 40 years, he said this is the first time he remembers it closing for any reason. “Even after the Loma Prieta earthquake, we were open the next day,” he said.
Michael LoBue, who until recently was the executive director of the California Association of Growers and Shippers, said the $6 billion U.S. flower industry was already faltering before the pandemic, as South American growers — who can grow roses and carnations year round — increased market share and California farmers replaced flowers with more lucrative crops, like cannabis.
“California growers are facing an existential situation right now,” said LoBue. “They are sitting on a product they can’t sell, but they still need to tend to. They are asking really hard questions, like ‘if I am not getting any money, how can I afford to keep my greenhouse staff? How long can I keep paying my field staff?’”
LoBue said he knows several Bay Area wholesalers who have decided to call it quits.
For the Flower Mart, the pandemic shutdown comes at a perilous time. The market is planning to move because its landlord, Kilroy Realty, is planning to build a 2 million-square-foot office complex on the site. The flower market — assuming it’s still a viable business when the pandemic has lessened its grip — is due to move to Potrero Hill.
“We have worked so hard fighting for this market to survive,” Boes said. “Now to have some pandemic come along and shut us down is just unbelievable.”
Residents looking to save the industry should prepare to spend some money when the crisis subsides, she said.
“Buy flowers, send flowers, go out to dinner, plan your wedding, reschedule that corporate event,” she said. “Bring the color and beauty of flowers back into our world and our lives.”
J.K. Dineen is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: jdineen@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @sfjkdineen
