Woodworking is a lifelong passion that took form during Greg McGavran's childhood, when he helped his father, a surgeon, build handmade toys. Now, as the founder of Vision Wood (6010 Magazine St., 504-265-8983; www.visionwood.com ).
McGavran's favorite activity has brought him into numerous New Orleans homes, venues and restaurants — and even to Hollywood and beyond.
“Without wood, New Orleans would not be New Orleans,” McGavran says. “Drive down St. Charles [Avenue] or most any street. What you see is wood exemplified — and not only the exterior of homes. The shade of the parks and our streets — imagine them without trees.”
In high school, he honed his skills in wood shop classes, and after he finished college, he opened the hardwood flooring company Custom Wood Floors with his uncle in 1981. He then switched gears and opened Firebird Industries in Harahan in the ’90s, before becoming an agent and importer. Vision Wood began to take shape just three years ago.
“I was walking down Magazine Street in 2017 and [the building] was available for rent," he says. "I spent the next two years designing and creating the gallery and the business.”
Vision Wood now has a local following and an international customer base. Equal parts art gallery and resource library, it provides a community space where curious browsers can peruse the creativity and mastery that goes into woodworking.
The showroom provides a presentation of wood as art by way of products in flooring, decking, paneling and furniture. Components of every piece were constructed in the space, where viewers also can discover artistic expressions in tables, benches, desks, vanities, mirrors, frames and sculptures.
“We hope our clients, first and foremost, smile [to know] that wood can be so good," McGavran says. "It’s a wonderful expression of ‘all things wood’ — we want all to come in and enjoy.”
When Vision Wood opened its doors, he thought the space would simply cater to wood enthusiasts, but it has been so well-received that clients have also booked it as a venue for birthday celebrations, corporate events and engagement parties.
For potential and returning customers interested in purchasing products, all of the wood shown in the gallery is available in small swatch samples. Clients can take them home to see what matches or complements their cabinets, baseboards and color schemes. Then, they can collaborate with the Vision Wood staff members, who answer questions, solve any problems and create custom designs.
The first thing clients usually look for is color, McGavran says — and mostly, the colors featured in the gallery are from natural woods. From there, clients select the format and grade of wood and figure out what works best with their budget.
“The challenge that we have in the gallery is that we look too good and clients think we will be the most expensive,” McGavran says. “Then they are surprised when we are the most affordable and the highest value.”
Vision Wood says they can out-compete pricing at chain stores because they manufacture and import the materials themselves.
Vision Wood also sources its materials from sustainably managed forests and other areas. And some of their most popular products are reclaimed from existing structures. “We are part of a life cycle of the trees and forests,” McGavran says. “True wood is environmental — it is the most natural material available with the exception of air, water and sunlight.”
In the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Vision Wood team has remained intact and even expanded its staff at the end of March even as stay at home orders remained in place. The business has made adjustments during mandated shutdowns to accommodate physical distancing measures implemented by officials.
Cool summer: How to beat the heat in New Orleans this season. Read the full edition of Gambit online
The weather is getting hot and New Orleanians are looking for ways to beat the heat. It's officially summer — but there's still a pandemic going on.
For example, the business sent potential clients wood samples through UPS and FedEx, the gallery was open by appointment only, and the staff made house calls. Vision Wood is now open regular hours, after New Orleans moved into Phase 2 earlier this month. Visitors to the shop must wear masks.
Vision Wood's work also is displayed at the New Orleans Museum of Art, the Ogden Museum of Southern Art, the Sazerac House and Justine restaurant. The company also has tackled some big projects around the country, including installation of wood flooring at Netflix's sprawling headquarters in Los Angeles. McGavran says Vision Wood also will provide custom work for Apple's new media office, also in Los Angeles.
For McGavran, dedication to his craft comes from a belief that wood is an essential part of life.
“Wood is literally everywhere and so ubiquitous," he says. "You cannot live without wood. Toilet paper, boxes for shipping and U.S. [Postal Service] would not exist without wood. Don’t take wood for granted. We hope to share, so that [everyone] can just gain some gratitude and appreciation for all the good things wood offers.”
NO NEWS IS BAD NEWS.
For almost 40 years Gambit has reported on the city we love, connected you to New Orleans, and covered the issues that matter to New Orleanians—all for free.
We need YOUR help to keep doing it.  Become a Gambit Member and support local journalism.
