Jun 19, 2020 – 6.58am, first published at Jun 18, 2020 – 8.25am
Former Wallaby and associate professor Paul Darveniza, a neurologist at St Vincent’s, and his medico wife Anne Charteris have bought a $4.25 million garden apartment off the plan in Rose Bay after the sale of their grand Centennial Park residence.
The purchase is just the latest in a slew of sales indicating the luxury apartment market in key downsizer hotspots is showing more resilience against the pandemic-led downturn thanks to the limited number of apartments on offer.
The $4.25 million garden apartment is in The Benson, a boutique block of nine in Rose Bay.
Sources say Darveniza and Charteris downsized to a three-bedroom apartment in the upmarket development The Benson, a boutique block of nine by developer Charles Mellick’s Fortis Development Group that targets well-heeled empty-nesters.
Ray White Double Bay’s Michael Finger and Di Wilson were credited with negotiating the sale given their exclusive agency with the development. They were no doubt introduced to the buyer by their colleague Nic Krasnostein, who recently sold the couple’s Centennial Park home for about $7.25 million.
Darveniza was one of seven Wallabies known as the “magnificent seven” after they took a stand against apartheid in South Africa in 1971 when they refused to play against the all-white Springboks that toured Australia. Soon after their protest, the Australian government severed sporting ties with South Africa until 1994, when teams were no longer based on race.
The three-bedroom apartment equates to a $31,000 per square metre result.
It comes just a week after former New Zealand prime minister Sir John Key and his wife Lady Bronagh resold their recently completed apartment north of the Harbour Bridge in McMahons Point for more than $6 million after just six weeks on the market.
Shortly before it sold, Ray White Lower North Shore’s Tim Abbott had a guide of $6 million to $6.5 million, and settlement will confirm if it reached the higher end of the range.
One of the three-bedroom apartments in The Benson sold for $4.25 million to Paul Darveniza and Anne Charteris.
In the adjoining suburb of Lavender Bay, a duplex owned by entrepreneur Joseph Chou and his wife Suzanne Ho sold for about $11 million last month to thoroughbred horse owner Fergus Doyle, this time through Ray White’s David Gillan.
Last weekend, the co-chief executive of Centuria Capital - Jason Huljich, of one of New Zealand’s richest families - sold his Elizabeth Bay waterfront apartment in two weeks at the upper end of its $4.5 million to $4.75 million range through McGrath’s Will Manning.
Domain senior research analyst Dr Nicola Powell says although all segments of the market have been affected, the coronavirus restrictions took everyone by surprise and that included a lot of buyers in the market who were ready to transact.
“Empty-nesters and those buyers who are cashed up will move on those properties that are regarded as diamonds in the market if they present themselves, rather than miss out,” Dr Powell said.
The latest sale of a three-bedder in The Benson equates to $31,000 a square metre.
