Greek Australian James Stevens founded Roses Only in Australia in the 1990s when he discovered a gap in the eCommerce industry.
Roses Only has since grown to become a household name across Singapore , United Kingdom , United States , Hong Kong &  Indonesia.
Starting a new chapter, just this year James founded his new brand Mr Roses in Australia.
Renowned for the finest Roses, Roses Only & Mr Roses specialises in stunning gift boxes.
Grown at 7000 feet above sea level in Ecuador, Columbia, Ethiopia and Kenya you can be sure that Roses Only and Mr Roses has searched across the world for the best roses available on the market.
These roses grow to the biggest in the world, and with beautiful 65 centimetre  stems and large rose heads they are sure to be a stunning addition whatever the occasion.
Even celebrity Ellen Degeneres loves Roses Only.
This time last year, tWitch, DJ on The Ellen DeThe Ellen DeGeneres Show, gave Ellen a classic Valentine’s Day present of the world’s finest long-stemmed roses from Roses Only, and Ellen decided to spread the love by giving the entire audience a dozen Roses Only roses too! Watch the video here.
Roses Only & Mr Roses, CEO, James Stevens says a beautiful box of roses is the most classic, if not the ultimate, Valentine’s Day gift, which is why they are predicting a spike in demand yet again this year.
“Giving Roses on Valentine’s Day really shows you care. Whether it’s to spark a new romance or cement a long-term relationship, when you nail it and choose the perfect Roses for your special someone, you make the occasion truly memorable,” James says.
James shares with Greek City Times his top three tips for choosing Valentine’s Day Roses:
Don’t order your flowers at the last minute. Most people will wait until the day before to order, which is when florists are most inundated with orders, meaning you could miss out on the Roses you want. I’d highly recommend ordering in the days and weeks prior to Valentine’s Day. However, if you are a last-minute kind of person, don’t stress as we do deliver on Valentines Day itself, UK wide, US Wide, Singapore Wide & Australia wide.
Nothing says passion like red roses. Valentine’s Day is all about the red rose. Red is the colour of love and passion and if each rose symbolises a month, giving a dozen of them means that you’re thinking of your recipient 12 months of the year. It’s best to stick to red because different colours have different meanings. Pink roses are associated with friendship, white roses typically signify mourning and yellow roses are synonymous with the cheerful enthusiasm of the sun, making yellow roses excellent for cheering people up.
Consider shelf life. There are some roses that will last until next Valentine’s Day! We have a range of infinity roses, which are 100% real preserved roses that have been cut at their most perfect state. The roses are then placed into a mixture of glycerine and other plant elements. This rehydrates the rose from its petals to its stem and replaces the sap within it. After a few days, the process is complete and the outcome is that our roses magically continue to look and feel like real roses, maintaining their freshness, beauty, structure and colour for at least one year.
Make a statement! If extravagance is what you prefer a range of statements stems are available, send 50 roses in form to really surprise and delight your loved one.
“During Valentine’s we only offer Red Roses, since they are the only colour of love!” explains James. “However out of the Valentine’s period (13th, 14th & 15th) we offer a range of colors to choose from. Each colour rose has an individual and unique meaning, you can send tailored messages to your loved one just by selecting the appropriate colour.”
With free same-day delivery available there’s never been an easier way to make your loved one smile than with a beautiful box of roses.
Mr Roses are so confident that you’ll love their roses that they have a 100% happiness guarantee. If the roses you send don’t seem right, the customer care team will do their best to make it perfect.
* Order your Valentines Roses between now and Valentine’s Day using our GREEKCITY10 promo code to enjoy 10% off Roses Only and Mr Roses Valentine’s Roses!
Exclusive to greekcitytimes.com, the code is valid at Mr Roses in Australia and at Roses Only in the UK, US, Singapore. Links to each V-day collection below:
