Professor Jonathan Van Tam said 'the rules are clear' after being put on the spot on the top aide's lockdown trips at Downing Street today.
When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
A top UK Government scientist strongly outlined his position on the Dominic Cummings scandal after being asked to clarify rules at today's live briefing.
Boris Johnson's top aide sparked fury throughout the nation after it was revealed he made 260-mile lockdown trips to Durham before later refusing to apologise.
He also claimed a journey to Barnard Castle was to 'test his eyesight' and make sure he was fit enough to drive back to London for work.
And at today's daily briefing from Downing Street, scientific expert Professor Jonathan Van-Tam made his views clear after minister's back Cummings over the row.
Johnson previously stepped in before senior scientists Sir Patrick Vallance and chief medical officer Chris Whitty were able to comment.
When asked for his opinion by the Observer's Toby Helm, deputy chief medical officer Van Tam replied: "The rules are clear and they have always been clear.
Deputy Chief Medical Officer Jonathan Van-Tam speaks during today's Downing Street briefing (Image: PA)
It followed Culture Secretary Oliver Dowden - who was holding the briefing - saying: "Dominic Cummings gave a very extensive explanation of his behaviour on Monday and answered all questions in relation to that.
Professor Van Tam's comments were hailed by the SNP's Westminster leader Ian Blackford, who doubled down on calls for Cummings to quit or be sacked.
Writing on Twitter, Blackford said: "Good for Prof Van-Tam, saying what needs to be said. There cannot be one rule for those in power and another for the rest of us.
He was joined by MP Kirsty Blackman, who commented: “This is a significant intervention that demonstrates figures at the heart of the fight against coronavirus are unhappy with Boris Johnson’s handling of the Dominic Cummings saga.
“There cannot be one rule for those at the top of government and another rule for everyone else.
“As Professor Van-Tam said, the rules are clear and always have been – and they apply to Dominic Cummings as much as the rest of us.
“The longer Mr Cummings is kept in his job the more public trust will be eroded. He must go now."
It comes after Durham constabulary said Cummings committed a "minor breach" of the lockdown when he drove 50 miles to Barnard Castle with his wife and child on April 12.
Cummings claimed he made the trip on his wife's birthday, to "test his eyesight" after he had fallen ill with coronavirus symptoms.
However they revealed no further action was required.
Cummings held an extraordinary press conference in the Downing Street Rose Garden last Monday in a bid to tell his side of the story, which only resulted in more questions being asked of the scandal.
Dominic Cummings leaves his home in London amid the fallout of his lockdown trips (Image: AFP via Getty Images)
He revealed at no point had he considered resigning and had 'no regrets' over making the trip.
Cummings had driven 260 miles from his home in London to stay at his parent's estate in County Durham, stating he did so after his wife developed coronavirus symptoms and he feared his child could not be cared for if they both fell ill.
He then drove to Barnard Castle so that he could check he felt well enough to drive back to London.
Cummings insisted he had acted “lawfully and reasonably” at all times - an opinion echoed by Boris Johnson and a raft of Cabinet ministers.
The Daily Record has launched our NHS Heroes campaign to thank the remarkable NHS staff who are on the front lines of this coronavirus emergency.
These amazing people place our health above their own and we are inviting the public to pledge their support by placing a heart on their location in the UK.
Please join us in showing these people our gratitude as we navigate this difficult time.
But the view was not shared by opposition politicians and even some in the Tory party, with Scots MP Douglas Ross stepping down form his government post in protest.
Nicola Sturgeon was among those to call for the top aide to be let go by the Prime Minister, citing the case of Scotland's former chief medical officer Dr Catherine Caldwell, who stepped down after it emerged she twice made trips to her holiday home.
