A child psychologist says we need to impart the difference between feelings and actions. Also: Moving for a job; housing problems in the Bay Area.
Re “ Mister Rogers’s Anger Management ,” by Mariana Alessandri (Op-Ed, Nov. 29):
As a child psychologist and the author of a curriculum being carried out in public schools that teaches children emotional intelligence, I agree that it is very unhelpful and even toxic to tell children that they should not be sad or angry.
We need to help fortify children to learn the difference between their feelings, which are all O.K., and their actions, which are sometimes not O.K., and help them to develop an awareness of what they are feeling and a “feeling vocabulary” to express it.
This will reduce the risk of later mental health challenges, reduce acting-out behavior and help children learn to develop endurance.
As a society we need to prioritize teaching these emotional skills in schools to help us produce functional, well-adjusted and law-abiding citizens.
One of the children I work with shared that his third-grade teacher would often tell the children: “Only positive thoughts. No sad, mad, bad feelings.” It used to really upset him, and he would say, “I’m allowed to feel sad, mad sometimes.”
Another child shared that the last sentence in the morning pledge at her school is, “Today will be the best day ever!” She said she doesn’t like it and doesn’t say it on some mornings.
A smaller share of Americans are moving each year than at any time since the Census Bureau started keeping track in the 1940s, according to new data. Credit...Gregory Rec/Portland Portland Press Herald, via Getty Images
Re “ Moving Vans Idle as Migration Stalls in a Reshaped Economy ” (front page, Nov. 21):
Americans are becoming less migratory due as much to shifting values as to a shifting economy.
We baby boomers grew up in the era of corporate loyalty. One’s career mattered above all. That often meant multiple moves in pursuing job opportunities. Forty years later, my siblings are now long-distance acquaintances.
Today’s young employees, struggling to survive a gig economy and sub-living wages, know that corporate loyalty is delusional, since corporations don’t return that loyalty. The company-employee relationship is transactional. Employees are dispensable.
Why uproot yourself, spouse and children to follow a job that might evaporate a year from now, dedicating yourself to a company that considers you merely revenue enhancement?
Corporations once assumed that company men (or women) would pour their energy into their careers, increasing profits at their families’ expense. But as low-wage contract work rises in dominance, the younger generation is discovering that being a “company man” is ridiculous, and that sacrificing one’s family’s happiness and stability to crawl up the corporate ladder is hollow.
