Let’s use what we know to examine how flower breeding in the game maps to reality. Polygon has a mathematical breakdown of which flowers “add up” to which other flowers. To get your flowers in the mood for love, you have to water them, have the right two colors next to each other, and leave an empty square where a third flower can sprout.
In Hamdan’s chart, he’s arranged the number of flowers you need to end up with the full selection. (Note: Hamdan tells Popular Mechanics the information in his chart isn’t totally complete due to the constantly evolving nature of New Horizons, but he is making frequent updates with new facts he’s learned from outlets like Polygon and various gamers' YouTube channels.)
Is crossing real flowers as easy as planting them together and crossing your fingers? Well, almost. With plants, there are strict definitions for terms like hybrid and heirloom. People can isolate plants with traits they want to breed in and then cross-pollinate those plants while excluding others.
The mechanic in Animal Crossing Pocket Camp gets closer to reality, surprisingly enough. In that game, you pick flowers to tap together directly. This results in one of several outcomes, with the possibility that your attempt fails. In New Horizons, the breeding is passive, but the outcome is almost guaranteed. The only complication is if you plant more than just the two desired flowers next to each other, you could get more than one combination.
A blue hyacinth grows next to two parent white hyacinths on gaming writer Rebekah Valentine’s island.
Since plants have many more genes than just color, what results from one cross-pollinated field of the same variety is a scattershot of different traits and levels of expression of those traits. Hybrids can be tougher and more vital than their precedents, with mutations or hidden qualities. Animal Crossing picks up this idea with new colors that result from two white flowers or two “hybrid” red flowers, for example.
The blue hyacinth I saw on gaming writer Rebekah Valentine 's island came from two white hyacinths, but a rare blue rose must come from two invisibly hybrid red roses. And these combinations also suggest the game is playing with the idea of recessive genes.
