Although the Rose Bowl will not put on the traditional July 4 event with a big crowd viewing fireworks, there will be a celebration of the nation’s birthday.
At the last meeting of the Rose Bowl Operating Company, the group agreed to hold an online event.
The event will honor the community and include messages from frontline responders, a salute to America and a flyover of Pasadena that will include some of its most historic landmarks.
More details including start times and a link to view the event will be released soon.
“The RBOC and Board of Directors found it especially important to continue the 93 year tradition of celebrating the 4th of July in Pasadena,” said Councilman Victor Gordo. “Although COVID has decimated Rose Bowl revenues, the Rose Bowl Board of Directors felt strongly that having the community celebration to inspire people to see hope in our future as a community and a country given all that is going on around us today. I hope people will participate safely.”
Americafest, which is usually held in the iconic stadium, is one of the biggest Independence Day celebrations on the West Coast. However, large gatherings are still banned under the city’s Safer At Home Order put in place to fight the Coronavirus.
This year’s event comes as the nation is once again discussing quality and race.
It is illegal to possess, sell and use Fireworks in Pasadena according to the city’s ordinance.
Due to the potential for fire hazards and injuries, Pasadena police and fire personnel will patrol the City looking for illegal firework activity and police officers will seize fireworks in an effort to protect the public. Parking enforcement officers will ensure that vehicles illegally parked in Pasadena’s hillside areas on July 4th are impounded.
The Pasadena Fire Department will be applying Phos-Chek to brush areas around the Arroyo area.  The main ingredients of this fire retardant are phosphates and fertilizers to help prevent plants from burning and to re-vegetate burned wildland areas.
Get our daily Pasadena newspaper in your email box. Free.
Get all the latest Pasadena news, more than 10 fresh stories daily, 7 days a week at 7 a.m.
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
