Hershey Gardens' flagship Rose Garden. Hershey Gardens will reopen to the public at 9 a.m. June 20.
Hershey Gardens , closed since mid-March because of the coronavirus pandemic, has announced it will reopen this month.
The gardens will open at 9 a.m. on Saturday, June 20, which officials said is “just in time for the peak bloom of 3,500 roses.”
Members of Hershey Gardens will be able to get in a day early on June 19.
According to a news release, “Originally named Hershey Rose Garden when it first opened in June 1937 as a 3.5-acre rose garden, the roses continue to be one of Hershey Gardens’ most anticipated shows of the year. The colorful display of 3,500 roses represents 175 hybrid tea, floribunda, shrub and miniature varieties.”
But, the butterfly atrium will remain closed.
“With butterflies not available from suppliers over the past several months, the butterfly population in the Butterfly Atrium is dramatically reduced; therefore, the Atrium will still be temporarily closed until the butterfly population increases. Anticipated opening for the Butterfly Atrium is early July.”
In order to continue to stem the spread of the coronavirus, purchasing tickets online is encouraged. On arrival you can scan your ticket. When purchasing tickets online, guests are asked to choose an arrival time, available in 20-minute intervals.
Hand sanitizers will be available.
“Guests are required to wear a mask indoors, encouraged to wear a mask outdoors and practice physical distancing during their visit. Anyone who does not feel well should stay at home.”
The gardens will be open 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily through Labor Day, Sept. 7.
Under Armour’s face masks for athletes sold out in an hour.
Thanks for visiting PennLive. Quality local journalism has never been more important. We need your support. Not a subscriber yet? Please consider supporting our work .
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
