How to choose the best flowers for Valentine’s Day: all about the symbolic meanings behind roses, carnations and more
The 2019 Philadelphia Flower Show runs March 2-10 at the Pennsylvania Convention Center in Philadelphia. This year's theme is Flower Power. The flower show is put on by the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society. Julia Hatmaker | jhatmaker@pennlive.com
For centuries, a flower has been more than just a flower.
It’s a symbol and can send quite the complex message if you can read its meanings correctly.
Dating back to ancient Egypt, lotuses were seen as symbolizing rebirth. William Shakespeare wrote of herbal meanings in his play “Hamlet,” with the crazed Ophelia saying “There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance.” But the symbolism of flowers really took off in the Victorian era when it became a way to deliver coded messages, whether they be romantic or… well, less positive.
We reached out to Jenny Carey, senior director for the PHS Meadowbrook Farm to learn more about flower meanings. Carey graciously took a break from working on the upcoming Philadelphia Flower Show (which opens Feb. 29 at the Pennsylvania Convention Center) to answer our questions.
“People have always meant things by what particular flowers they sent,” Carey said. “Each tradition and era has had their own way of interpreting them.”
Back in the 1800s, people would assemble “tussie-mussies,” essentially miniature flower arrangements, and gift them to friends. Each flower would have a meaning, composing a secret message of sorts.
So, for instance, a tussie-mussie of blue violets and American Cowslips would tell someone that you were “faithful” in your regard and thought they had “divine beauty.” Meanwhile, an arrangement of lavender and yarrow would mean that you distrust the person and are declaring all out war on them.
“It’s sort of fun because it predates text messages and any of the other ways you communicate these days,” Carey said. “It was a way to send a message without everyone knowing about it.”
The fact that flowers are beautiful, smell wonderful and are filled with meaning make them an excellent gift for a friend or significant other… or anyone really.
“I’m a firm believer that you can never give too many flowers,” Carey said. “There’s no occasion that a few flowers aren’t appropriate.”
But skip the pre-made bouquets and consider crafting your own, intermingling individual flowers to deliver the perfect message. Not sure what to include in your bouquet? Here’s a few recommendations from Carey, who uses the 1913 book “The Language of Flowers” to reference for flower meanings.
Roses, of course, tend to be the flower of choice for romance, for good reason. Red roses, for instance, stand for true love, while a white rose means “I am worthy of you” and a yellow rose means “friendship.”
You also can’t go wrong with plants that are part of the 2020 Philadelphia Flower Show theme : Riviera Holiday. That means olives, which mean “peace,” and citrus trees. Orange blossoms signify bridal festivities and “your purity is equal to your loveliness.” Orange flowers represent chastity, while the orange tree itself symbolizes generosity. Lemon means zest.
One flower to avoid? Red carnations, which means “alas, my poor heart!” Probably not the best for romance. It’s also best to skip out on foxgloves, which mean “insincerity.” African Marigolds are also a dicey choice, as they mean “vulgar minds” -- which could be a fun message, provided you think the recipient would enjoy it.
Regardless of what makes up your bouquet, you can help it live longer by cutting off the bottom of the stems before you arrange them and changing the water often. However, you may want to consider changing it up by skipping the cut flower bouquet and going straight for an actual growing plant. After all, what could be a better sign of love than something that’s alive and growing and will last longer than a week?
Daffodils, in that case, make a great plant to gift, since they mean “regard.” Hyacinths are also a good choice -- not only do they smell great, but a blue hyacinth, for instance, means “constancy.” With both hyacinths and daffodils, your lover can grow them in their windowsill during winter and then easily plant them in their garden come warmer weather.
For the green thumb challenged, cacti are a great idea. Added bonus? A cactus means “warmth.”
The 2019 Philadelphia Flower Show runs March 2-10 at the Pennsylvania Convention Center in Philadelphia. This year's theme is Flower Power. The flower show is put on by the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society. Julia Hatmaker | jhatmaker@pennlive.com
