Flowerbx are continuing to provide their stylish blooms amid the lockdown, offering contactless delivery across Europe, the UK and New York from their warehouse which is sanitised daily. From £30, you can send a bunch of their classy, single-variety bunches nationwide. In the words of CEO Whitney Hawkings, ‘At a time when most of life’s ‘pleasures’ are taken away, flowers remind us to find joy in the little things’. To get the most out of your flowers, Flowerbx recommends changing the water and trimming the stems a little every day.
You can still get your weekly flower fix from Freddie’s Flowers despite the lockdown. For £25 a week, Freddie’s Flowers will deliver a fresh cut-to-order bouquet to your doorstep every seven days. The team at Freddie’s have set up a virtual notice board to share customers' messages during lockdown and they tell us how heartwarming the feedback has been -  'all the messages we’re getting from people saying how our flowers are really cheering them up and thanking us for carrying on in these worrying times…Some of them are incredibly moving and humbling - it really makes all the extra effort worthwhile.'
Quarantine won’t stop you getting a bunch of Pelaton’s rustic blooms. Although East London-based Petalon have made the decision to pause delivery by bicycle (the quirk we love them for); instead, for the duration of the lockdown, bouquets will be delivered by carbon-neutral courier, that is adhering to all safety demands. You can pick from two of their seasonal bouquets (which are freshly designed each week) for delivery nationwide for £42.  They’ve scaled back staff in the studio so it’s just founder Florence Kennedy and husband James handling the flowers. Florence told Tatler: 'We want to make it possible for people to send some love, as acts of kindness are really needed right now, but we are taking great care to do this as safely as possible… We've been so touched to see how many people are sending flowers and just how much love and support there is out there even when we can't be together.'
