It’s not unusual to have difficulty placing trust in someone again after you’ve been hurt — even if your current partner doesn’t show any signs of manipulation or dishonesty.
Certain triggers, whether you’re aware of them or not, can still remind you of the past and provoke doubt and insecurity.
Low self-esteem can sometimes contribute to relationship insecurity and anxiety.
Some older research suggests people with lower self-esteem are more likely to doubt their partner’s feelings when experiencing self-doubt. This can happen as a type of projection.
In other words, feeling disappointed in yourself can make it easier for you to believe that your partner feels the same way about you.
People with higher levels of self-esteem, on the other hand, tended to affirm themselves through their relationship when they experienced self-doubt.
The attachment style you develop in childhood can have a big impact on our relationships as an adult.
If your parent or caregiver responded quickly to your needs and offered love and support, you probably developed a secure attachment style.
If they didn’t meet your needs consistently or let you develop independently, your attachment style might be less secure.
Insecure attachment styles can contribute to relationship anxiety in various ways:
Avoidant attachment could lead to anxiety about the level of commitment you’re making or deepening intimacy.
Anxious attachment, on the other hand, can sometimes result in fears about your partner leaving you unexpectedly.
Keep in mind that having an insecure attachment style doesn’t mean you’re doomed to always experience relationship anxiety.
“Just as you can’t change from one kind of personality to another, you can’t completely change your attachment style,” says Jason Wheeler , PhD. “But you can certainly make enough changes that an insecure attachment style doesn’t hold you back in life.”
A questioning nature can also factor into relationship anxiety.
You might need to ask yourself about all possible outcomes of a situation before deciding on a path. Or maybe you just have a habit of carefully considering every decision.
If you tend to ask yourself a lot of questions about your choices, even after you’ve made them, you’ll likely spend some time questioning your relationship, too. This isn’t always a problem. In fact, it’s usually healthy to take time to think about choices you make, especially significant ones (like romantic commitment).
It could become an issue, though, if you find yourself stuck in an endless pattern of questioning and self-doubt that doesn’t go anywhere productive.
It might not feel like it in the moment, but relationship anxiety can be overcome, though it does take some time and effort. And doing so usually involves more than simply being told that your relationship is fine.
“I can tell someone their anxiety doesn’t necessarily mean there’s an underlying problem in the relationship, and indeed they may be well loved,” Robertson says. “But until they have felt [a] sense that all is well, that they truly are safe and secure, the anxiety will likely persist.”
She encourages addressing relationship anxiety early, before it becomes a problem.
These tips can help you get the ball rolling:
As you and your partner become closer, you might find key parts of your identity, individuality, or even your independence shifting to make room for your partner and the relationship.
This often happens naturally as you and your partner become a couple. And while some changes — such as getting used to sleeping with the window open — may not have a big impact on your sense of self, others might.
Losing your sense of self in the relationship or changing to accommodate what you think your partner wants doesn’t help either of you.
Remember, your partner’s reasons for wanting to date you probably have a whole lot to do with who you are. If you start pushing down parts of yourself in order to hold on to the relationship, you might begin to feel less like yourself. Plus, your partner might feel as if they’ve lost the person they fell in love with.
Mindfulness practices involve focusing your awareness on what’s happening in the present moment without judgement. When negative thoughts come up, you acknowledge them and let them move on.
This can be particularly useful when you’re stuck in a negative thought spiral . It can also help you to prioritize your day-to-day experiences with your partner.
After all, maybe the relationship will end in a few months or a few years, but you can still appreciate and enjoy it in the meantime.
Relationship anxiety often comes from within, so it may have nothing to do with your partner.
But if something specific is fueling your anxiety — whether it’s playing with their phone when you talk or not wanting to visit your family for the holidays — try bringing it up in a respective and non-accusatory way.
Using “I” statements can be a big help during these conversations.
For example, instead of saying “You’re being so distant lately and I can’t take it,” you could rephrase it as, “I feel like there’s been some distance between us, and it makes me feel like you’re withdrawing because your feelings have changed.”
Even if you know your partner truly does love you and that your anxiety is coming from within, it can help to loop your partner in.
You can explain what you’re thinking and how you’re trying to deal with it. Their reassurance may not fully alleviate your anxiety, but it likely won’t hurt.
Plus, opening up and being vulnerable can strengthen the bond you already have.
Feeling anxious about your relationship or your partner can sometimes make you want proof that everything is all right.
It’s natural to want to reassure yourself, but resist the impulse to find this proof in unhelpful or harmful ways.
Pay attention to the difference between your usual behaviors and impulsive actions. Texting regularly might be normal in your relationship, and keeping up a steady conversation can help reinforce your sense of connection. But sending several texts in an hour asking your partner where they are and what they’re doing, when you know they’re hanging out with friends, can lead to conflict.
When you feel these impulses, try to distract yourself with some deep breathing, a walk or jog, or a quick phone call to a close friend.
If you’re having a hard time working through relationship anxiety on your own, talking to a therapist can help you get some clarity. It’s also a great way to learn how to cope with the effects of relationship anxiety.
For relationship anxiety, a therapist who works with couples can be particularly helpful.
They can help you both:
It doesn’t have to be a long-term thing, either. One
