How do you know your cat loves you? Let me count 25 ways
Scientists claim that cats show no attachment to their owners. Au contraire: the evidence of their love and devotion is obvious and abundant
‘My cat tolerates affection. She lets me kiss her, even though she clearly doesn’t like it.’
“ Face it, your cat doesn’t care about you ,” reads one headline. “ Cats do not need their owners, scientists conclude ,” reads another. Poor cats, always getting bad PR. As if it wasn’t enough that Australia has declared war on feral cats , we now have a study that says cats don’t need their owners. The research, from the University of Lincoln, adapted the Ainsworth “ strange situation ” test, developed in the 1970s to observe just how attached children, and sometimes dogs (idiots), are to their caregivers. They found that when you put a cat in an unfamiliar room it does not look for reassurance from its owner or seem to miss them if they are absent. There’s one potential explanation for this, it strikes me: cats, unlike children and dogs (idiots), are territorial – put them in a strange room and they will be too busy freaking out to look for reassurance. But that doesn’t matter. The myth of the independent cat who sees humans as nothing more than handy food dispensers is firmly entrenched. As a cat owner, I am deluded enough to think that my cat loves me. And I have been racking my brain, and asking everyone I know, to come up with hard evidence of this fact.
1. Greets you at the door. One colleague’s cat recognises the sound of her husband’s car in a busy street, and another’s two cats sit on the garden wall waiting for her to come home from work.
2. Follows you around. Does your cat come and hang out with you, in a sort of casual, hey what are you doing, oh taking a shower, well, I’ll just sit down then, way? That’s love.
If you live with a cat, you live with a weirdo: your tales of feline oddity | Guardian Readers
3. Stares at you. Unsettling. But cats only make direct eye contact with people they really like.
4. Blinks at you. A long slow blink is a cat equivalent of a kiss. Do it back. But only if no one is watching.
5. Meows. Cats do not meow to other cats, only to humans. This is my best cat fact. Your cat is talking to you. Your cat is telling you it loves you. Also: purring. Loudly.
6. Tolerates affection. My cat lets me kiss her, even though she clearly doesn’t like it. She may duck, but she doesn’t run away, and I consider this a victory.
