Depending on your reason for isolating, be sure to check all local regulations and avoid any spaces that are closed for safety or health reasons.
If getting outdoors isn’t an option, you could try:
growing herbs or small plants on a windowsill, patio, or balcony
You may not have a 9-to-5 job to report to while you’re isolated, but a lack of routine can cause disruptions in eating, sleeping, and activity.
To keep a sense of structure, try to create a daily routine that consists of work or house projects, mealtimes, workout time, and even downtime.
Having an outline for your day helps you keep track of the trajectory of your hours and gives you mini “goals” to hit throughout the day.
So you can’t go to the movies or meet your friends for dinner. But you can still “meet up” with them — just in a different way.
Use real-time video streaming services, like FaceTime, Zoom, or Skype, to chat with your friends, colleagues, and loved ones. Face-to-face chat time can keep you in contact with the “outside world” and make even your small home feel a whole lot bigger.
Connecting with others who are in a similar situation can also help you feel that you’re not alone. Sharing your thoughts, emotions, and challenges with others can help you realize that what you’re feeling is normal.
Connecting with others may even help you find creative solutions to an issue you’re grappling with.
Did you play a band instrument in high school? Were you once interested in painting? Do you have stacks of vacation photos you once promised yourself you’d put in a scrapbook? Is there a recipe you’ve always wanted to try but never had the time?
Use your time in isolation to reconnect with creative activities that you’ve had to put on hold because life got too busy. Spending time on creative activities keeps your brain busy.
Keeping your mind occupied and engaged may help ward off feelings of boredom or restlessness and make the time pass more quickly.
If you live with others, feelings of cabin fever may be intensified by the nearness of other individuals.
Parents have responsibilities to children; partners have responsibilities to one another. But that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t have any time on your own.
Give yourself time “away” from others to relax. Find a quiet place to read a book, meditate, or pop in some earbuds for an engaging podcast.
Research has shown that people who exercise regularly are less prone to anxiety than people who don’t exercise. That’s because physical activity lowers your body’s stress hormones, such as cortisol .
At the same time, exercise causes your brain to release endorphins . These neurochemicals can boost your mood and overall feeling of well-being.
If you can’t get outside, you can do a strength training workout at home using just your body weight or simple equipment, like dumbbells or resistance bands.
Or you can put together your own routine by focusing on a few basic but effective exercises, such as:
