‘We don’t look much alike, beside our smiles’: Mattha Busby (left) and Declan Aumpu, who met in their 20s.
“I’d always wanted a brother,” says Declan Aumpu, the first time we meet. It’s April 2017, and I am 23 years old. Dec, 26, has arrived in the back of a friend’s van after a big night out. He is clearly nervous and has hardly slept. I’m anxious, too.
It’s strange that we have never met, especially since so many people know we are half-brothers, and I gulp back feelings of regret and shame. We don’t look much alike, beside our smiles, which curl up on the left-hand side of our mouths, but there is an instant connection; an immediate ease in each other’s company. As we embrace outside the Merlin’s Cave pub in Chalfont St Giles, south Buckinghamshire, it’s like being reunited with an old friend.
Later, in the pub, Dec tells me he was “forever envious of the bond that brothers seemed to share”, a feeling that only grew when, around the age of eight, he found out about me. He also explains that this is not our first meeting: more than two decades ago, we spontaneously played together with a boules set in a pub garden in nearby Chalfont St Peter, where our parents had grown up. Dec’s mum, Tracey, beckoned him away as soon she realised who I was. I had no idea of the identity of my fleeting playmate.
Dec drinks Stella; mine is a Guinness. The barman asks who I am, since Dec is a regular here, and Dec proudly says that I’m his brother. Noticing the height difference between us (I’m 6ft 4in and Dec is 5ft 8in), the barman raises an eyebrow and makes a joke about me being put into a grow bag at an early age.
I only learned of Dec’s existence relatively recently. When my parents first got together in 1991, my dad, Nick, then 27, told my mother, Mandy, 26, about a rumour going around that he had recently fathered a child; he said it wasn’t true, and my mum believed him. Soon afterwards, they moved from Chalfont St Peter to the more affordable town of Fenny Stratford, near Milton Keynes, where they had me and my younger brother, Rory. My mum heard nothing more about this rumour until many years later, when my uncle Andy referred to my dad’s “other son” during a conversation with my aunt Judy; she later told my mother.
Not wanting to disrupt Rory’s GCSEs, Mum spent the next six months silently seething, before confronting Dad. Clearly regretful and contrite, he eventually told us about our half-brother as we slowly chewed paneer at an Indian buffet in July 2016. He claimed he had been warned to stay away from his baby son after his friendship with Tracey broke down, and that he had duly done so. Tracey has since said she had wanted him to be either a constant presence in Dec’s life, or not present at all, and he had conceded that he was not ready to be a father. I was, and still am, bewildered: the dad I knew had never shied away from truth and responsibility.
Once the news had sunk in, I got in touch with Dec, a landscape gardener and builder, on Facebook, and we arranged to meet. We settled on the Merlin’s Cave, where he and my dad had met a handful of times since 2010, after my parents separated and my dad sent Tracey a Facebook friend request. Dec is keen to build a relationship with Dad, but neither of them are very good at texting each other back, never mind socialising or making time for enriching activities. Nor am I.
Dec tells me that, growing up in Chalfont St Peter, most people viewed his connection to the Busbys as a matter not to be spoken about. Tracey struggled for money, and they spent time in a homeless hostel before moving to the next village. “I still get called ‘the bastard Busby’ down the pub,” he says. “And at school, there were these girls who would viciously bully me for not having a dad.” This prompted Tracey to tell him that his dad had another family. Then, at the age of eight, Dec was diagnosed with diabetes, and took part in a genetic study; through this, he discovered our father’s name, and those of his half-siblings.
Dec and I both spent large parts of our childhoods alone; he is an only child, while Rory is six years younger than me, and we didn’t really connect until later in life. “If we’d been introduced when we were younger, it would have been a different experience,” Dec says now, three years after that first meeting. “But now you’re my little brother.” We may not see each other regularly, but we find comfort in keeping in touch to discuss our partners, work, family and the coronavirus. Just like brothers would.
How does it feel for other siblings united in later life? Almost one in five British families have been touched by estrangement , according to research by the charity Stand Alone, and a million children across the UK have no significant contact with their father . Reenee Singh, a psychotherapist and CEO of the Association of Family Therapy, is clear about the emotional burden associated with this: “It can be very difficult for half-siblings to grow up knowing they have a family somewhere they’re not in contact with,” she says. “If their existence was a secret, it can leave them feeling confused, vulnerable, unprotected and insecure.”
However, she warns against rushing into a meeting with an estranged sibling, pointing out that it is better to exchange photos, letters or messages on social media first. In my own case, she says: “You’re old enough to forge your own adult relationship and to bridge the gap between him and your father. The onus is on the siblings who have grown up with both their parents to reach out to their half-siblings.”
Reunions aren’t always straightforward, as the 2018 documentary Three Identical Strangers , about triplets separated at birth, tragically showed. Although the three brothers experienced a joyful reunion, followed by fame and success, they all struggled with mental health issues. One of the siblings, Eddy, took his own life in 1995. Meanwhile, plenty of people live their lives never knowing the whole story about their families or how many siblings they have.
My meeting with Dec had raised questions for us both, and made me want to speak to other people who had experienced something similar. How had they found their long-lost siblings? Had they been able to reconcile their different upbringings and move beyond pondering what might have been?
‘You don’t realise you’ve got space for another sibling. But when one turns up, it’s great’: Sandy Busek, 53, and Paul Busek, 51
