feelings on their own, they need to seek mental health help,” Dr. Sullivan
If you tend to withdrawal when times get tough, know that staying connected is a powerful tool for coping during hard times. Whether that comes in the form of video chatting or sending a good old-fashioned letter, staying in touch with family, friends, neighbors and coworkers can help you keep a positive attitude.
also seeing patients through virtual visits, so if you’re having trouble
coping, contact your healthcare provider for a referral.
When there is so much uncertainty about the future, it’s
easy to get carried away playing out the worst case scenarios in your head. Will I or someone I know get COVID-19? How
long will we have to stay socially distanced? Will things ever go back to normal?
control, be aware of what you do have control of. For example, you can choose how
much news or social media you consume in a day. You can decide what you eat. Be
mindful about these choices, and focus on staying in the present.
Allow yourself to find joy and gratitude in the small things, like a video chat with family members, or the rush of fresh air when you open a window or step outside. If you’re under a shelter-in-place order, find ways to appreciate the opportunity to step back from the hustle and bustle of everyday life and be home.
A change in routine can be especially tough for kids. They
might not understand why school is canceled, or think it’s unfair that they
can’t play with their friends or see their grandparents.
“Our kids have their own misconceptions about what’s occurring,” Dr. Sullivan says. “I think it’s important for us to give them the appropriate information at their age-appropriate level.”
kids find the positives,” Dr. Sullivan says. “Instead of thinking, I can’t be with my friends, challenge
them to think of what they can do, like making cards for people who are alone
or might be at risk for sadness, isolation, depression or anxiety.”
example. If you can model how to stay calm and safe, that will help your kids,
