Guns N’ Roses European tour ‘will not be happening’ but has been postponed.
In January we spent £200 on tickets to see Guns N’ Roses at Tottenham Hotspur’s stadium on 29 May as part of a European tour (they’re also due to play the following day). The chances of these gigs going ahead have been limited for a while, yet there has been no statement from the band or Ticketmaster. Until recently, Ticketmaster replied to emails to say it would keep people updated if anything changed.
The gigs are now less than three weeks away and obviously have no chance of going ahead. I’m lucky that we haven’t booked hotels or transport, but others will have, and many have posted their frustration on Twitter.
I’m confident we’ll eventually get our money back, but I think the handling is unbelievably bad and should be called out. What’s more, Ticketmaster is still selling tickets to the event.
We received your email on Monday and the same afternoon the band tweeted that its “upcoming European tour will not be happening”, with promises of “further announcements” when possible. Ticketholders are now told that gigs have been postponed to a “date due to be announced soon”. As the concerts have been effectively rescheduled, rather than cancelled, Ticketmaster is likely to keep you in limbo until the new dates are agreed with promoters.
Ticketmaster is encouraging fans not to “reach out directly” with a refund request because of the huge backlog of cancellations and rescheduled events. However, once dates are agreed it is likely you will be offered the chance to roll over your ticket or apply for a refund.
We asked Ticketmaster for a statement for publication, but we had not received one at the time of going to press.
Reader HS of the Isle of Man contacted us with a ray of cheery news. “I booked a three-night stay at a Premier Inn in Bristol at the beginning of June to attend a wedding. This has been cancelled and as it was a ‘non-flex’ booking I was expecting to have to pay and then wrangle with my insurance and credit card company for repayment.
“However, I received an email saying I could change or cancel with no charge. I have now cancelled. What a refreshing change: a big corporation that is so helpful. Well done Premier Inn.”
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com . Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions: http://gu.com/letters-terms
