He continued: 'Today was conflicting for me, on one hand I'm beyond proud of the relationship I have with my children.
Jeff went on: 'Then due to all of the self development I've done I seem to 'feel' more than I suppress these days so I've spent most of today feeling an absence of something I wished I'd experienced, something I would have had from 13 onwards but was simply denied by some rather s**t luck.
'These feelings today led me not for the first time to reading a few things about the events leading to his death, I usually stop myself after a while though because the whole misinformed affair was as honest and transparent as much of which we struggle with today.'
He ended: 'I hope others who have lived lives equally as complicated as my own will feel even just a slight sense of satisfaction knowing you're not on your own, your feelings are valid, and being honest, even if slightly vague feels great and is to be encouraged.
'Own your story, recognise the strengths you've acquired and show your vulnerabilities because we all need to be a little more human and recovery works (much) better when we aren't bottling things up. Yes I'm encouraging you to talk, get used to it.'
On his Stories, Jeff reposted a series of photos his wife Kate Dwyer, 30, had shared to mark the day.
He shares his two sons Bobby, 17, and Freddy, 15, with the late Jade Goody.
Jeff recently revealed that his relationship is stronger than ever after lockdown gave him and Kate a chance to work on their marriage.
The couple tied the knot in September 2018, but experienced some problems late last year, with Jeff pictured not wearing his wedding ring.
Now, the pair are back on track as a result of spending more time together, telling HELLO ! magazine that they were able to 'pause and reset' their marriage.
Jeff explained: 'Now we are a million times better because we took the time to invest in ourselves.
'I am so proud that the two of us have got to the point where things are more straightforward and more simple and easier than they have ever been between us.
'We are stronger for the two months that we've spent together with time to just focus on one another. Kate and I have had an opportunity to press pause and reset.'
Sweet: On his Stories, Jeff reposted a series of photos his wife Kate Dwyer, 30, had shared to mark the day with sons Bobby, 17, and Freddy, 15
PR director Kate added: 'For us, day to day, we have realised how much we love each other's company. Marriage isn't always easy and our struggles were often because we didn't see each other. Now we are stronger than ever.'
Jeff went on to explain that he is a 'better' person when Kate is around, and marvelled at the amount they have been able to achieve when working together, including renovating their house.
'I appreciate all couples need their space, but I am genuinely better when Kate is around. I enjoy her company, and there is something special about the team that we make,' the 41-year-old TV presenter, author and life-coach tells
'We like to get stuff done, to roll our sleeves up, and it's no coincidence that the house has come on bundles since lockdown.'
Family: Jeff shares his two sons Bobby, 17, and Freddy, 15, with the late Jade Goody
Share or comment on this article:
