NEW ORLEANS (press release) – Named the No. 1 “Best Hotel Restaurant” by USA TODAY 10Best , Jack Rose, the culinary crown of the Pontchartrain Hotel, is now open for dine-in service. Diners can once again enjoy Jack Rose signatures such as the Royal Red Shrimp Muddy Waters with squid ink campanelle; Fried Chicken Parmesan with red gravy and Parmigianino Reggiano; Pompano en Papillote with leek, potato, preserved citrus butter; and the decadent Mile High Pie, among others.
Additionally, Jack Rose’s famed Sunday Brunch is back with crowd favorites like the Chicken & Waffles with pepper jelly; Crispy Shrimp & Grits with étouffée sauce; and the 1&1 Burger with cheddar cheese curds and hickory sauce. New offerings include Corned Beef Hash with creole hollandaise and poached eggs; French Omelette with wild mushrooms, english peas, and mahon. Bottles of Yellow Label Veuve Clicquot will be available for $60.
Dinner is served Wednesday through Saturday from 5 p.m. to 10 p.m.; Sunday brunch is served from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. Jack Rose is closed Monday and Tuesday.
Hot Tin, the Crescent City’s favorite rooftop bar with a breathtaking 270-degree view of the Mississippi River and downtown New Orleans, has officially reopened its doors to the public. Hot Tin’s signature cocktails will be on offer, including the Champagne Safari made with gin, pimm’s, aperol, cucumber, lemon, sparkling; Some Like It Hot made with tequila, mezcal, mango, lime, cherry brandy, and habanero; and the Skyliner made with honeysuckle vodka, aperitif, lime, grapefruit, and habanero bitters. Hot Tin’s full beer and wine will also be available. Hot Tin is open Wednesday through Saturday from 5 p.m. to midnight; and Sunday from 2 p.m. to 8 p.m. Hot Tin is closed Monday and Tuesday.
Jack Rose and Hot Tin are adhering to all safety protocols including local ordinances and recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control. Both establishments have instituted policies including socially-distanced indoor and outdoor table seating. In line with New Orleans’ protocols to ensure the safety of guests, all employees are required to wear a face mask. Guests are also required to wear a face mask to gain entry. Masks can be removed while seated at the table. Jack Rose and Hot Tin are located at the Pontchartrain Hotel, 2031 St Charles Ave. in New Orleans. Reservations are strongly recommended.
