Published: Jun 20 at 8 a.m.
Updated: Jun 20 at 8:06 a.m.
Sorry you must be at least 19 years of age to consume this content.
Dalhousie University professor Jack Novack speaks with Yarmouth resident Warner Comeau at a municipal recruitment at the Burridge Campus of the Nova Scotia Community College. BELLE HATFIELD PHOTO
“The days and weeks are blurring together. There is a sense of constant go. We know that if we slow down people end up dying.”
Being a dad I was happy, with Father’s Day approaching, to get an email from Lewis Novack, who is proud as could be of his pops, the much-applauded Dalhousie University professor Jack Novack.
Novack senior, who has already received the Lieutenant Governor’s Medal for Excellence in Public Administration and the Canadian Association of University Continuing education award for Innovation and Co-operation, has just been awarded Dal’s College of Continuing Education’s inaugural award for excellence in teaching.
When I called Novack, whose focus is local government, and who has worked with a wide range of municipal and public administrators, to ask what the key is to being a great teacher, he paused for a minute at the end of the line in Halifax.
Then he said that first you have to love the subject, and have the attitude, more or less, when standing before the classroom that “I can’t imagine why anyone wouldn’t want to know about this.”
It’s not something that can be faked, he told me. Students pick up on a teacher’s inflections and mannerisms. They know when something matters to the person at the front of the room.
“Enthusiasm is infectious,” Novack said. The opposite, if someone is on autopilot or teaching a subject they don’t really care about, is equally true.
You also have to care about your students, he said. In Novack’s case that is easy, since his students go back to local government where they have a tangible impact on people’s lives, which means that his own “little contributions can make a difference.”
Novack, in truth, didn’t want to talk about himself much the other day.
So we chatted for awhile about his concerns over the solvency of local governments due of the pandemic, and his feelings about the Black Lives Matters movement of which he said “freedom requires eternal vigilance” and “municipalities need to lead this not respond to it.”
Eventually, the conversation meandered back to his son, Lewis the former Armbrae Academy valedictorian.
“He is very focused. He just doesn’t have the normal kind of reticence,” Novack said of the eldest of his three children, who at 27, is running the COVID-19 clinical trials at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.
Then he proceeded to tell a story about how Lewis, at age 10, got it in his mind that he wanted to be certified in first aid and CPR from St. John Ambulance.
So, Novack Sr. drove him over to the St. John Ambulance buildings in Dartmouth one Saturday morning.
There, a boy whose favourite television show was Barney & Friends, walked into the classroom among rows of electricians seeking mandatory re-certification.
When lunch came the lads invited Lewis to join them at the tavern. He stayed put, eventually writing the multiple choice exam and becoming the youngest person in the province, at that point, to earn the St. John Ambulance designation.
When I called Lewis to get his version of events he said the idea came from all of the medical shows he had been watching on television in the early 2000s. “At that point I wanted to take on the world,” he said. “First aid got me a little closer to the action.”
It also kick-started his path towards the world of health care, which he thought was going to lead to trauma medicine, but instead has veered in another direction.
Novack had a knack for the sciences, but somewhere along the line also developed enough of an interest in the humanities to earn an anthropology degree from Carleton University in Ottawa.
A masters in Global Health Policy and Management at Brandeis University followed, where, among other things, he specialized in communicable diseases, then post-graduate work in global infectious diseases at Harvard University.
There he was recruited to become a clinical epidemiologist in the university’s Department of Epidemiology, and then to lead a clinical trial at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital’s division of Infectious Diseases.
Now he’s a full-time clinical epidemiologist at the hospital while also leading its clinical trials for COVID-19 vaccines, which means he’s riding herd over a team of 35, all of them working 80-hour weeks.
“The days and weeks are blurring together,” he told me. “There is a sense of constant go. We know that if we slow down people end up dying.”
When I asked Jack Novack about his son he said, “I’m very proud of him.”
Did this story inform or enhance your perspective on this subject?
