We earn a commission for products purchased through some links in this article.
Kit Harington and Rose Leslie: a timeline of their relationship
We all remember Jon and Ygritte's love story on Game of Thrones . Even people who have never watched the show know the line, "You know nothing, Jon Snow." And as though the story couldn't get any better, Jon and Ygritte (aka., Kit Harington and Rose Leslie got together in real life shortly after their characters did on the show. The couple even got married in an idyllic ceremony in Scotland in 2018, where Leslie's father owns a castle, obviously.
Here's everything we know about the couple's notoriously private relationship, with the most recent update first.
The rarely seen couple make an appearance at The Golden Globes, looking as in love as ever on the red carpet. Harington was nominated for Best Actor for his role as Jon Snow in the final season of Game of Thrones, which incidentally, was the series' only nomination at the 2020 Golden Globes. Ouch.
This was also the first time the pair had been photographed together since Harington left a London-based treatment centre in June 2019 ahead of the GOT finale on HBO, with his publicist stating he was using the break in his schedule "as an opportunity to spend some time at a wellness retreat to work on some personal issues."
And here's the rest of Rose Leslie and Kit Harington's relationship timeline...
We don't know exactly when in 2011 Kit and Rose met, but they began filming scenes for GOT together in 2011. Reportedly, however, they didn't fall in love until after their characters did, which happened gradually from season two onwards, with THE steamy cave scene taking place in season three. Although in August of 2012 TMZ shared several pictures of them holding hands in a restaurant in London.
At some point in the years between 2011 and 2016 Kit and Rose become a couple, we don don't officially know when since they're so private about the relationship (fair enough), but in 2014 Harington told Evening Standard that they were just friends, but that he would keep it to himself if he had a girlfriend anyway.
"All rumour and myth," he said. "Me and Rose are very, very close and very good friends. And continue to be, actually. She’s wonderful. But no, no love affair.
"On a serious level," he continued. "I wouldn’t tell the press if I was in a relationship or not. I wouldn’t ever reveal that, because it takes you down a certain road…"
Rumours have been swirling for ages with no confirmation, but finally Rose and Kit make their official debut as a couple on the red carpet of the Olivier Awards in London.
In an interview with Italian Vogue , Kit speaks about how the pair fell in love, describing his best memory of filming the show, "The three weeks in Iceland when we were shooting the second season. Because the country is beautiful, because the Northern Lights are magical, and because it was there that I fell in love. If you’re already attracted to someone, and then they play your love interest in the show, it’s becomes very easy to fall in love…".
Rose and Kit give us an uncharacteristically intimate insight into their relationship, when Kit plays an April Fool's prank on Rose, putting a prop of his own severed head from Game of Thrones on the top shelf in the fridge.
He spoke about the prank on The Jonathan Ross Show, saying, "My family does April Fools. Her family doesn’t do April Fools, and after that, she was in tears, and I was there going, 'April Fools!' It didn’t go down well."
Kit talks about moving in with Rose in an interview with Esquire saying that he and his then-housemate had decided to look for new places, "He's going off with his girlfriend and I'm living with my girlfriend," he said, before saying the relationship was off-limits in the interview.
"'Cause it's as much her relationship as it is mine and I can't speak for both of us. But yeah, we are very, very happy. So that's what I'll say about that."
By July, it was being reported that the pair had moved in together in this idyllic timber property in East Anglia.
On the 26th September a rumour began going around that the pair had got engaged. Then, a day later an announcement appeared in the paper. That's right, in the paper! How cute, it's like the olden days.
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
— Elliot Wagland (@elliotwagland) September 27, 2017
Kit tells The Guardian why he and Rose don't take pictures with fans, detailing the polite and rehearsed rejection he gives when asked, "But you just have to," he defends. "Otherwise you start feeling like a mannequin. Especially me and Rose, we never do a photo together. Because then it makes our relationship feel like… puppets... like we’re a walking show."
He then explained the pair's decision not to speak about each other in interviews, "I just don’t – and I won’t say much about it now – but I don’t believe in talking about one’s relationship in the press because it’s… I strongly believe it’s her relationship and mine, and anything I say here, she may not want me to say. So I just don’t say it. I genuinely think it’s our private life.”
Rose and Kit tied the knot in an idyllic, traditional ceremony on 23rd June at Kirkton of Rayne church in Aberdeenshire, which was attended by the who's who of Westeros and The Seven Kingdoms... aka, the cast of Game of Thrones. Sophie Turner , Maisie Williams, Peter Dinklage and Emilia Clarke all showed up for the big day.
A Russian model called Olga Vlaslova tweeted what she said was a nude photo of Harington, telling a Russian newspaper that she and Harington met in Luxembourg and slept together several times before and after his marriage to Leslie.
A rep for Harington quickly denied the story, saying "The allegations in this story are completely false," his rep says. "[Harington] has never even been to Luxembourg nor has he ever met Olga Vlasova."
The fact that he's never even been to Luxembourg makes this pretty conclusive, really doesn't it.
Rose and Kit walked the red carpet together at the premiere of the final season of Game of Thrones, looking every bit the happy couple.
The couple quietly celebrate their first wedding anniversary after Kit returns from a month in a wellness retreat, which he attended to work on some "personal issues", according to a representative.
A source, told People , "since Kit left the Connecticut wellness center, he is back in London with Rose. The two are enjoying the summer, spending time with family and friends. Kit seems well. And Rose seems happy that he is back in London. While he was in Connecticut, she was lying low. It seemed their focus was just getting Kit feeling better. And he does look better. Kit and Rose seem happy."
Cosmopolitan UK's July issue is out now and available for purchase online and via Readly . You can also SUBSCRIBE HERE or read on Apple News+. Find our podcast 'All The Way With...' on Spotify , Apple Podcasts and the Acast app.
Like this article? Sign up to our newsletter to get more articles like this delivered straight to your inbox.
