PUBLISHED 1:44 PM ET May. 25, 2020 PUBLISHED 1:44 PM EDT May. 25, 2020 UPDATED 2:07 PM ET May. 25, 2020
WASHINGTON D.C. – The majority of Southern California counties just received the approval to move deeper into Phase 2 for reopening their economies this week. Governor Gavin Newsom is loosening coronavirus-related restrictions for the state, while allowing certain areas to make their own decisions.
Overall lawmakers from both sides of the aisle are finding some relief knowing parts of the state are reopening, but some continue to raise concerns that new movement will put people at a greater risk for a new surge of the virus. While most counties complied without problems when Newsom first issued the stay-at-home order in mid-March, as the first state in the nation, the anxiety to reopen has brought on pushback and rebellion to his restrictions.
California Republicans said they want even more places reopened including hair salons, churches, and other places of worship rather than just what Phase 2 includes which are businesses like child care services, dine-in restaurants, and in-store retail shopping.
San Fernando Valley Democrat, Tony Cardenas, of the 29th district, admitted some of the large Southern California cities have been anxious to reopen, but said he believes the governor is doing the right thing: “opening little by little.”
— Rep. Tony Cárdenas (@RepCardenas) March 19, 2020
Cardenas said the “fortunate part” is California continues to stay one of the most cautious states, taking science into consideration, while the “unfortunate part” is that he knows health officials warn about a rise in deaths reopening amid the pandemic.
“We know every health professional has said as we reopen we’re going to see a rise in the number of cases, and unfortunately if you have more cases, you have more deaths,” Cardenas said. “So that’s why we are being very, very careful. Some people are just anxious to open and unfortunately they’re not willing to consider the consequences if we open to quickly or too early but it literally is a matter of life and death.”
Cardenas said much of the progress during the coronavirus should be seen through unified leadership in Washington.
“I just wish this administration, this White House would participate better and more fruitfully with local governments and states, cities, and counties, to make sure we have a more fluid system.”
President Donald Trump flip-flopped between calling for “total authority” over the states, to allowing states to decide how to reopen for themselves. Cardenas pointed to the lack of PPE and testing in some states while others have what they need saying the federal government should have better plans in place.
