Two weeks ago, new Knicks president Leon Rose consulted with The Master – or at least “The Model” for this new rush to hire agents to run NBA teams.
Warriors GM Bob Myers, who worked for superagent Arn Tellem, is given a share of credit for turning the woebegone Warriors into a franchise that made the NBA Finals five straight seasons.
The prosperous reigns of Myers and longtime agent Rob Pelinka of the Lakers have been cited by owner James Dolan’s associates as a factor in bypassing Toronto’s leading executive Masai Ujiri and hiring Rose. The 58-year-old from Cherry Hill, N.J. was the basketball architect at Creative Artists Agency.
In a phone interview with The Post, Myers said he’s “surprised” and “flattered” by the recent attention. He spoke to Rose for nearly an hour on the phone.
“I like Leon a lot,” Myers told The Post. “He’s got a good demeanor. I think he’s seen quite a bit being in the business as long as he has. He was always universally respected. That’s hard to be in a cutthroat industry of the agency world. It takes a lot to maintain the reputation he had over that many years among everybody — teams, peers, clients. I don’t know anybody who has a lot of bad things to say about him.”
Rose picked Myers’ brain – even if they are now competitors. The Warriors and Knicks will review the same college players in the draft lottery this spring as Golden State muddles through an injury-marred gap year.
Leon Rose built a sports agency powerhouse from the ground...
“We had a long conversation,” said Myers, who became the Warriors GM in 2012. “I don’t proclaim to have all the answers. Every job is different. He just had questions. I told him to stay curious. I try to do that. That’s important in this whole thing to keep learning, keep working. It’s stuff he probably knows and has done in his career to get where he is.”
Myers also let Rose know about the mantra he’s followed about success being earned through effort.
“The agent thing, you don’t just become successful, you have to earn it,” Myers said. “To get a group of clients and keep them, it’s not easy to do. He obviously proved he can do that.”
Myers, a former 6-foot-7 forward who played at UCLA, first as a walk-on, left Tellem’s agency in Los Angeles for a new challenge.
Myers said it was huge to have a season of apprenticeship as assistant GM under Larry Riley before grabbing the whole enchilada. Rose, who took over Monday, is being thrown right into the fire, greeted by a sudden Spike Lee-James Dolan feud exploding.
