Lockdown Love. Our new series explores love in this new ab-normal life. Where masks have replaced kisses and hugs have become emojis. Where cold steel and glass have replaced the warmth of flesh and blood. How has love changed? Or is it still the same, underneath the layers of disinfectants and face-coverings? Tell us a new love story. In 250 words or less. Send your submissions to lockdownlove.dailyo@gmail.com.
We will publish the best ones on Mondays.
Rabia is at the airport, she is about to board her first flight after the lockdown. And after all the required protocol and safety rules that have become the new normal, she is sitting in her seat. She has just a handbag, filled with extra gloves, face masks, sanitiser, perfume, lip balm, her wallet, and a small gift. Her phone rings, she reaches into her bag and searches for her phone amongst all her things. She sees a name flash on her phone and under her dark glasses, behind the face mask and the face shield, tears spring up.
She goes back to a year ago, well, more than a year.
She was in Sydney, at Bondi beach, with her installation that was featured in 'Sculptures By The Sea'. It was called 'Amour'. It was made with thrown-away parts of vehicles shaped into pieces of broken hearts when you looked at it from an angle. Just a mangled mass of metal from another. And then a beautiful heart from another angle.
She met Maddy right at it. He was there on a tour, presenting his wine at a wine conference. 'Elsewhere' was in business for about 22 years now, and he worked tenaciously to build his brand from nothing to all it was today.
Rabia was talking animatedly about her installation and could see Maddy walking around her installation and watching her, with a smile. So she waved out to him, and said, "Come over, I don’t bite."
Cheeky, she thought and wanted to laugh, but ignored what he said and went back to explaining to a bunch of eager listeners about her piece 'Amour'.
Maddy walked around, he was looking at how animatedly she spoke, how her eyes were aglow and how she smiled a lot, and when he saw that she was walking away from her piece to check out the rest of the installations, he quickened his step and offered her a glass of wine from the servers floating around.
"I don’t drink with strangers," Rabia said, laughing.
Maddy smiled cheekily and said, "You absolutely should not. But technically we hung together with "Love", so you know me now. I’m Maddy,  by the way."
"That’s terribly cheesy," Rabia laughed and her eyes squinted in the sun.
And for some unknown reason, they just walked and laughed together, and realised they were both from India, here on work. Maddy lived in Nasik and had his own vineyard. Wine was something he learnt along the way to set it up.
Rabia lived in Mussoorie. Landour, to be precise and was a metal sculptor and an installation artist. She lived in Budapest for a few years, but came back and was sure she wanted to definitely live in India. She lived with her dad and just loved the mountains.
And, they walked around "Sculptures By The Sea" for the next three hours, dissecting each installation and breaking into Hindi when they did not want anyone to understand them.
Maddy asked Rabia what she was doing in the evening, and Rabia told him that she had to attend a dinner that the organisers had planned for all the artists. If Maddy was a bit disappointed, he did not show it. He said he was leaving the next day and would have loved to spend time with her, if possible. Rabia looked at his earnest face and made a mental note saying, "Nope! Don’t fall for this line!"
She said bye to him and they both walked away, in different directions.
In the evening, Rabia was dressed in her favourite Mekhela Chador and was walking around a room of familiar faces she had acquainted herself with this past week, during the work that had to be done for the installation, leading up to the exhibition.
"You need to taste this wine, it’s really really good, it comes from a small vineyard called ‘Elsewhere’." She turned around at the sound of a voice, she kind of recognised, straight into the smiling eyes of Maddy.
She laughed so loudly that everyone turned around. "Are you stalking me?" Rabia asked.
And he led her out into the garden with a bottle of 'Elsewhere' and two glasses.
"I don’t leave parties with strangers," said Rabia.
"Must I remind you that you spent the afternoon drinking with me, so I’m not," said Maddy.
She put her arm through his and walked out.
Her head easily reaching his chest, that she so wanted to just rest on, tired in her four-inch heels. And she liked her arm nestled in his, it felt scarily like home.
He seated her on the grass on his jacket and said, "To amour!"
"Yup, may it never go Elsewhere, and just stay," she said, with a naughty grin.
Maybe it was the September moon, or then that beautiful Sydney salty breeze or sips of that desi wine on foreign soil, that cast a spell.
They sat right there and talked to each other till nearly morning.
At least bits of it.
Rabia was out of a long-term relationship and had moved back to India about two and a half years now.
Maddy was in the middle of trying to find what he liked and wanted in life. After a string of love affairs that did not work out, he decided to stay single and just be. They were both sure that marriage was something that they wanted to avoid or at least the pressure of it all.
You know what they say, that sometimes you know a person for years and don’t know them at all, and sometimes just a few minutes are enough to reach inside someone's soul.
"Don’t you have a flight to catch?" asked Rabia.
"I would love to cancel it," said Maddy.
Then she looked up at him and laughed, "Maybe I can drop you to the airport and make sure that you don’t stalk me again!"
Four hours later, she was standing outside the airport, saying bye to Maddy.
"See you at my vineyard soon, Rabia. I really would love to get to know you!" And Maddy just put his arms around Rabia and kissed her.
She kissed him back and said, "Yup!" And smiled into shiny black eyes, set in the most beautiful eyelashes.
By the time they both got back to normal life, back home in India about a week later, they seemed inseparable despite the jet lag and miles between them. They were constantly in touch.
"Maddy, I’m growing immensely fond of you." Rabia texts Maddy, post-work at 11.30 pm. "Are you awake? Can we talk?"
"Well I was going to sleep, but since you are getting immensely fond of me, I’m fully awake," said Maddy. "But listen, I want to at least see you, so I’m going to FaceTime you, pick up your phone."
For two people with hectic work that took them half the way around the country all the time, this looked like it would never work out. And yet it did. Mostly over FaceTime. (Illustration: Sukriti Vadhera Kohli)
Rabia picked it up immediately and started laughing, "Ok now I don’t know what to say."
‘’You were telling me that you like me," said Maddy.
"No, I did not say that," said Rabia.
"Do you do this often? Calling guys and telling them you like them," said Maddy.
"Yes," said Rabia and laughed.
And they continued flirting and spilling their beans to each other till Rabia realised that its nearly 4:30 am.
‘’How much do you talk Maddy! Seriously," laughed Rabia.
"It’s just you Rabia. I can talk to you for hours, it’s crazy," said Maddy.
And then they both decided that they had to stop behaving like stupid teenagers, they both had work in the morning and had to sleep.
And they both did, with a smile on their faces.
The next day they decided that maybe in-between their work, they could meet somewhere, between their flights for lunch. So that they could actually see one another other than on FaceTime.
So they matched schedules and met each other while they had to take a connecting flight, once in Mumbai and once in Delhi.
"Maddy, I need to say this to you. I don’t like crowded relationships. I get jealous and I’m falling in love with you," she called Maddy at 4.30 am.
"Rabia," said a very groggy-sounding Maddy.
"I think I love you, Maddy," Rabia said, very matter-of-fact. "And I don’t like playing games, so thought I should just tell you."
Maddy was silent. Then a very groggy but happy voice said, "What do you see in me Rabia? Listen, I’m not all like you imagine me to be, ok? I’m not that nice!"
‘’You are just enough for me, Maddy,’’ said Rabia.
"Ditto," said Maddy, "I thought I should not scare you away, so I was taking it slow."
And then they kept talking to each other, till Rabia fell asleep with the happiest heart she had in the longest time. Maddy could not sleep immediately; he was just trying to think straight, and Rabia’s words just put the biggest grin on his face. "So this is how comfortable and easy it should be," he thought to himself.
It seemed so easy to fall in love, but meeting each other was like a beautiful puzzle with a few pieces missing. Yes, Rabia and Maddy were officially in a long-distance relationship, with the algebra equation of distance factored into the scarcity of time, overwork plus lots of love multiplied by craziness. So it was quite a calculation. Trying to match schedules.
For two people with hectic work that took them half the way around the country all the time, this looked like it would never work out.
And yet it did. Mostly over FaceTime and calls.
Maddy wanted Rabia to come home. And to introduce her to his life, he invited Rabia home to the vineyard. He wanted to introduce her to his elder brother, who was more of a father-figure than just a brother.
"Do we have to involve family right now?" Rabia sounded unsure.
Maddy heard the concern in her voice and said, "Rabia, we have been stuck to our phones since we met, and hours on FaceTime. I want to see you more often. I know we are going to have to figure out our feelings, our life, and we have to start somewhere. Don’t you trust me? I want you to come home and let my family at least know the reason I’m always smiling at my phone like a psycho. I would like you to come. We can talk there. You mean a lot to me and let me show it to you. I know you said you don’t want to involve our families till we are both sure, but I’m sure! You think about it and let me know. Take your time."
Rabia was trying to figure out how to do this. She was never in the habit of saying anything she did not mean, so she was wondering what she was going to have to say to her dad about going to Nasik to meet Maddy.
Rabia was flying off to Chennai the next morning. She had work in Pondicherry for the next three days. And this was high season for the vineyard with the festive season coming, so the only way they could meet would be if she flew to Nasik for Christmas.
They spoke to each other every day, but she said nothing about visiting and he did not ask her anything.
Maddy was flying to Mumbai for four days of work. He was organising a wine festival with an art exhibition.
"Hi, can I please speak with Mr Vichare?" asked Rabia’s voice.
Maddy’s voice answered, "Yes this is he, and where did you get this number from? It’s private."
"Well," said  Rabia, "I am a sculptor and heard you are organising an art exhibition in Mumbai, and I wanted to be part of it."
"Sorry, I did not get your name. And all entries are closed. So maybe, probably, next time," said Maddy in his pretend-formal tone.
"Oh, that’s a pity," said Rabia, "Ok then, it’s no use booking my flight to Mumbai now."
"And you are giving a stranger this information, because?" continued Maddy.
"Aaaah hahaha," Rabia laughed, with no holding back, "Maddy, I’m coming to Mumbai. I have a few days off. I won’t get in your way. There is this guy I’m quite crazy about. I just want to hang with him!"
"I’m sure, he too is crazy about you!" laughed Maddy.
And they coordinated their dates and flights.
And soon, they were both sitting at a hotel by the sea, having dinner with each other. And in the middle of Rabia biting into a big morsel of salmon with capers, Maddy said, "I love you, Rabia. Thank you for choosing me."
Yes, of course, Rabia knew Maddy loved her to bits. But to hear him say it to her in person just caught her by surprise, and she was only able to reply with a stupid "Ok" after she gulped the morsel down, with the coyest grin.
It felt good to be loved. They both felt brand-new.
Rabia and Maddy always had so much to talk to each other about. Rabia never left his side, she loved to watch him work. How serious he looked, how he spoke about his wine, how the ones around him reacted to him with respect and warmth. She could easily spend more than just a few days with him, if only they had the luxury of just living in the same city.
Four days flew by with lunches, sightseeing and lots of beautiful loving moments in each other’s company.
As she kissed him goodbye at the airport, she said, "Maddy, get a room ready for me at your vineyard. I’m coming over for Christmas."
"You are staying with me," said Maddy.
"Yup, crazy about you," said Rabia.
They both hugged each other tightly.
She hated this and had no clue how to work her life into his. And he looked at her, thinking exactly that.
"Call me once you land," said Maddy.
"Miss you already," said Rabia, hugging him tightly. She put her dark glasses on and walked into the airport, out of his sight. She hated every step away from him. Maddy just did not like the feeling of her walking away.
December was a really busy month. They were both looking forward to spending time with each other.
Rabia told her dad about Maddy. He looked happy; he was happy to see her smiling a lot more. She had immersed herself in her work and rarely said anything after the break-up with Vansh.
Rabia had started packing for Christmas. Gifts for Maddy’s brother, his wife and their 16-year-old son. Then his mom, whom he loved to bits.
She had no idea what to give him. She did not yet know his likes and dislikes and sometimes that’s a good thing. So after much confusion, she got him something small for the vineyard, a mul shirt and a photograph he loved at a photography exhibition they both attended in Mumbai.
It was a picture of a tiger, looking at a bee.
She hoped he would like it.
"Rabia, I will pick you up from the airport. Just message me when you board your flight," said Maddy.
Nervous as hell about meeting Maddy’s family, she went off to sleep.
Pune airport was not so crowded.
She was out in no time.
Another airport, she thought with a smile.
She had begun to love flights if it meant Maddy would be waiting for her at the airport on the other side.
She saw him waiting for her. It had been so long since she last hugged him. She ran to him and launched herself into his arms.
"I missed you sooo much," she said. "I did not," said Maddy holding her tight.
She loved how she fit inside his arms.
Three hours and lots of conversation, songs and kisses later, Maddy stopped short of the vineyard, about 10 minutes away. And got out of the car. He went to the other side, opened the door and led Rabia out.
"Welcome home," he said, and put his arms around her and kissed her. He pointed out to his home down in the valley and to the slopes of his vineyard. It was a beautiful spot in the middle of nowhere. Maddy was telling her how he may not be able to have her in his arms in that crowded, bustling-with-Christmas-preparations home of his, and wanted a little bit of just "us" before he shared her with everyone.
Rabia was not hearing anything anymore. All she kept thinking was how much she loved this amazing man.
In a bit of time, she and he were lugging her bags up to her room.
Spending Christmas with his folks was really lovely. They were the welcoming, non-judgemental kind.
The house was filled with friends, who usually stayed with them for the Christmas-week.
By the fourth day, everyone at the dinner table was asking Maddy if he was going to be shifting to Mussoorie or whether Rabia was going to be shifting to Nasik.
Or whether they were going to continue meeting like gypsies in various cities and keep travelling through various airports.
It was all very funny how everyone laughed, except Maddy and Rabia.
And for the first time, there was an air of confusion between them.
"Listen, don’t take all that talk seriously. We will figure this out," said Maddy.
"Yes, Rabia, what choice do I have? You live in Mussoorie, your work is there. My work is here in Nasik, all that I have built is here. I can’t get up and leave!" said Maddy.
"My dad lives in Mussoorie, Maddy. How do I leave him? As for my work, well, that skill just goes with me wherever I go," she said.
"But if we one day decide to take this further, you probably will have to find a way to come live with me, Rabia," he said, "Would you be able to work from here? I think I can keep you happy."
Rabia looked at Maddy, "I’m happy with you anywhere, Maddy. But slow down. You are going too fast for me. Let me figure this out, and the fact of the matter is that we hardly know each other."
Maddy looked at her a little irritated, "Well, I talk to you every waking moment of the day, you know exactly what I’m up to all the time. Do you think I’m just fooling around?"
"No, no, Maddy. Of course not. But I feel we need to give ourselves time. Let us get to know each other a bit more. Maybe once we get to know each other really well, we may not feel like taking another flight to see each other," she tried a feeble laugh.
Maddy looked at her a bit upset, "I’m going to ignore what you just said, Rabia. Maybe we should go to sleep. It’s been a long day. We'll talk tomorrow."
And they both walked, fingers entwined, under the moonlight, towards the house that was still resounding with laughter and music.
The next two days went by so quickly, and soon Rabia was saying bye to Maddy again at the airport. She kissed him goodbye, and said, "I love you, Madhavan Vichare. I love you very very much. As much as I love your surname haha!"
Maddy laughed back and said, "Listen, I’m getting tired of meeting you at airports. So figure out your life, Ms Rabia Fauji. And come back soon."
