The reality star, who became a dad this year, said he'd been inspired to undergo the procedure after a nasty accident at home left him with a bald patch
Love Island star Jack Fincham has revealed he's undergone a hair transplant.
The 29-year-old said he'd started considering the procedure after a grim accident at home left him with a bald patch on the front of his scalp.
Jack said he's always been proud of his thick head of hair but became self-conscious after the incident.
The star paid a visit to the KSL Clinic in Kent - who have treated a string of fellow Love Island hunks in the past - to see if anything could be done to cover up the scarring.
Jack admitted he'd been left self-conscious about his hair after his locks failed to grow back over a cut to his head (Image: KSL CLINIC)
The Love Island shows off his finished look (Image: KSL CLINIC)
Jack said he'd visited the clinic on two occasions before but was told he didn't need a transplant.
"You see so many so many videos and testimonials and you think that looks sick I wanna get involved in that!
"But KSL Clinic told me I didn’t need it done but obviously I’ve had this accident at home and thought, two birds, one stone!” said Jack.
In the end, Jack opted for the non surgical FUE transplant which involved hair follicles being removed one by one from the donor area and then small incisions are made for the hair follicles to be placed on the new site.
Jack was left with a thinning spot at the front of his head (Image: KSL CLINIC)
He also wanted his hairline brought forward (Image: KSL CLINIC)
Jack said he'd been inspired after seeing the likes of Joe Swash and Mike Quickenden undergo similar procedures.
While fellow Love Island stars Max Morley, Kieran Nicholls and Alex Beattie have also had the treatment.
Jack visited the KSL Clinic, where fellow Love Island and reality stars have had the same procedure (Image: KSL CLINIC)
"It's just a bit of self improvement, same with my teeth. Didn't need to get them done but I wanted them done," explained Jack.
Before starring in Love Island, Jack splashed out on a visit to Turkey to get some super sparkling veneers.
His new gnashers were the subject of many jokes on the show, particularly from voiceover Iain Stirling, but Jack ended up having the last laugh when he walked out with the £50k prize.
Image conscious Jack had some new teeth before starring in Love Island (Image: REX/Shutterstock)
Jack shows off his real teeth in 2015 (Image: jack_charlesf/Instagram)
Sadly, Jack's relationship with Dani Dyer didn't last a year outside of the villa.
Earlier this year, Jack stunned fans by announcing he'd become a dad. He broke the news with a snap of him cuddling a baby, which he revealed was his daughter Blossom.
He later revealed he'd welcomed Blossom with his friend of ten years Casey Ranger.
The Love Island champ has had a busy year as he also became a first time dad (Image: jack_charlesf/Instagram)
