A new project aims to turn social distancing into a dating game, taking a cue from “Love Is Blind.”
Love Is Quarantine is a new dating experience, based on the Netflix show “Love Is Blind.”
For singles practicing social distancing in their houses and apartments, dating presents some obvious challenges. But also: opportunities.
“If you really think about it, being in your apartment during self-isolation is like being in a pod,” said Thi Q. Lam, 27.
He was referring to the Netflix reality-dating show “ Love Is Blind ,” in which contestants are isolated in windowless rooms called pods and speak to each other through walls. These dates are part of an “experiment,” the show’s participants say, to see if a lasting emotional connection can be forged between two people who have never set eyes on each other.
Mr. Lam and his roommate, Rance Nix, 28, are hoping to replicate the experiment virtually, as the new coronavirus has confined many people to their homes.
In their project, Love Is Quarantine , the pods are cells on a Google spreadsheet. The dates are phone calls. Each “season” lasts only one night. Mr. Lam and Mr. Nix are the ones doing all the matching. Viewers at home can follow along on their Instagram account, where the creators post updates from their “cast members.”
On Tuesday night, the first 30 contestants — who applied earlier that evening through a Google doc — were matched for dates. The group consisted of mostly straight couples, but they did have one gay match. “We’re L.G.B.T.Q.I.A. friendly,” said Mr. Rance.
After the dates, Mr. Rance and Mr. Lam called and texted the contestants for recaps. The contestants also recorded pre- and post-date videos, similar to the confessional interviews on reality shows.
Fans following along shared their thoughts and predictions in comments on Instagram and in a section of the Love Is Quarantine Google doc. “We already have some fan favorites,” said Mr. Lam. “I want to date Roman,” one comment on the fan spreadsheet reads. “I need updates on Katie and Steve! Another date?!” reads another.
But what did the daters have to say?
“Some of the dates went really well,” said Mr. Rance. “Some of these couples were talking on the phone for over an hour. We’d text to check up on them, and they were still talking.”
“I think we have a lot in common and we’re really vibing,” read one mid-date text from a contestant last night.
Mr. Lam and Mr. Rance said they are ultimately looking to help people connect and feel less isolated in these uncertain times. “Any way we can lift spirits, that’s what we’re here for at the end of the day,” said Mr. Rance.
Thi Q. Lam, left, and Rance Nix, the creators of Love Is Quarantine.
The two roommates recently binge-watched the Netflix show, as both of them have been out of work as a consequence of the virus’ spread. (Mr. Lam runs his own content studio, and Mr. Rance is an actor.) They found the message of the Netflix show — that love could blossom without physical barriers — inspiring.
“One thing that resonated with us is the fact that we’re stripping away the physical aspect of dating, and that’s a pretty cool opportunity,” said Mr. Rance. “As a person with achondroplasia, the most common form of dwarfism, dating can be kind of tough when a lot of people are looking for that six-foot-four guy. To watch ‘Love Is Blind,’ a show where they give people the opportunity to get to know each other beforehand, I think that’s cool. We’re trying to do the same thing with Love Is Quarantine.”
“We want people to get to know other people and their personalities, likes and dislikes before they make a judgment call based on what they look like,” he said.
Mr. Lam and Mr. Rance plan to begin selling Love Is Quarantine merchandise. When they do, they said they would donate 100 percent of the proceeds to Feeding America , a nonprofit organization focused on hunger relief.
“While Love Is Quarantine is a fun opportunity to set up dates and create loving matches, it’s also a great opportunity to help others who at this present time might not be able to cover their bills for basic needs like food,” said Mr. Rance.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
My state is reopening. Is it safe to go out?
States are reopening bit by bit . This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
How do I get tested?
If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.
Love Is Quarantine already has 400 contestants hoping to be chosen for Season 2, which will unfold Wednesday night at 9 p.m. Eastern time. The roommates, who live in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, plan to keep the project going for as long as they remain unemployed.
“We’re excited and super grateful for the opportunity to share some positivity and light especially during these difficult times,” said Mr. Lam. “We’re going to do this as long as we can until we get our jobs back.”
Many of those who successfully match plan to wait to meet up in person until everyone can safely venture back outdoors.
“We might send our couples to Popeyes later after this is all over,” said Mr. Lam, “as their honeymoon.”
