We earn a commission for products purchased through some links in this article.
Love Island: Where are the original gang from 2015 now?
From Jessica Hayes to Jon Clark.
Love Island is back for another series soon (when isn't it?), and we can't wait for the usual blend of sun, sand and shenanigans when the next group of hopeful romantics head into the villa. Every year, a new cast of singletons land in Majorca looking for love, but it's safe to say not everyone gets their fairytale ending. Back in 2015, the show got a revival with Caroline Flack at the helm, and ditched celebs for ordinary folk. Let's cast our minds back to the first series and see where some of our favourite contestants have ended up three years on.
Along with Max Morley (more on him in a minute), Jessica became the one half of Love Island's first winning couple back in 2015. Sadly, their romance just wasn't to be (they broke up just over a month after leaving the villa), but on a brighter note, she's currently with a new fella, Dan, and is enjoying her life as a fashion and make-up artist. She even had a baby in June 2019.Worked out for her in the end, then!
What about Jess' other half, Max Morley? Well, as we just found out, their relationship didn't last – but he went on to date Charlotte Crosby and Zara Holland, and also made an appearance on Ex On The Beach after announcing his plans to ditch full-time work in favour of being a socialite. Who can blame the man? More recently he's had an on-off relationship with Love Island 2018 contestant Laura Anderson.
Jon was paired up with glamour model Hannah Elizabeth from the very beginning of the series, with the love birds even getting engaged on the show as their whirlwind romance blossomed. But they broke up shortly after, despite finishing third in the series.
Reality TV aficionados will know all too well what Jon's up to now. After 2016, he joined TOWIE , and dated Love Island 2017 star Chloe Crowhurst for a bit.
So Hannah Elizabeth's romance with Jon wasn't quite built to last, despite staying loyal to each other from day one right through to the end.
Luis Morrison was with Cally Jane Beech for a while… but if Love Island has taught us anything it's that love never lasts and we should all give up. They split in 2018.
Omar Sultani definitely had the confidence on Love Island, but sadly he didn't find his perfect match, eventually getting dumped 21 days in. Sad times!
He doesn't give a lot away on his social media – his Twitter bio literally reads "Was on TV once" – but he still keeps active and looks to be enjoying himself on a lot of holidays.
Lauren made headlines even before she turned up on Love Island, after sparking something of a social media storm when she shared a snap of herself chilling with Zayn Malik.
After Directioners blamed her for Zayn's decision to quit 1D and ditch fiancée Perrie Edwards, she still managed to win over the nation. Not surprisingly, she's stepped away from the limelight since the show, with her Twitter profile set to private.
Naomi was thrown into the villa to stir things up and provide some drama – and she absolutely delivered, stealing Josh from Jess and later dumping him for Max. Who was also linked to Jess. Savage!
She's stayed active on social media, and she sparked rumours of a reconciliation with Josh after sharing a snap of them together – but then she also stepped out with Max at a premiere…
It's fair to say Josh had a bit of drama with the ladies during his time in the villa, but after everything with Naomi and Jess, he settled in third placed with BFF Lauren Richardson – friendship goals, right there.
He later appeared on Ex On The Beach , and more recently he dated Charlotte Crosby. You wouldn't know it from his Insta feed, though, which has been heavily edited since their breakup.
Now we move onto Jordan Ring, aka Hulk – who struck up a relationship with Zoe Basia Brown during his time on the show, and made things official while they were in the villa. No, it didn't last – we're sensing a pattern here – but he still keeping busy, as he's currently signed to a film featured artist agency. So that's something!
Zoe Brown announced her breakup with Jordan Ring on social media, saying at the time: "To all those who have asked Hulk and I are no longer together. Thanks so much for all your kind comments and messages throughout, wish him all the best #onwardsandupwards."
Since then, though, she's gone off the radar, taking her Twitter and Instagram accounts down and stepping away from the spotlight.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
