We earn a commission for products purchased through some links in this article.
Love, Death and Robots season 2: Release date, trailer and everything you need to know
Tim Miller and David Fincher's Love, Death + Robots (LDR), an animated adult anthology series, burst onto Netflix on March 15, 2019. It rapidly received a strong response from viewers.
There was a lot of love from some quarters, with oodles of praise for the varied animation styles (which are excellent), and a number of the standalone episodes which rightfully deserve praise, such as Beyond the Aquila Rift , Three Robots and Ice Age.
But the way in which LDR uses women's bodies in some of the narratives is concerning, something that many outlets including Digital Spy discussed at length.
It's certainly not to everyone's taste, but fans of the show will want to know what the future holds for Love, Death + Robots season 2: a range of animated styles covering stories on "mature themes" – ie ultraviolence, sexuality and evil cats. Plus robots: lots and lots of robots.
Here's everything you need to know.
Love, Death and Robots season 2 release date: When will it air?
Netflix hasn't confirmed whether the anthology series will return for a second outing, so at the moment, your guess really is as good as ours.
But keep your eyes on this page for any new snippets of information.
UPDATE: Good news! In a June 2019 tweet, Netflix’s See What’s Next Twitter account confirmed that Love, Death + Robots had indeed been picked up for a Volume 2.
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
"Love, Death and Robots" will be back! Jennifer Yuh Nelson has joined as supervising director for Volume 2 and will oversee all episodes pic.twitter.com/8OVStMbpeP
— See What's Next (@seewhatsnext) June 10, 2019
It was also announced that Jennifer Yuh Nelson (Kung Fu Panda 2) had joined as supervising director to oversee all episodes. Let's hope that'll lead to a tweaked narrative approach, potentially losing season one's problematic elements outlined above .
But it doesn’t mean the original team won’t be involved somehow.
"Love, Death + Robots is my dream project, it combines my love of animation and amazing stories," co-creator Tim Miller previously said . "Midnight movies, comics, books and magazines of fantastic fiction have inspired me for decades, but they were relegated to the fringe culture of geeks and nerds of which I was a part. I’m so f***ing excited that the creative landscape has finally changed enough for adult-themed animation to become part of a larger cultural conversation."
With that level of passion, we can’t imagine Miller will be sitting this one out completely.
As for when it’ll land, that’s a tricky one.
Series composer Rob Cairns has confirmed (via Inverse ) he's "just started" producing the music for season two. "I've seen a couple of the Season 2 scripts and have started discussions with directors and started playing with sound," he said.
That gives us a clue as to where the series is, in terms of production.
"Some of the episodes were pretty much done by the time I even started at them," Cairns said, speaking about his series one process. "They actually had the animation in and we were waiting for the final scene assembly with all the effects and whatnot."
If season two is following the same pattern, that means they’re pretty much done – which means that even in these unpredictable times, we could still expect to see new episodes at the end of 2021. Let's hope so.
Love, Death and Robots season 2 trailer: When will it land?
This content is imported from YouTube. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
All bets really are off though, the current global situation has thrown pretty much everyone off-balance when it comes to producing and releasing new shows.
We'll have a better idea about when we'll see new footage after an official release date is announced by Netflix, which has halted production of all of its shows as a result of the current crisis.
As soon as any new data arrives, we'll add it to this feature. Until then, you can revisit season one's trailer above.
Watch this space for updates.
Digital Spy now has a newsletter – sign up to get it sent straight to your inbox.
Looking for more TV recommendations and discussion? Head over to our Facebook Group to see new picks every day, and chat with other readers about what they're watching right now.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
