Save this story for later.
Our son Raffi has always been a handful. He is wild, willful, easily frustrated and disappointed. He is also curious, adorable, and full of joy. These qualities alternate in him in approximately five-second intervals. It has always been this way, but things got worse—a lot worse—when Raffi’s little brother was born, last summer, just after Raffi turned three.
Raffi’s mother, Emily, had to this point spent more time with Raffi than I had, but she was consumed with the task of keeping the baby fed, clothed, and sleeping regularly. Raffi missed her attention, but he did not seem to resent the baby. He just wanted to play with him. He wanted to pull on his face, tug on his head, sit on his back. The baby was not necessarily ready for these activities. Keeping Raffi from killing the baby, and keeping myself from killing Raffi, became my job. I was not very good at it.
Twice in the summer after the baby was born, I raised my hand to Raffi. The first happened when the baby was just a few weeks old. One evening, while Emily was cooking dinner, I was holding the baby in my lap when Raffi came over and started trying for some reason to slap the baby’s head. “Stop that,” I said. But he kept doing it. So I held the baby with one hand and with the other tried to move Raffi farther away. But, instead of pushing him in the chest, as I’d intended, I pushed him in the forehead. He staggered back and then ran to his mother in the kitchen. “Dada hit me!” he said.
The second time was about a month later, at my father’s house. The baby was lying on the carpet, trying to learn to hold his head up, when Raffi started grabbing his face and tugging on it. I told him to stop and he didn’t. I told him again and still he kept doing it. Finally, I slapped his wrist. It was just his wrist, but I slapped it hard. “Ow!” he said, and then ran downstairs to find his mother. He stopped harassing the baby for about an hour, then went back to it again.
I was ashamed and bewildered, but those weren’t even the low points. The low points were the times I got so mad at Raffi that I would yell and hector and explain. I would put him in his room for a time-out, and then I would come in and lecture him. I loved Raffi so much, and yet he simply refused to do anything I told him to. I could see him almost getting used to the yelling and lecturing. I could see that it wasn’t working. But I couldn’t stop.
When Raffi had turned two, someone told us that the truly difficult part was just beginning. It was hard to believe. We had finally emerged from two years of Raffi screaming, crying, shitting, and trying to eat various things off the ground. How could it get anything but better? At the same time, we knew that setting boundaries and telling him no would actually, for us, be harder than all the physical labor that we had just done. For all the debates Emily and I had over sleep training, screen time, and whether the ancient baby carrier I’d inherited from a relative  was going to make Raffi bowlegged, it was the work of discipline that was the public work, the place where we’d determine what Raffi was going to be like in the world and what we were going to be like with Raffi. We weren’t prepared.
Near our place, we had two playgrounds—a rich one and a poor one. The rich one was well kept, shaded by old-growth trees, and surrounded by beautiful converted carriage houses. The poor one was a little parched, a little run-down, and next to a public-housing project and a police station. In both playgrounds I saw good parenting. And in both playgrounds I saw lousy parenting. One time, on the poor playground, a little boy of about three came up to me, crying a little, because he had scraped his knee. It wasn’t a terrible scrape, but it was bleeding, and I said, “Let’s get some water on that.” I walked with the boy toward the water fountain. His father intercepted us. “What are you doing?” he said to the boy. “Stop complaining. Go back and play.” The father didn’t say anything to me, and I didn’t say anything to him. The boy was his son. His son was going out into a tough world. He would probably be fine without putting any water on his cut. But his father was still an asshole. I went back to Raffi, and we continued playing.
At the rich playground, a few weeks later, I witnessed a different scene. A little boy, maybe six months younger than Raffi, was playing with a ball. Raffi, as is his wont, ran over to him and grabbed it. The boy started crying. I watched to see what would happen: sometimes when Raffi grabbed someone’s ball, it was an invitation to play. And that, in a sense, is how the action was interpreted by the little boy’s father, who looked to me like a guy who worked on Wall Street. “Go get the ball,” he told his son. But he did not say it in a playful manner. He barked it like an order. “You want the ball, go get it.” The boy was confused. He did not chase Raffi. The father was disgusted. “Let’s go home,” he said to the boy. I got the ball from Raffi and brought it back to the father. “Here you go,” I said. He did not answer.
And I thought, Well, at least I’m not like that. But I also thought, Raffi is going to go out into a world filled with boys raised by fathers like these. Both were training their boys to be aggressive. One father wanted his boy to toughen up and not complain. The other wanted his boy to learn to take whatever it was he wanted. And I, too, in my way, by blowing my top too often, by not controlling my emotions, was teaching Raffi aggression, though not in any systematic or deliberate way.
The baby got a little bigger and I learned to take him out of harm’s way, most of the time, when Raffi was on the loose. But mornings and late evenings continued to trouble us. Raffi was always the first one up: around 6 A.M., we would be startled awake by him noisily climbing into our bed and demanding that we bring him some milk. Emily would have been up several times during the night to feed the baby, so she needed more sleep. Most mornings, I would get up and stagger with Raffi into the living room. Then the battle would begin to keep him out of our bedroom; what he wanted was his mother. He would try to sneak back in while I was making coffee or going to the bathroom. I would have to go after him and drag him out, sometimes kicking and screaming. It wasn’t the best way to start our days.
The evenings were just as bad. We’d had bedtime battles with Raffi since he was a baby. After we started sleep-training Raffi’s brother, in the room they shared, Raffi realized that he had significant leverage: he could wake the baby. This meant that our bedtime ritual became ever longer, with Raffi making increasingly extravagant demands. We would emerge from these battles exhausted and angry, and rarely earlier than 9 P.M.
A friend recommended a book: “ The Kazdin Method for Parenting the Defiant Child ,” by Alan Kazdin, a psychology professor at Yale and the director of the Yale Parenting Center and Child Conduct Clinic. Kazdin had the answers; better than answers, he had data. At his parenting center, he had seen thousands of children and their parents. He knew how to fix what was wrong the way an electrician or a plumber did. I read the book on my phone with fascination and took screen shots of the best parts to text to Emily.
Kazdin is a behaviorist. This means that he places an emphasis on reinforcement. To support a behavior, you pay attention to it; to extinguish a behavior, you ignore it. Everything we’d been doing—the time-outs, the yelling, the belief that, if we told Raffi to stop doing something enough times, he would actually stop—was wrong. And yet I was not discouraged to learn this. We’d been doing everything wrong, but now we would do everything right—we just had to do the exact opposite of what we’d been doing.
Kazdin is a bracing read. “Speaking of time-outs,” he writes, “plenty of experts explain that you give a child a time-out so that he can think about how he got into trouble. This is a complete misunderstanding of time-out, which is not about thinking at all. We know this because animal research proves that time-out works with all sorts of mammals that do not have our cognitive power. In a time-out, we simply withdraw attention for a brief period.”
Ah! I thought. “A complete misunderstanding of time-out.” Other benighted parents could labor under this misunderstanding. I no longer did.
“One widely read author assures readers that if children can tell us they are angry, they will not kick us or otherwise express their aggression in unacceptable ways,” Kazdin writes. “This is an outdated view not supported by evidence. A large body of scientific work tells us that talking about aggression will not reduce aggressive behavior.”
A large body of scientific work—deployed, now, to the problem of taming Raffi. I loved it. I finished the book while Raffi was napping. I couldn’t wait for him to wake up and face his new, scientifically informed dad.
The Kazdin “method” was all about looking for good behavior and then lavishing praise on it. Kazdin refers to it as teaching parents to “catch their child being good.” You should also work on anticipating possible problems and heading them off with some kind of incentive, he says. For example, rather than spending all your time in a store fighting over whether Raffi will get a piece of candy, before finally breaking down and giving it to him, why not tell him he’ll get a piece of candy if he behaves in the store? He gets the same piece of candy, but now you get something, too.
Some of it worked. Trips to the store and some other small journeys went more smoothly. But some of it did not work. Dinnertime was another pain point. Raffi just didn’t want to sit with us and eat. He would act out. One night, fresh off my reading of the Kazdin book, we were ready. Raffi threw his food on the floor, and we ignored it. He went over to the coffee table and swept the books to the floor; we ignored it. We also ignored his running into the kitchen and turning the recycling bins upside down; dumping the shoes from the shoe rack on the floor; and chasing after our cat, Swizzle, with a sneaker. Finally, he ran at Emily with his fists in the air. She put up her hand to defend herself and caught his cheek with her fingernail. Immediately, he started bawling. “Mama!” he said. “You scratched me!”
And so it went for weeks. We would ignore him as he marauded around the house, and then finally he’d do something—hit the baby, draw on the wall, or (a favorite of his, and for some reason especially infuriating to me) start spraying the baby’s milk bottle all over the living room—and we’d yell at him. Finally, he’d calm down, having got a strong response from us, but we would feel terrible and defeated. Maybe if we’d managed to ride out the storm a few times to the end, he’d have stopped behaving that way. Or maybe we would have ignored him until he’d found a knife and cut himself with it. I don’t know. In any case, we never managed.
The worst part of it was that Raffi, by now, was not oblivious to the fact that I was constantly mad at him. “Dada,” he once said, “superheroes never get mad.” It didn’t help that Emily and I had very different ideas about discipline. She considered me too authoritarian, a yeller. I considered her too permissive. She let Raffi watch too much TV, in my opinion. In her opinion, my anti-screen militancy was going to drive all three of us crazy. We both had a point, I think, but it proved very hard to meet in the middle.
We had a terrible dinner at Bareburger. We suspected it would be terrible, but we really had no idea. Raffi immediately dropped his crayons on the floor. He started playing with the salt. Then with his water. He spilled it all over the table. We cleaned it up. The food came. Raffi chewed on his hot dog for a minute and then threw the rest of his meal to the floor.
When a child is in a situation where he is behaving horribly, you should take him out of the situation. I knew that much. I grabbed Raffi and carried him out of the restaurant. As I did so, he hit me in the face and clawed at me. I tried, without dropping him, to get his hands farther from my face. By the time we were outside, I was holding him upside down and shaking him so that he would stop. He went from crying and whining to laughing. It sounded to me like a desperate laughter. I was holding him upside down, and I was angry; he was scared. I put him down. Emily came out of the restaurant with the baby. We drove home.
We had a terrible day at a playground with A., Raffi’s best friend from preschool, and his mom. Raffi and A. liked to wrestle with and hit one another, and A. definitely gave as good as he got. Every few weeks, we’d get an e-mail from the preschool with the subject heading “Scratch.” Raffi was playing with a “friend,” the e-mail would say, and the friend scratched Raffi. Then there’d be a photo of Raffi’s face with a scratch on it. Sometimes a quite deep one! When we picked him up, we’d ask Raffi who had scratched him. “A.,” he would say, matter-of-factly. “Why did he do that?” we would say. “Because I hitted him.” “Why did you do that?” “Because he scratched me.” And on and on. I’m sure A.’s parents also got e-mails about stuff that Raffi had done to A. We didn’t talk about it.
So I was prepared for a little bit of roughhousing at the playground. But it turned out that Raffi was the instigator. He kept trying to knock A. down or pull his shirt. I was embarrassed. I ran over and dragged Raffi off of A. and told him to stop. The second time it happened, I told him that if he did it again we’d leave. I told him that again on the third and fourth time. The fifth time, I finally had to carry out my threat, even though I didn’t want to—even the lax discipline books agreed that if you threaten consequences, you have to deliver on them. Raffi wailed and howled as I carried him home. I felt horrible. That night, I told Emily what had happened. “Oh, that’s exactly what happened last week when we went with A. to the playground,” she said. “Raffi kept hitting him?” I asked. “Yes,” she said. “And I told him that if he didn’t stop, we’d have to leave, and he didn’t stop, so I had to take him home.” I was shocked. In this one instance, we’d done everything right, and it hadn’t mattered.
Throughout all this, Raffi could also be adorable. He loved dancing and making up silly names. For a while, he loved singing “Twist and Shout,” which he called “Shake It Up, Baby,” and which I’m pretty sure he thought referred to an actual baby. He liked running around naked, and he also liked hiding under things—towels or blankets or recycling bins—and eventually popping out and saying, “Here I am!” It would almost have been easier to deal with his misbehavior if it didn’t alternate so consistently with moments of warmth, cuddliness, generosity (“Dada, here is a cozy blanket that you can borrow from me”), and unbelievable cuteness. I wanted to grab him by his little shoulders (he never ate anything) and yell, “Act like this! Act like this all the time!”
I kept reading books. I read and found useful “ How to Talk So Kids Will Listen and Listen So Kids Will Talk ,” by Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish. The basic idea is that parents need to try to enter the child’s perspective. If Raffi suddenly announced that he did not like mac and cheese (although he did) or, worse, that he did not like A. (although he definitely did!), my automatic reaction was to contradict him, to explain to him why he was wrong. This was a mistake. What I should have done, and what I did manage to start doing here and there, was accept the premise. “So you don’t like mac and cheese? When you see mac and cheese you want to throw it out? You would rather eat grass?” Something like that. His experimental hatred of mac and cheese having been indulged, Raffi would some of the time go ahead and eat it.
I read and found useful a book called “ Love and Anger ,” by Nancy Samalin, based on a series of parenting workshops that Samalin hosted in the eighties. Parents talked about what drove them crazy about their children, about the horrible things they did or said in their anger, and then about the ways they tried to improve. Some of the things the parents said were truly harsh, way beyond anything it would ever occur to me to say to Raffi. “It served you right,” one mom confessed to saying to her bawling seven-year-old, after throwing all his favorite toys down the trash chute because he’d failed to clean them up. “Now, go to your room. I don’t even want to see you for the rest of the evening.” Jeez, I would think. I’m not a monster like these people; I don’t need this book. Then something would happen with Raffi and I would return to it. One father spoke of his son’s “dawdling” as being the thing that gave him the most trouble. This seemed very true to me, and I loved the word. That’s what Raffi did every morning when I was trying to get him out the door—not active resistance, just dawdling! From then on, whenever he did it, I would think of that other dad, how he hated dawdling, and grow a tiny bit less annoyed.
It was a primarily descriptive, rather than prescriptive, book, and an older one, that finally helped me (and Raffi) survive this year of our lives. It was called “ Your Three-Year-Old: Friend or Enemy ,” and its authors, Louise Bates Ames and Frances Ilg, had, in 1950, founded the Gesell Institute of Child Development, in New Haven, with Janet Learned Rodell. There, they spent decades observing the behavior of little kids, and in their patient and generous way they described it all: the aggressiveness, the sudden mood swings, the stubbornness about every little thing. Ames and Ilg wrote that little kids moved in approximately six-month cycles—phases of relative calm and happiness at two and three were followed by storm clouds at two and a half and three and a half. This did not track exactly onto our experience, but it was pretty close. There really had been times of calm with Raffi. We had taken them to be simple maturation: this is what he’d be like from here on out. But then he’d revert, or get worse in a new way.
Ames and Ilg were there to explain it. “Three is a conforming age,” they wrote. “Three-and-a-half is just the opposite. Refusing to obey is perhaps the key aspect of this turbulent, troubled period in the life of the young child. It sometimes seems to his mother that his main concern is to strengthen his will, and he strengthens this will by going against whatever is demanded of him by that still most important person in his life, his mother.”
This sounded right. It was antiquated, a little, and in the next paragraph it described the mother doing things (taking the child to school, to the bathroom, getting him ready for bed) that, in our family, I often did, especially since the baby was born. But, still, for all my troubles with Raffi, it was Emily who bore the brunt of it. It was Emily who was at the center of Raffi’s universe; it was Emily to whom he gravitated. The articulation of this truth, reaching through clear time to the muddy present, was immensely helpful.
And there was something else in there as well: the empathetic description of the child as going through a turbulent and troubled period. This was new to me, this idea of Raffi not as a problem to be solved but as a person going through difficulty—a little person, but a person still. “Parents sometimes fear that their Three-and-a-half-year-old is deaf when he so often disregards what is being said to him,” Ames and Ilg wrote. “Surprisingly, he may respond best when whispered to. Actually, the child of this age may have many auditory fears. He is afraid of the banging of the radiator, the sound of a siren, the noise of thunder. He may even fear or be made uncomfortable by the sound of a loud voice.”
Poor little guy! This riotous, hard to control, occasionally violent little boy was also scared of loud noises. He certainly heard a loud voice often enough in our home—mine. Poor little guy.
And, again, in a passage about late toilet training, a perceptive remark about his relationship with his mother: “But with others this lateness of training and inability or even refusal to function may be part of the life-and-death struggle that some are carrying on with their mothers.”
Yes. Yes! Raffi did not want to kill me and marry Emily. It was more complicated and more difficult than that. What he wanted was all of her attention, even as he also wanted to be his own person. He wanted to re-create the relationship they’d once had, when he was smaller, but in a way that it could no longer be re-created. He wanted the impossible and he knew it and it drove him crazy. It almost literally tore him to pieces. It really was life and death, though mostly it was life, the heartbreak of life. Poor little guy!
So I read this book. I read it slowly, with immense gratitude, and here and there I was able to make some adjustments. It was so helpful to know that what Raffi was doing was normal; that he couldn’t help himself; and, above all, that it would pass. I found, during our bedtime struggles, that, if he was acting up, it wouldn’t do to try to restrain him. I could not lie on top of him and make him see reason. Instead, if he wanted to fight, I would curl up into a ball and cover my head and let him whale on me. He wasn’t very strong. Eventually, he’d lie down in bed and let me read to him.
But, more than anything, as Ames and Ilg also predicted, time passed. Raffi changed. As he approached four, he was still willful, sometimes violent, and reluctant to go to sleep, but his main activity shifted from defying us to explaining the world to us. I was keeping a diary of incidents in which I’d lost my temper and, at a certain point, the diary shifted over to cute little things he’d said.
This morning: woke up and smiled at me. “Dada, I had a dream that we
went to the museum together. There were crocodiles.”
we can eat them. Dada, look, I’m going to eat one of them, see?”
“Dada, a date and a prune are a kind of big, big, big, raisin. Dada!”
There are still many terrible bedtimes and too-early mornings. We still have blowups. I still sometimes lose my temper, and he is still sometimes too rough with his little brother. And I know that we’re just in a lull right now and that this is all going to come back soon enough, in a different form. But his little brother is not as vulnerable as he once was, and, anyway, I think we will handle it. We’ve made it this far.
A little while ago, on a weekend morning, Raffi got up late, at 7 A.M., came into our bed, and then demanded, as always, a milk. I fetched it and lay down between him and Emily and closed my eyes. Sometimes Raffi dozes off after his milk, or just takes a while to drink it. Even five more minutes of sleep would be something. But Raffi quickly finished the milk, threw the cup at me, and then, from where he lay, elbowed me in the nose.
I found this unacceptable. I grabbed him and carried him screaming and crying into the living room. I couldn’t lock him in his room because the baby was asleep in there. I couldn’t lock him out of our room because he’d bang on the door and wake up Emily. I knew from Kazdin that time-outs didn’t work, but Kazdin himself admitted that sometimes parents just wanted justice. Raffi had hit me in the face for no reason, and I wanted justice. I headed for the bathroom, put him down in there, and shut the door.
“No,” Raffi cried, almost to himself, “not again!” I don’t know where he’d picked up that expression, but he had taken to saying it a lot. The other day, I had given him five frozen blueberries and he’d thrown them to the floor because he wanted more than five. We discussed it, and I told him that he could only have five. He agreed, but when I once again gave him five, he cried, “Oh, no, not again!”
So here he’d said it, even though I had never before locked him in the bathroom. In his little voice, it was heartbreaking. And, in fact, the reason we never locked him in the bathroom was that we didn’t trust him in there and that, more than anything, is why I opened the door, went in, and sat down on the toilet.
“What’s going on?” I asked.
“I want Mama!” he wailed.
I looked at him, at my little boy. He was a lot like me, and he was a lot like his mother. I thought of his complex inner life, all the things he feared and wanted and didn’t understand.
“I’m not Mama,” I said. “But I’m Dada. Come here.”
He let me hug him until he stopped crying, and then I, in turn, let him watch some TV.
