Even if Eskimo speakers did possess a voluminous vocabulary for snow, or Hampsteaders for bread, it wouldn’t prove that they were subject to some separate reality. Lepidopterists have terms for the behavior that butterflies exhibit at damp spots (puddling) and for the opening of the silk gland found on the caterpillar’s lower lip (spinneret). Architects can distinguish between arrowslits, bartizans, and spandrels, while pilots speak of upwash and adverse yaw. New words are created every day by people who are able to comprehend their meanings before they exist. Novel language can be a function of time as well as of space. Czech speakers came up with prozvonit—the act of calling a cell phone and hanging up after one ring so that the other person will call you back, saving you money—because cell phones were invented, not because they were Czech. Even if some languages express certain concepts more artfully, or more succinctly, it’s precisely because we recognize the phenomena to which they refer that we’re delighted by knullrufs and Kummerspeck.
A language carries within it a culture, or cultures: ways of thinking and being. I spoke American English with the people to whom I was closest (with the exception of Olivier), who spoke American English back to me. For most of my life, I had assumed that Americanness agreed with me, because I had never questioned it. My alienations were localized, smaller-bore. In North Carolina—my parents had migrated there from Philadelphia and Long Island, rendering us lifelong newcomers—I craved the immensity of New York. In New York, I longed for the intimacy of North Carolina. It wasn’t that I didn’t like either culture. I loved them both. Yet I felt that I could claim neither place as fully my own. In North Carolina, I was an arriviste; in New York, some part of me would always be a bumpkin, marvelling at the existence of “doorman buildings” and thinking the phrase “plus one” a little mean. In some way, I felt that I had already learned a new language, “picked it up,” like Zadie Smith, “in college, along with the unabridged Clarissa and a taste for port.”
“Why do people want to adopt another culture?” Alice Kaplan, the French scholar, writes. “Because there’s something in their own they don’t like, that doesn’t name them.” For me, French wasn’t an uncomplicated refuge. I was coming at the language, I think, from the opposite direction: I had accidentally become the proprietor of a life suffused by French, and, for all its charms, there was something I didn’t like in it.
In French, the grid was divided differently, between public and private, rather than polite and rude. At first, I felt its emphasis on discrimination, its relentless taxonomizing, as an almost ethical defect. French—the language and the culture—was so doctrinaire, so hung up on questions of form. The necessity of classifying each person one came across as vous or tu, outsider or insider, potential foe or friend, seemed at best a pomposity and at worst an act of paranoia. The easy egalitarianism of English tingled like a phantom limb. French could feel as “old and cold and settled in its ways” a place to live as Joni Mitchell’s Paris. One day, I bought a package of twenty assiettes à grillades and ached for America, where you could use your large white paper plates for whatever the hell you wanted.
Like Mark Twain—who translated one of his stories from the French back into English, to produce the thrice-baked “The Frog Jumping of the County of Calaveras”—I at first found the language comically unwieldy. In its reluctance to disobey itself, it often seemed effete. One French newspaper had a column that recapitulated the best tweets of the week in more characters than they took to write. The biggest ridiculousism I ever came across was “dinde gigogne composée d’une dinde partiellement désossée, farcie d’un canard partiellement désossé, lui-même farci d’un poulet partiellement désossé ”—that is to say, turducken.
Even if muruaneq—a Yupik word for soft, deep fallen snow—was basically powder, the question tantalized me: Does each language have its own world view? Do people have different personalities in different languages? Every exchange student and maker of New Year’s resolutions hopes that the answer is yes. More than any juice cleanse or lottery win or career switch, a foreign language adumbrates a vision of a parallel life. The fantasy is that learning one activates a latent alter ego, righting a linguistic version of having been switched at birth. Could I, would I, become someone else if I spoke French?
It’s a Friday class. We’re listening to a Mauritanian folktale on tape. There is a wise old man. He notices that his daughters have lately been wearing more revealing clothes. He summons them and seats them around him in a circle, and then shows them his hands. The right one is open. In it, he holds an ounce of gold. The left one is closed.
“Choose one,” he tells his daughters.
Without knowing what’s in it, they all select the left fist.
“But you see that in my right hand there’s an ounce of pure gold while you don’t know what’s in the other one,” the man says.
The daughters still want whatever is in the left hand.
Thus bidden, he opens it. There’s nothing there but a lump of coal.
Luisa presses Stop on the tape deck and scans the classroom.
“What do you think?” she says. “Lauren?”
“I think the Mauritanian folktale is pretty sexist,” I reply.
“Why doesn’t he tell his sons that, then?”
Luisa, warming to this interpretation, turns to Cristina and asks her to continue.
“Too open is not interesting,” she says. “That’s the moral of the story.”
“Man and woman are not the same!” he cries. “That’s reality.”
It’s a pile-on. I know I should probably fold. But now, like Carlos, I can’t help trying to articulate my feelings.
“Reality can be sexist,” I say, fixing Carlos with a stare. “What if this was Saudi Arabia instead of Mauritania?”
“Ladies,” he says, regaining his composure. He opens his chest to the room, like a lawyer addressing a jury. “Do you prefer a man who shows it all or who keeps a little hidden?”
“I think people should wear whatever they want,” I say.
Merde, what are collants? I whip out my little dictionary app like a gunslinger in a saloon fight.
“What do you think of a guy,” Cristina is yelling, “who wears tights to show his intimate form?”
My pistol requires a password. I can’t type fast enough.
“It’s not the same for a man or a woman,” Lana says, raising a manicured hand.
