'It was the first time I'd seen it and I got here first. I FaceTimed him and he got teary because I was teary.'
The three bedroom apartment boasts three bathrooms and a huge walk-in wardrobe.
Our home! The couple were staying at Paige's parents house in Scotland for the past three months, but decided it was time to have their own flat in Manchester
Meanwhile, Finn, 20, has revealed his plans for the pair to get engaged soon.
He said: 'I'm not going to wait – I want to propose soon. I don't want to say a timescale as it's going to be a surprise.'
The couple said they have only spent five days apart so far since falling in love on Love Island and the idea of moving to Manchester was sold to them by their fellow islanders; Callum Jones and Jamie Clayton, who live in the city.
They had initially planned to move in at the end of March but due to lockdown restrictions stayed at her parents house in West Lothian instead.
Big step: Saying she cried on moving day, Paige said: 'I got quite teary. Finn came down in a van and I came down in the car'
It comes after a PR expert predicted the stars of Love Island 's inaugural winter series have lost £500,000 in 'missed opportunities' due to the pandemic.
Following January's show, which was filmed in South Africa , stars including Finn , Paige, Sophie Piper and Luke Trotman were looking to follow to in the success of former stars, with lucrative club promotions and signings.
Yet amid the coronavirus pandemic, Jack Cooper of EdHopkinsPR revealed to the Metro that stars have missed key moneymaking moments which have previously bagged stars up to millions of pounds.
While the show has made millionaires out of many of its contestants, including Olivia Buckland, Alex Bowen, Dani Dyer and Chris Hughes, PR expert Jack has predicted that this year's contestants will have such chances thwarted.
He said: 'With no events to attend, they are also missing out on a huge range of exposure in the media, having no stories for the press to write about...
'The Winter Love Island stars are set to lose huge amounts of money, some contestants up to £500,000. Brand deals at the moment are at an all-time low.
'Many of the participants have approached us to represent them during this tough time. Due to our books being full and also the lack of opportunities in the industry at this time, we have had to decline them.'
Despite this, he predicts couples who are still together stand a better chance, as he said: 'People are interested in keeping up to date with what they are doing, especially if they are isolating together. Being in a couple brings up their financial worth, and in some circumstances could secure them a deal of up to £10,000.'
Share or comment on this article:
