MANASQUAN — Despite the fact that new cases have flattened statewide, Manasquan's coronavirus presence has grown in recent weeks. Just not by much.
Manasquan's case total increased from 31 on June 6th to 33 on Thursday, a 6 percent increase.
No new cases were reported this week and since Monday, when Gov. Phil Murphy allowed indoor retail and outdoor dining to reopen.
Here are the latest local updates from Manasquan:
Manasquan had 33 cases as of Thursday, June 18, according to the Monmouth County Health Department.
Manasquan has launched a relief initiative to provide support to those in distress. The Manasquan Borough mayor and council say they recognize the unprecedented health-related and financial hardships that many residents are experiencing as a result of this insidious pandemic. Read more: Manasquan Launches '5 Star COVID-19 Initiative'
Manasquan announced phase two of its reopening plan, and that includes reopening the beach walk. Read more: Manasquan Announces Beach Opening Plan Phase 2: Beach Walk Opens
A Manasquan restaurant is seeking to reassure the public as it deals with the coronavirus. Read more: 'We will beat this:' Manasquan Restaurant Seeks To Reassure
Hackensack Meridian offers COVID19 testing at its nine urgent care centers in Monmouth and Ocean counties.
Immediate care of Marlboro is offering a drive-thru COVID19 test in the Marlboro Medical Arts site located at 479 Rt 520 in Marlboro. Testing is by appointment only at (855) 925-5467 ext 0.
The PNC Bank Arts Center is a regional FEMA drive-thru test location and is open for testing every other day from 8 a.m. to 4pm for up to 500 persons per day. Click here for PNC Arts Test Center info & schedule .
On every Saturday, the PNC Bank Arts Center site will be dedicated to symptomatic health care workers and first responders -- police, fire, and EMS -- with valid credentials only. The general public will not be able to access this site on Saturdays.
Central Jersey Urgent Care is testing up to 80 patients daily at Eatontown, Howell and Marlboro.
Manasquan officials say they're opening parks in accordance with Gov. Phil Murphy's Executive Order 133. Manasquan were expected to open several parks on Saturday, May 2nd. Read more: Manasquan To Open Up Several Parks
Manasquan has declared a state of emergency because of the coronavirus outbreak. Read more: Manasquan Declares State Of Emergency
Manasquan schools say they plan to hold in-person graduations this year now that Gov. Phil Murphy has allowed live ceremonies. Read more: Manasquan To Hold In-Person Graduations
New Jersey Coronavirus Updates: Don't miss local and statewide announcements about novel coronavirus precautions. Sign up for Patch alerts and daily newsletters.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person . Someone who is actively sick with COVID-19 can spread the illness to others. That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
There is currently no vaccine for COVID-19.
While the best way to prevent illness is to avoid virus exposure, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention always recommends taking preventive actions to contain the spread of viruses. This includes:
Stay home when you are sick.
Cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue, then throw the tissue in the trash.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces using a regular household cleaning spray or wipes.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after going to the bathroom, before eating, after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing.
