Richard-Olivier Marius had said he was upset Max Rose initially did not support impeachment and progressive legislation he thought could help struggling Island families.
CITY HALL -- Democratic Socialist Richard-Olivier Marius has dropped out of the Island’s competitive congressional race against freshman Rep. Max Rose, the North Shore resident confirmed.
Marius, a former Rose campaign volunteer, was the only Democrat who stepped up to challenge Rose in the June primary.
The North Shore resident declined to say why he decided to drop out of the race or when exactly he made his decision.
Marius said previously he was upset Rose did not initially support an impeachment inquiry into President Donald Trump and other progressive legislation like the Green New Deal, Medicare for All and a program that would guarantee federal jobs.
The deadline for prospective congressional candidates to file with the state Board of Elections to run is just three months away in early April, but so far, no other Democrats have announced plans to run against the Democratic incumbent in the June primary.
Staten Island’s Democratic Party has yet to make an endorsement in the upcoming primary nor interview prospective candidates.
But in September, the Island’s Democratic Party’s new Chairman Assemblyman Michael Cusick, stressed the importance of getting Rose re-elected to Congress come 2020.
Earlier this week the Island’s Republican Party endorsed Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotaki s in the NY-11 race after they interviewed two other candidates including her only GOP opponent in the primary, Brooklyn prosecutor Joseph Caldarera.
Rose came under fire from fellow Democrats late last year when he initially did not support an impeachment inquiry into Trump. Some Democrats had vowed to not vote for the incumbent or actively begin looking for another primary challenger if he did not vote yes for impeachment.
Marius filed with the Federal Election Commission to run over the summer but had run a quiet campaign and did not file any quarterly funding reports with the commission.
His twin brother Philippe Marius is running for North Shore Councilwoman Debi Rose (D)’s City Council seat which she will be term-limited out of in 2021.
FOLLOW SYDNEY KASHIWAGI ON TWITTER.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
