As a result of the global Covid-19 pandemic and the lockdown measures which have been imposed in order to limit it's transmission, many people have felt that their mental health has been particularly challenging over the past few months.
The reasons for this are wide and varied, but they are also understandable in what are unprecedented times for us all.
With measures now starting to be relaxed, this in itself could also elicit mental health concerns as people adapt to what will be the new normal.
In some ways, the full lockdown imposed by the Prime Minister back in March yielded some form of certainty. The rules were clear and rigid, with everybody in little doubt about what they should do to keep themselves and their loved ones safe.
The gradual relaxation of these measures have blurred those parameters somewhat and this can give rise to feelings of uncertainty and enhanced vulnerability.
In fact, an individual can be faced with a plethora of mental challenges as they navigate from the perceived safety of lockdown to one which may appear to be fundamentally different.
Of course, this does not just refer to the virus itself - it can relate to a whole host of situations which we all will have to reacquaint ourselves with.
Returning to work could be a source of anxiety for example, as could meeting up with friends and family who you have not seen since lockdown measures were imposed.
Sometimes, it is the acts which seem the most trivial that prove to be the most challenging and there is absolutely no shame in admitting that.
There wasn't any notion of what a "normal" response to lockdown should be and there isn't now that certain measures are easing.
In addition to this, feelings may change on an incredibly regular frequency - sometimes many times per day.
Emotions will be influenced by a whole range of factors - some of which will be within your control, but equally many of them will be well beyond it.
The EFL's charity partner, Mind have put together some poignant and accessible help guides with regard to looking after your mental health during this particularly challenging time.
If you are struggling or know somebody that is, then please do read these and know that you are far from being alone.
They offer practical advice covering a variety of topics associated with the mental health impact of coronavirus and you can view these by following the link below.
