“I admire their courage and strength in sharing very personal, creative, and beautiful pieces with the world."
“I admire their courage and strength in sharing very personal, creative, and beautiful pieces with the world."  
Check out this story on desertsun.com: https://www.desertsun.com/story/news/education/2020/06/21/mental-health-team-psusd-encourages-expression-feelings/3195715001/
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Welcome to our new and improved comments, which are for subscribers only.
                                            This is a test to see whether we can improve the experience for you.
                                            You do not need a Facebook profile to participate.
You will need to register before adding a comment.
                                            Typed comments will be lost if you are not logged in.
                                            It's OK to disagree with someone's ideas, but personal attacks, insults, threats, hate speech, advocating violence and other violations can result in a ban.
                                            If you see comments in violation of our community guidelines , please report them.
Joan L. Boiko, Special to The Desert Sun Published 5:55 p.m. PT June 21, 2020
Palm Springs Unified School District’s team of mental health professionals have been continuing their work with students they had been working with prior to the COVID-19 pandemic causing the physical closure of schools throughout Riverside County. The need for mental health support for local children has increased, and PSUSD’s team has responded to those needs and are working with many more children who are struggling through an array of emotional challenges.
“During conversations with students of different grade levels, common themes evolved around daily struggles, transitions, loss of freedom, dreams that dissolved, boredom, frustration, anger, sadness, distress, anxiety and fear,” said Dr. Joaquin Galeano, a clinical psychologist and a member of PSUSD’s mental health department. “But, there was also a sense of making the best out of the situation, of really getting to know and spending time with families, of adjusting and accommodating to the new world’s reality, of attempting to create comfort with very limited resources, and, at times, having the opportunity of being creative and reinventing oneself.”
A collage of artwork from Palm Springs Unified School District students during the coronavirus pandemic.
Galeano along with therapists Mireya Gonzalez and Tamara Hagy-Lopez, encouraged the students they were working with to express themselves through art.
“As a way of creating meaning in the form of art, on a willing and voluntary basis, some students agreed to articulate their thoughts and feelings about the meaning of the lockdown, being seniors in high school, or dealing in general with the rapid and drastic changes in their lives,” said Galeano.
A created online exhibit shows the artwork created through a process of free association. Students expressed themselves through artwork created with acrylic, chalk and pencil. Those who view the exhibit can see common themes and get a sense of what kids are feeling.
“As one appreciates the art, one may see themes that evoke messages of despair, avoidance of reality, a mask that appears to cover some true feelings, horizons, darkness, light, paths, a dog that provides comfort, quarantine routines, a family joint effort, ways of coping moving energy, designs, textures, words, symbols, not giving up, and hope — the most healing of all messages, said Galeano.
Galeano encouraged all students to find creative ways to express themselves during this difficult time and for those who are looking at the creations to view them with “appreciation and respect.” He also expressed high praise for the students who participated in the gallery project.
“I admire their courage and strength in sharing very personal, creative, and beautiful pieces with the world,” he said. They are indeed an inspiration, as they immersed yourselves in the artistic production.  As Thomas Merton said: ‘Art enables us to find ourselves and lose ourselves at the same time.’ I encourage the students to continue to grow, to create, to express themselves, to find meaning in all they do, not only for their own good and benefit, but also for the good and well-being of others.”
Joan Boiko is the Coordinator of Communications and Community Outreach for the Palm Springs Unified School District. She can be reached at jboiko@psusd.us or (760) 883-2701, ext. 2.
