Society for Science & the Public, which publishes Science News for Students, uses cookies to personalize your experience and improve our services. For more information on how we use cookies on our websites, visit our Cookie Policy .
Subtle ear, nose and whisker movements show pleasure, fear, pain and more
Subtle movements by ears, whiskers and noses can signal that a mouse feels pleasure, fear and pain, researchers find.
Although it’s tricky for people to see, mouse feelings are written all over their furry little faces.
A research team in Germany trained a computer program to study the faces of mice for signs of emotion. It was able to reliably spot expressions of joy, fear, pain and other basic emotions. Those signs offer a sort of “field guide” for scientists who study emotion. And understanding the emotion in animals better could help guide human studies too, the researchers say. They described their new findings in the April 3 Science.
Nadine Gogolla studies the brain at the Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology. It’s in Martinsried, Germany. She and her colleagues treated mice in ways to trigger distinct emotions. To evoke pleasure, they gave the mice sugar water. A shock to their tails triggered pain. Bitter quinine (KWY-nyne) water led to disgust. An injection of the chemical lithium chloride made them uneasy and queasy. And being put somewhere they had been shocked in the past sparked fear. For each setup, high-speed video cameras focused on the animal’s faces. These captured subtle movements in the animals’ ears, noses, whiskers and more.
An observer would likely see that a mouse’s face changes, Gogolla says. But translating those subtle changes into emotions? That’s really hard, she says. That true “especially for an untrained human being.”
Weekly updates for inquiring minds of every age, delivered to your inbox
But a computer had no trouble, the researchers found. They used an approach called “machine learning.” It directs a computer program to scout for patterns in images. The program analyzed thousands of video frames of mouse faces. It spotted subtle movements that accompanied good or bad events.
For instance, take the face of a (presumably happy) mouse drinking sweet water. The ears move forward and fold toward the body. At the same time, the nose moves down toward the mouth. The face looks differently when the mouse tastes bitter quinine. Its ears move straight back. It nose curls slightly backward, too.
Using machine learning to reveal mouse expressions is “an extraordinarily exciting direction,” says Kay Tye. She is a neuroscientist at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif. She was not part of the new study. The findings “lay the foundation for what I expect will be a game-changer for neuroscience research on emotional states,” Tye says.
The activity of nerve cells in a mouse’s brain also changed with distinct emotions, other analyses showed. These cells reside in a region known as the insular cortex. This deeply buried spot plays a role in human emotions, too.
By prodding cells there to fire signals, the researchers could prompt the mice to display certain facial expressions. These connections may lead to insights on the neural basis of emotions. They also could help scientists explore what goes wrong in disorders such as anxiety, the researchers suggest.
anxiety: A nervous reaction to events causing excessive uneasiness and apprehension. People with anxiety may even develop panic attacks.
cell: The smallest structural and functional unit of an organism. Typically too small to see with the unaided eye, it consists of a watery fluid surrounded by a membrane or wall. Depending on their size, animals are made of anywhere from thousands to trillions of cells.
chemical: A substance formed from two or more atoms that unite (bond) in a fixed proportion and structure. For example, water is a chemical made when two hydrogen atoms bond to one oxygen atom. Its chemical formula is H2O. Chemical also can be an adjective to describe properties of materials that are the result of various reactions between different compounds.
colleague: Someone who works with another; a co-worker or team member.
computer program: A set of instructions that a computer uses to perform some analysis or computation. The writing of these instructions is known as computer programming.
disorder: (in medicine) A condition where the body does not work appropriately, leading to what might be viewed as an illness. This term can sometimes be used interchangeably with disease.
fire: The burning of some fuel, creating a flame that releases light and heat. (in neuroscience) The activation of a nerve or neural pathway.
insight: The ability to gain an accurate and deep understanding of a situation just by thinking about it, instead of working out a solution through experimentation.
insular cortex: (also known as insula) This is a part of the cerebral cortex — the outermost layer of brain tissue in people. Instead of being on the outside of the brain, though, the insular cortex is part of a deep fold on either side of the brain, right above the ears. The insula plays a role in consciousness — awareness of ourselves and the world around us. The front part of the insula — called the anterior insula — helps us process our own emotions, feel disgust and empathize with other people’s feelings.
lithium: A soft, silvery metallic element. It’s the lightest of all metals and very reactive. It is used in batteries and ceramics.
machine learning: A technique in computer science that allows computers to learn from examples or experience. Machine learning is the basis of some forms of artificial intelligence (AI). For instance, a machine-learning system might compare X-rays of lung tissue in people with cancer and then compare these to whether and how long a patient survived after being given a particular treatment. In future, that AI system might be able to look at a new patient’s lung scans and predict how well they will respond to a treatment.
nerve: A long, delicate fiber that transmits signals across the body of an animal. An animal’s backbone contains many nerves, some of which control the movement of its legs or fins, and some of which convey sensations such as hot, cold or pain.
neuroscience: The field of science that deals with the structure or function of the brain and other parts of the nervous system. Researchers in this field are known as neuroscientists.
quinine: A bitter compound derived from the bark of the cinchona tree. Quinine has been used since the 1600s to treat malaria. It is also used as a flavoring agent in tonic water.
subtle: Some feature that may be important, but can be hard to see or describe. For instance, the first cellular changes that signal the start of a cancer may be visible but subtle — small and hard to distinguish from nearby healthy tissues.
taste: One of the basic properties the body uses to sense its environment, especially foods, using receptors (taste buds) on the tongue (and some other organs).
