Please fill out this field with valid email address.
By subscribing, you agree to our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use.
@theslowfactory is launching its Open Education initiative created for, and taught by, Black, Brown, Indigenous and minority ethnic communities. ⁣⁣
The program will launch this fall and provide skill-building in various areas of the fashion industry, including classes on regenerative agriculture, equity centered-design, sustainable sourcing and manufacturing, food security and social justice, all central to the organization’s existing mission. ⁣⁣
Tap the link in bio for more. ⁣⁣
Bianca Alexa made a call to action on June 5 when she released a video on the social media platform where she recounts the times she faced discrimination while working as a Black model and how the industry needs to do more to create an inclusive and diverse environment for Black, indigenous people of color. She has subsequently launched the platform, #VisiblyUs, on Instagram to highlight Black models, influencers, hair stylists and makeup artists that brands should be working with.⁣
“I want the platform to shed light on what we often go through in the industry,” she said, “but also be a resource for brands to find talent of color and create equal opportunities and give us the same spaces they give our white counterparts. It can also offer action steps on how we can remain inclusive to the Black community, not just now because it seems like a trend to most brands, but it’s something that should be and continue to be in the future.”⁣
Tap the link in bio for more. ⁣
The @cfda and @voguemagazine Fashion Fund’s “A Common Thread” has announced the 36 companies that will receive grants in the second round of funding. ⁣⁣
Slightly more than $2 million will be distributed, with a little more than $1 million of that going to 36 companies, including 18 fashion/accessories brands; 13 retailers; three factories, and two other business organizations.⁣⁣
In addition, A Common Thread will make a $1 million donation to ICON 360, a new nonprofit that was recently started by Harlem’s Fashion Row. ICON 360 is designed to offer forgivable financial relief to designers of color who are pivoting their businesses during the coronavirus pandemic and need funding to scale up their businesses.⁣⁣
Tap the link in bio for more. ⁣⁣
