FRANKFORD — With all schools in New Jersey closed from March until at least  fall, teachers and students have been forced to adjust to a unique and often unfamiliar form of instruction since.
Doug Post, a fifth-grade teacher at Frankford Township School is retiring at the end of June, and after 40 years as a teacher, remote learning is not the way he wanted to end his career.
“To end this way is definitely a surreal way to end my career,” he said. “I can’t say that I’ve enjoyed it. I’d much rather be in the classroom with my students to say hello and so long.”
Despite the circumstances, Post will still be recognized by the school community during Frankford’s “drive-thru” graduation ceremony for the eighth-graders Friday at the Sussex County Fairgrounds. He will also be honored as part of the Recognition Drive program, with his name featured on a street sign above the road near the school for the month of October.
For Post, who has only ever taught at Frankford School beginning in September 1979, the novel coronavirus pandemic brought his presence in the classroom to an abrupt end.
“With the shutdown of schools, this has been an anticlimactic way to end a career,” his son Sean said. “I know he is experiencing many of the feelings that graduates have by not being able to celebrate their achievements in the normal way.”
A resident of Frankford since he was a young child, Post started as a student at the school where he would eventually teach for 41 years. He taught students whose children would later be in his class — “No grandchildren yet, though,” he quipped — and his own son, Brendan, is now among his coworkers as a gym teacher at the school.
Post also served as a teacher for his three children, an arrangement which led to some unusual situations during their time at the school. Sean Post recalled a time when his father marked his best friend as having not completed his homework — an assignment the two had worked on at the Posts’ house —before it was found among the family’s recycling items a week later.
“My dad has heard a lot of excuses for not having homework, but this was definitely one that stands out,” Sean Post joked.
Post began his teaching career on the third grade level before moving to fifth grade, where he now teaches science and social studies. He has been involved in a variety of school activities throughout the years, including the yearbook club, ski club, bowling club and numerous school plays.
Post had been looking forward to being part of the school’s annual “clap out,” in which eighth-graders and retiring teachers march through the halls of the school to applause from other students and staff, before COVID-19 put a stop to those plans. But as restrictions on social gatherings statewide have gradually lifted in recent weeks, he will be permitted to follow the cavalcade of graduates through the fairgrounds Friday.
Like most teachers, Post cited the feeling of working with students and watching them finally grasp a difficult concept as one of the aspects of his job that he will miss the most. Even as COVID-19 significantly altered his final days at Frankford, he is grateful to be honored by the school community where he spent his entire professional life.
“I’ll definitely miss the interactions with the kids,” Post said. “I’ve been Mr. Post for so long that it’s almost like you’re losing a piece of your identity.”
Kyle Morel can also be contacted on Twitter: @KMorelNJH, on Facebook: Facebook.com/KMorelNJH, or by phone: 973-383-1292.
