Mo Besic's Sheffield United career is over with no hard feelings, and Panagiotis Retsos and Richairo Zivkovic's could soon be too
Sheffield United will be missing midfielder Muhamed Besic for the Premier League run-in, and could also have to do without January signings Panagiotis Retsos and Richairo Zivkovic.
While Dean Henderson featured in the Blades' Premier League return at Aston Villa on Wednesday, fellow loanees Besic, Retsos and Zivkovic were not involved even in the expanded 20-man squad, or declared injured.
Besic has returned to Everton, and decisions are expected before Sunday's trip to Newcastle United on the other two, but manager Chris Wilder says there are no hard feelings towards anyone unwilling to extend their stay beyond June 30.
Sorry, there seem to be some issues. Please try again later.
“I’ve no issue,” he insisted. “We’ve had a couple of loan players who won’t re-sign and I understand that. They don’t want to put themselves in that position (of missing out on a future transfer because of injury), because of lack of opportunities. They've got to look at their careers longer-term.
“But all of our main players, all of the main actors, that are out of contract and in that situation have re-signed.
“We've not got many out of contract, really but we've dealt with them.
“As a football club, whenever we step out onto the pitch, we need everyone pulling in the same direction. We can’t have people breaking the chain, not our players and not the way we play, and how far the football club's come in a short period of time.
“If anyone doesn't want to be a part of it, absolutely no problem. We've not had major issues, only a couple where we fully respect their decision, and I said all along I would respect the decision of people.
“We've signed good people and they'll make those decisions according to how they feel and what they feel is best for themselves and their careers.
“One was Mo Besic and I won't name the other player because we're possibly 24, 48 hours before coming to that decision.
“I should imagine we’ll be making a statement soon. Mo's not been with us for a month and it's a decision regarding Panos and Richairo. We’ll make those decisions over the next 24, 48 hours in conjunction with the players. The details will be in that statement.”
Besic, who was on loan at Middlesbrough last term, has only started two Premier League matches this season, while Retsos's appearance came as a substitute in the FA Cup at Reading. That is the only game Zivkovic has been in a matchday squad for, though he did not make it onto the pitch. Phil Jagielka was the only key figure whose contract was due to expire this month, and he was on the bench at Villa Park.
Typically Premier League playing contracts and loans run until June 30, and sides and the players themselves have until a week beforehand to make a decision on whether to renew them. Clubs who have decided against keeping a player have tended to say they will not use them even in June's remaining games so as not to affect team harmony.
Premier League clubs had to submitted updated 25-man squads in January, and are unable to change them for the resumption.
The Blades have a small and settled group of players, and were tested when centre-back Jack O'Connell was injured in the build-up to Wednesday's 0-0 draw, having previously played every minute of the league campaign.
John Fleck also missed out through a training ground injury, while David McGoldrick picked up a heavy knock late on, but finished the game.
None of the trio have been ruled out of Sunday's game.
“Jack has got a chance of playing and John has got a chance of playing,” said Wilder. “David McGoldrick, who landed awkwardly, is hopefully going to be training today and he's got a chance as well.
“An enormous of effort went into it. The first game of the restart was always going to be a difficult one but we came through it unscathed. I thought we looked strong towards the end.
Editor’s note: first and foremost - and rarely have I written down these words with more sincerity - I hope this finds you well.
Almost certainly you are here because you value the quality and the integrity of the journalism produced by The Yorkshire Post’s journalists - almost all of which live alongside you in Yorkshire, spending the wages they earn with Yorkshire businesses - who last year took this title to the industry watchdog’s Most Trusted Newspaper in Britain accolade.
And that is why I must make an urgent request of you: as advertising revenue declines, your support becomes evermore crucial to the maintenance of the journalistic standards expected of The Yorkshire Post. If you can, safely, please buy a paper or take up a subscription. We want to continue to make you proud of Yorkshire’s National Newspaper but we are going to need your help.
Postal subscription copies can be ordered by calling 0330 4030066 or by emailing subscriptions@jpimedia.co.uk . Vouchers, to be exchanged at retail sales outlets - our newsagents need you, too - can be subscribed to by contacting subscriptions on 0330 1235950 or by visiting www.localsubsplus.co.uk where you should select  The Yorkshire Post from the list of titles available.
If you want to help right now, download our tablet app from the App / Play Stores. Every contribution you make helps to provide this county with the best regional journalism in the country.
