When I say flowers. I’m calling attention to Cannabis flowers, for mom!
The flowers that I’m discussing are flowers from some of my favorite brands of cannabis. No, I don’t write about orchids or roses, but I do write about the plethora of brands of cannabis brands that I’ve enjoyed over the past months. This lengthy list of growers and packagers are all important to me because it’s what I like to smoke. I have plenty of favorites and favorites not yet tried, that’s the way of cannabis in my opinion.
And mom? If she smokes cannabis, she’s much cooler than my mom. Let me assure you on that one.
To start things off rolling, I’m quite fond of the high-end cannabis dispensary named SPARC located in San Francisco . Their home-grown by Marigold, Triple Chocolate Chip is a luscious cross between Mint Chocolate Chip and Triple OG. This is truly IN THE COUCH cannabis that will put your mom down faster than that bong hit you had first thing in the morning . Deep approval for this company. I dig them.
Garden Society: I love their flowers and their love of our plant. Not just because they come rolled in just the right size for one person. They’re just fun! Since we are social-distancing and not sharing joints any longer, their intimately small joint is just perfect. Why is this important? I don’t smoke too much at one time and what I do enjoy is fresh from the first puff to the last. Win/Win!
If your mom is into truly esoteric cannabis flowers grown by a woman, beeline a path to California where you really should locate Moon Made Farms . Tina Gordon is weaving stories of complex beauty in every organic, sun-grown cannabis flower grown on her extensive farm. Mom deserves the very best, doesn’t she? I think so. Buy some today.
Danny Murr-Sloat inspires many moms as the famed owner of AlpinStash cannabis. He credits consuming and growing cannabis with losing 70 pounds, transitioning off over 19 prescriptions including opiates for an array of medical issues, and eventually becoming one of the most revered micro-cultivation brands in Colorado. Mom would be charmed if some of these flowers made their way into her purse. Colorado is not too far away via train.
Highrize Mini Pre-Rolls: The size and ultra-stony quality of Highrize flower are just some of the myriad of good reasons why I enjoy this product. For me to go deeply into the others would become a story-stick before I got to the bottom of writing this list. It’s also their variety of hash infused mini-pre rolls that really take me further and even beyond that. I love them.
Aster Farms has a story to tell that hits very close to home to anyone who is a mom. Their story is authentic and determined, as their flowers are grown in live soil, under organic practices. Mom would resonate with their struggle to rise again like a phoenix from the veritable ashes. Their bond to the earth is strong. You can taste it.
Tradecraft Farm came into my periphery when I discovered my tasting notes from last year’s Hall of Flowers . I knew immediately that mom would appreciate it greatly if you could procure some for her to smoke. Of course if she doesn’t smoke, you could try to buy a copy of the book, Cannabis Cocktails from your local Indie bookseller and weave a tasty little mint julep for her. Brimming with a just the right amount of THC that comes in their luscious flowers. Not everyone is happy about that thing that’s called a cross-fade. The art of infusing craft spirits with cannabis, but in the right hands, just like the caring ones of your mom. She had you, didn’t she? So celebrate her.
Excelsior Extracts surpasses my already high bar for quality cannabis by people who really love their craft. They are located somewhere on the perimeter, out on the east coast, so their terroir completely is different than what is nurtured out west. That’s what makes them unique to the east coast based connoisseur of fine cannabis flowers. They cure their elegant flower as nicely as the finest herbs I’ve tasted out at Blunt and Moore in Oakland, California . Excelsior is what your mom asked for.
Lady Jays says it all on their little box of mini pre rolls, Great Flower. Girl Power . If I was in Oregon right now that is what I’d be looking to smoke, this very moment. They’re not just made for women, mind you. These little joints pack a serious punch. They truly are strong, but also aromatic in a positive manner. I’m a big fan and yes, they get me lit. Your mom will appreciate what you offer her, make sure Lady Jays is in her Mother’s Day basket. Don’t forget her!
Brotherly Love Cannabis : This is beyond organic cannabis that always exceeds my expectations of what great cannabis can only strive to become. As Biodynamic and organic wine fills my metaphorical glass, Brotherly Love fills my active soul. I am fortunate to enjoy many of the worlds finest smokes, with Brotherly Love Organics in the very top tier of these benchmark flowers. Their curing is what makes them world-class. May I recommend aging their cannabis like the art of aging fine pipe tobacco? Low and slow in a regulated, humidified space, preferably in the dark, a used rum cask would be fabulous. Their fancy pre-rolls would charm your mom as well. Highly recommended because I’ve smoked them. Buzzzz.
Sunrise Mountain Humboldt Craft Cannabis . I’ve been up to this hand-tended farm, sited at the top of the veritable dream state and spilling out visually over the foothills in sea smoke and ample sunlight. The aromatics of the earth are ever present here. If they put anything into this soil, it will grow. Cannabis is not the only thing grown at Sunrise Mountain Farms. It’s very nearly self-sufficient as a seasonal, “Victory Garden” along with the robust cannabis grow. The flowers grown at Sunrise Mountain should be on your very short list for mom.
Lyfted Farms: I know very little about cannabis . Most young adults can break down all the terpenes of any given strain before I have a chance to open a cannabis app for more information. Lyfted Farms really gets it. They are cannabis nerds like myself, only much younger. If I was to get a cool mom some really boss flowers that do their best work on your intellect, these would be in that league. I love their curing.
Wonderbrett: This street-smart, B-Boy or B-Girl brand , along with Lyfted Farms are the dark-horse contenders for any mom who is: way too cool for school. I know this brand has a younger following, but hear me out for a second. There are no better consumers than people my age and up, we actually spend money on cannabis, we can’t hit our parents up for money anymore to buy some. Also, you should understand that bright color packing does sell cannabis, it’s what catches your eye. Mom will dig it. Trust me. If she doesn’t, you can blame me. I can take the heat.
Casa Humboldt. Lucky is the person who has a nugget or two of Casa Humboldt tucked back in their pocket. Be good to your mom and buy her some, as in today. She will say thank you with her knowing smile that comes from the goodness of the earth. Your mom loves the good stuff. She taught you and you didn’t even know it! Two words, Casa Humboldt. Say it. Thank you mom.
Nug: I’m a massive fan of their company and your mom will be too. They are vertically integrated which means they do it all. Start to finish. In house. They control their destiny. Mom might not find that interesting, but she will find their flowers to be quite intriguing. It’s obvious by her smile, you have good taste if you bought your mom some Nug flowers for Mother’s Day. Good job!
Flow Kana: What haven’t I said about Flow Kana. Cannabis with a goal of terroir and small family owned farms- out here on the east coast this is an art, out west it’s practicality. Mom would appreciate what Flow Kana is trying to do. They achieve this goal, I’ve written and will continue to recommend their ethos and delicious brands. Find some Flow Kana brands for your mom, tell them I sent you.
Is your mom still drop dead gorgeous? Do you know where you get your good looks from? Does she bring bemusement when she comes into the room from her direct path and inner smile? When she visits her local dispensary does she buy the very best? Have you ever seen Madrone in her stash ? If you know that she is a cannabis-nerd and your mom had you, so it all makes perfect sense, get her some Madrone strains. This is patiently tended herb on the highest plateau for your mom. Madrone is grown in Mendocino, California where the earth is full of its own terroir; or taste of the place.
Canndescent, one of California’s first (legal) large-scale grower are leaders in ultra-premium cannabis flowers. Their herbs are well known for their quality, but your mom knows that already. She does have a precious Hermes handbag in the same vibrant orange color. Canndescent will be releasing their third brand named Baker’s Cannabis Co . It’s a lower cost example of what a truly high-end cannabis company can do for all consumers of fine flower, not just the big earners. I think mom would love Baker’s, not just for their high quality flowers, but for the money you saved! I can hear her now, “My sonny-boy/girl...So smart and so very frugal, she bought Baker’s! ”
SHERBINSKIS , I hope your mom gets some of these ultra luxury smokes that come in many varieties from flowers to pre-rolls, to their incredible vape pens. SHERBINSKIS make your mom young (er) again, with their lip smacking aromatics and smile inducing effects. Your mom will dig their flowers. I did .
Edie Parker Flower : Mom better get some Edie Parker Flower if she lives in California. It’s almost inexcusable if you have passed their elegantly packaged- Flow Kana sourced flowers and bought something else. This is mom’s mirrored boudoir table! I love this kind of luxury packaging. Great stuff. Well done for mom or anyone who loves an opulent and fancy style!
LakeGRADE: Mom will be so proud of you for remembering one of her favorite brands- Lake Grade. I just know these things and you should too. LakeGRADE is on this list because of their ease to like balance. They are delicious and enjoyable too. The curing is on point so you won’t have to struggle grinding and rolling up a spliff for your dear mom. She wants you to roll up another one, just like the other one . Get to it!
Your mom must be really cool , because she knows about the ultra-luxe cannabis brand named, A Golden State. She has good taste and it’s just obvious by her path in life. Mom is definitely cerebral and she is responsible for more than just your acerbic sense of humor, she gets it. She knew all about relaxation, once she stopped being responsible for you. And recreation? Let me tell you, should you buy your mom some of A Golden State, she’s going to know you are success driven.
TrūFlora, this is really yummy herb shared in a mini pre-roll style. Grown outdoors, (I believe you can taste the difference) by Humboldt located, Sunboldt grown , your discerning mom will be most pleased with you should you bring her a couple packages of their intellectually stimulating mini pre-rolls. I smoked some TrūFlora mini pre-rolls just the other day- a little birdie dropped them off- and I can say that if I’m this charmed by their outdoor grown terroir. They are really that good and good for your mom too! She’ll love them!
Stone Road Infused pre-rolls are just the right place to start your mom, a wake and bake if you will, because they come gently infused with delicious ice-water hash. A gourmet treat for certain. Go now and find them for your mom. Alas, only in California.
Sundae School Infused pre-rolls are potent reminders that not everything is as they seem. Kind of like when your mom thought you would grow up to be a famous scientist? It’s much more fun to do what you love, where your passion is, not where someone else wants your passion to be.
Remember when you were young and your mom brought you milk and cookies ? Well these cookies are not the same ones as those cookies from your youth. You would probably remember them served hot and steamy on a plate. These Cookies are for adults over the age of twenty-one. I can just about imagine your mom’s face when she sees what KIND of cookies you have purchased for her? Not any just cookies. I’m quite fond of the Snowman strain and mom will be as too when she becomes ultra cerebral and the words start flowing along with glasses of her favorite THC infused wine .
Many of these strains and brands were enjoyed using my Cloudious9 Atomic9 Mini- Vaporizer. I recommend this beautifully designed unit to your mom because of the cutting-edge technology, easy to learn directions and that lovely physical curve at the top makes it almost invisible to the uninitiated. There are few electronic cannabis devices on the market as well priced too , coming in under $60 dollars, it’s a great deal for technology of this level. Mom wants one! Happy Mother’s Day!
Warren Bobrow, the Cocktail Whisperer, is the multi-published author of six books. Apothecary Cocktails: Restorative Drinks from Yesterday and Today, Whiskey Cocktails:
Warren Bobrow, the Cocktail Whisperer, is the multi-published author of six books. Apothecary Cocktails: Restorative Drinks from Yesterday and Today, Whiskey Cocktails: Rediscovered Classics and Contemporary Craft Drinks, Bitters and Shrub Syrup Cocktails: Restorative Vintage Cocktails, Mocktails & Elixirs, Cannabis Cocktails, Mocktails & Tonics: The Art of Spirited Drinks & Buzz-Worthy Libations and his celebrated, 2017 release, The Craft Cocktail Compendium. He also has an edition of Apothecary Cocktails translated into French for the European market. Bobrow led a panel on Cannabis Cocktails for Park Street University at the Berlin Bar Convent in Germany. Bobrow attended the B2B event named:Hall of Flowers in Santa Rosa, California in 2019. He currently makes his living in the Cannabis Industry having in prior years supported craft spirits focusing on craft Bourbon and unmanipulated rum. Warren has been a rum judge for the Rum XP and the Ministry of Rum having first tasted rum off of Anegada in the BVI- in the early 1980's.
Warren appeared on Viceland Live on February 27, 2019. He presented at 2018’s SXSW: Disrupting the Cannabis Kitchen and Cannabis Cocktails. He was the Mercedes-Benz Me Conference Mystery Speaker on Wellness for SXSW 2018. Bobrow has written articles for Saveur magazine, Voda magazine, Whole Foods-Dark Rye, Distiller, Beverage Media, DrinkupNY and many other national and global periodicals. He has written for SoFAB Magazine at the Southern Food and Beverage Museum in New Orleans and has in the past, written restaurant reviews for New Jersey Monthly. He has also contributed to the Sage Encyclopedia of Food Issues and the Oxford Encyclopedia edition: Savoring Gotham: A Food Lover's Companion to New York City. Warren judged the 2016 Asheville, NC, Cocktail Week. Warren was nominated for a Tales of the Cocktail Spirited Award in 2013. Warren appeared in the Saveur Magazine's "100" in 2010. He taught a Master Class on un-manipulated rum during the Moscow Bar Show in 2015 and a class on Mocktails and Acidulated Beverages, AKA: Shrubs at Stonewall Kitchen in York Harbor, Maine. His books consistently lead in overall sales during Tales of the Cocktail held yearly in New Orleans.
