MS-02 Republican Congressional Runoff features Flowers, Carey; winner will face Thompson
The Republican Primary runoff election in the 2nd Congressional District is set for Tuesday, June 23rd. This will determine which Republican candidate will face Democrat Incumbent Congressman Bennie Thompson in the November General Election.
On the ballot will be Brian Flowers and Thomas Carey.
Flowers grew up in a small town in North Carolina and joined the U.S. Navy after high school, spending 10 years in the military. He then worked for the Naval Underwater Warfare Center in Keyport, WA, and Columbia Generating Station in Richland, WA, where he worked in the commercial nuclear industry. Flowers was then hired on at Grand Gulf Nuclear Station, where he currently serves as the FLEX Marshal in the Operations Department.
Carey is known for his 2014 candidacy for the U.S. Senate where he drew 1.5% of the vote statewide, denying an outright win for either former U.S. Senator Thad Cochran or State Senator Chris McDaniel.  Carey endorsed McDaniel in the runoff but Cochran won the election to retain the Mississippi U.S. Senate seat.
Carey does not appear to have an online presence either by way of a campaign website or on social media.
Voters who participated in the March 10th Democratic Primary for the 2nd Congressional District are unable to vote in the June 23rd Republican Primary runoff election.
© 2005-2017 Jackson New Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Cookie settings ACCEPT
This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience.
Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.
Any cookies that may not be particularly necessary for the website to function and is used specifically to collect user personal data via analytics, ads, other embedded contents are termed as non-necessary cookies. It is mandatory to procure user consent prior to running these cookies on your website.
