To send a link to this page you must be logged in.
The planter in the London Inn car park, Exmouth. Picture: Marion Drew
George Kent, a long-time supporter of Exmouth in Bloom, has come forward to claim responsibility for putting a rose in a town centre planter.
As previously reported by the Journal, Exmouth in Bloom thanked a nameless gardener who placed the rose in the brick planter near the London Inn car park.
Mr Kent, whose connection with Exmouth in Bloom dates back to the days when Pat Graham was involved, has been revealed as the mystery gardener.
Marion Drew, of Exmouth in Bloom, said: “George was passing by, doing his twice weekly sweep and litter pick of the seafront gardens and shelters as we were planting the Union Flag at Ocean Carpet bed.
Pat Wilkins tending to the 'oasis' planter in Alexnadra Terrnace, Exmouth. Picture: Marion Drew
“He not only does his ‘bit’ on the seafront, but also makes a difference in the London Inn car park, where he tends the wildflower patch and the brick planter.
“He is just one of many unsung heroes in Exmouth who just gets on and does something to contribute to keeping the town looking good.
Exmouth in Bloom have been busy tending to the town’s flower beds since the lockdown restrictions were eased and have been working on the model dinosaurs enclosures.
The group is also gearing up for taking part in both Britain in Bloom and South West in Bloom in 2021.
Volunteers, led by Pat Wilkins, have also been planting up an old horse trough in Alexandra Terrace.
The ‘oasis’ was in need of tender loving care after it was fenced off during work to fortify the town’s sea defences.
Now Mrs Wilkins, who ran the Exmouth Animal Dispensary for 43 years, can go back to tending to the trough.
The ‘oasis’ has a plaque above it, put in place by the RSPCA, during its presentation to Exmouth, marking Queen Victoria’s Jubilee year in 1887.
It was re-sited to Alexandra Terrace 100 years later.
For more information on the work Exmouth in Bloom does and to get involved, visit the website
If you value what this story gives you, please consider supporting the Exmouth Journal. Click the link in the yellow box below for details.
This newspaper has been a central part of community life for many years, through good times and bad, serving as your advocate and trusted source of local information. Our industry is facing testing times, which is why I’m asking for your support. Every single contribution will help us continue to produce award-winning local journalism that makes a measurable difference to our community.
To send a link to this page you must be logged in.
