According to Professor Kim Felmingham, a clinical psychologist and expert in trauma from the University of Melbourne, Sarita could be feeling something similar to what clinicians call "survivor's guilt".
The term 'survivor's guilt' is usually used when someone is experiencing distress after surviving a traumatic event when others around them haven't - in a natural disaster or an accident, for example.
"Coronavirus isn't quite like that, but it really is traumatic. It's just pulled the rug out from under people. It's had a massive impact on people's lives and on their mental health," Professor Felmingham told Hack.
"While COVID-19 is largely not widespread life or death trauma in Australia, I do think by extension it has some similarities to survivor's guilt."
Importantly, Professor Felmingham says feeling guilty about your privilege in these circumstances isn't just a "perfectly normal" reaction - it's part of our evolutionary programming.
"Guilt is a reflection on your empathy. In an evolutionary sense it allows us to form close social bonds and connections with others, so it's a result of your empathy that you're feeling guilt.
"It's a normal reaction. So give yourself a break, don't beat yourself up if you are feeling guilty."
Sarita Moore says grappling with her feelings of guilt is just part of the problem - the other is figuring out how to navigate relationships and help those around her without feeling like she's "pitying" her loved ones.
"I'm not sure what's the appropriate way to support loved ones without rubbing it in people's faces," Sarita says, "I don't really know how to engage with them in a meaningful or tactful way. I don't want to hurt their feelings."
Professor Felmingham has some advice on connecting with loved ones who might be doing it tough.
"First of all, recognise that you're lucky and use your privilege to help where you can.
"If someone's telling you their stories of hardship, don't make it about yourself. Just listen and validate and empathise with their experience.
"And if you can, help out - donating to a food bank is an incredible thing to do to help others. Looking around at a community level at what you can do is the best antidote for that guilt."
