                by Jack Deery at 5:42am 22nd June 2020.
Naomi House and Jacksplace have created a virtual gift card to help raise a bit of money.
It's that time of year again when the children's hospice charity are getting read to hand over a peppercorn rent of 12 red roses to the family who owns their land.
It's a tradition that goes back to 1997, when Mary Cornelius-Reid allowed the charity's base to be built on the grounds of her Sutton Manor Estate.
She had two conditions for it, one that it's named after her youngest daughter Naomi and the other that the hospice pays a rent of a dozen roses every Midsummer's Day.
This #MidsummersDay , Carys, together with Naomi House staff, presented Naomi Cornelius-Reid with 12 red roses to cover the hospice’s annual rent payment! She wonderfully presented the roses with a cheer of excitement & a little cuddle! Read the full story: https://t.co/FuxDZX69DP pic.twitter.com/8xt5viBAZf
— Naomi House & Jacksplace (@naomiandjack) June 24, 2019
On Wednesday (24th June), the passing over of the flowers will happen once again, but this year they want to get their supporters involved.
They are being invited to buy one of their new '12 Red Roses' virtual gift cards, at a cost of £20, to help support their vital work for seriously ill children and young adults across the South.
Lynda Barrow, Marketing Executive at Naomi House & Jacksplace, said:
"The 12 Red Roses virtual gift card is a meaningful and sensitive gift to give to friends and family to let them know you’re thinking of them, and will appeal to anyone who wants to make a difference to their local children’s hospice. Our annual 12 red roses tradition is always very popular with our supporters and this year, we are delighted to be able to offer another way for them to chip in and help.
It is particularly important in these challenging times, when charities are struggling to fundraise, that people show their support and help us continue to care for seriously ill children, young adults and their families."
The card is decorated with a picture of one Naomi House and Jacksplace's regular visitors.
It shows young Theo presenting roses to Naomi Cornelius-Reid.
Sign up for exclusive news, competitions and offers.
