Eleven days after the fatal shooting of Kamal Flowers, New Rochelle officials have identified the police officer who shot him as Alec McKenna, a 5-year veteran of the department.
They also released their first new details since the day after the shooting, including that Flowers was hit by two bullets, not just one.
Flowers was a passenger in a Dodge Charger pulled over by McKenna and another police officer on Pierce Street just before 11 p.m. on June 5. Flowers fled, chased by McKenna, who caught up to him less than two blocks away on Sharot Street, where the shooting occurred.
According to the initial police statement, the day after the shooting, McKenna tried to subdue Flowers with a Taser, a struggle ensued, Flowers displayed a gun and tried to fire it and McKenna shot him. He fired six shots in all, and one entered Flowers’ armpit and struck his heart.
Police subsequently learned from the medical examiner's office that Flowers was also hit once in the groin.
Tuesday's statement made no mention of a struggle, only that McKenna tried to stun Flowers twice but it didn't work. There is also no longer a reference to Flowers trying to fire his gun, only that he displayed it.
A Ruger 9 mm handgun and 10 rounds of ammunition were recovered at the scene, "in close proximity to where Mr. Flowers was lying on the ground," police said. Police said Tuesday the gun had been defaced, its serial numbers scratched off.
The gun would have been a violation of Flowers’ parole. The 24-year-old father of two was released from prison in March after serving more than two years for an armed carjacking in Mount Vernon.
Video from several angles released last week did not show a physical confrontation between the two men or make clear that Flowers had a gun. At least three of the gunshots appeared to be while Flowers was on the ground. It took more than 40 seconds after the shooting for a second officer to arrive alongside McKenna.
The Charger had been on the police radar since two nights earlier, when a resident of Heritage Homes reported a suspicious black Dodge Charger with Virginia license plates circling through the development several times. Police said McKenna and his partner observed the car on June 5, followed it, and pulled it over on Pierce after it "committed traffic infractions."
When the foot pursuit began, the Charger left the scene. It took 37 seconds from the time Flowers ran off until McKenna’s partner drove the unmarked police car away from the scene of the traffic stop. Authorities said Tuesday that the Charger has since been found and impounded by New York State Police but the statement did not say when.
McKenna’s name had been widely circulated in the community for about a week but authorities refused to confirm it until Tuesday. They cited safety concerns for the officers, who were placed on administrative leave, as is typical in police shootings, pending the investigation into the shooting. On Tuesday they still did not identify McKenna's partner, who has been a New Rochelle cop for three years.
Police officials have not yet responded to a Freedom of Information Law request filed last week by The Journal News/lohud related to McKenna's employment record.
Richard St. Paul, a lawyer for Flowers' family, said he too has requested the records and faulted the department for not releasing the officers' names earlier.
“That has been standard protocol in all police cases that we’ve seen throughout the nation when there is an officer-involved shooting,” St. Paul said.
The New Rochelle NAACP and Flowers' family have called on Gov. Andrew Cuomo to ask the state Attorney General's Office to take over the investigation. St. Paul said he has had conversations with Westchester prosecutors about Flowers' autopsy findings, including whether he was hit with the Taser before he was shot.
He said there are no plans to conduct a separate autopsy on Flowers until his office reviews the medical examiner's report.
McKenna, who has also served as a U.S. Army specialist, joined the police department in 2015 and graduated from the Westchester Police Academy later that year.
He was named Officer of the Month in January and March 2018 for a pair of drug arrests, including one following a traffic stop, and also received a Lifesaving Award and two Commendation Awards last year, according to a program from the 2019 police awards' ceremony.
McKenna is one of nine New Rochelle officers named in a pending federal lawsuit by Francisco and Cesar Jimenez. The brothers allege their civil rights were violated in August 2016 when police arrested them and then were retaliated against after Francisco filed a notice of claim that he intended to sue the department.
McKenna did not participate in the initial arrest. But the lawsuit alleges that he was part of the retaliation. In August 2017 he and an unidentified officer tried to forcefully enter Francisco Jimenez’s home without a warrant, according to the lawsuit. Two months later, he issued Jimenez a traffic ticket. Francisco Jimenez died in January this year of natural causes and his father as the administrator of his estate took over as plaintiff.
Staff writer David Propper contributed to this report.
