Coun. Markus Chambers, Winnipeg’s new police board chair, has mixed feelings about the police defunding movement in the wake of civil unrest in the U.S.
The University of Manitoba graduate and former youth and family services worker said the call for defunding the police is both timely and untimely. He said that crime in the city is escalating, with a record number of homicides against the backdrop of the methamphetamine crisis.
“Currently we are working through a global pandemic, which has marginalized some families even further, creating additional pressures in the community,” he said in a statement. “The ignition to all of this is the traumatic events witnessed through the brutal killing of George Floyd by the Minneapolis Police over an alleged $20 dispute.”
Chambers (St. Norbert-Seine River) explained that he’s in agreement with Chief Danny Smyth that defunding without an alternative wouldn’t be in the public’s best interest.
“I also believe transformational changes to policing of this nature require a buy-in from all levels of government, because it will impact social services, courts and prison systems,” he said. “Calls for service, responding to missing persons, checking well being, mental health and addictions, and families in crisis issues don’t necessarily require a gun and badge response.”
Chambers said there is a need to develop additional community based policing models that integrate “positive policing policies” for youth. He explained that community liaison officers would help nurture trust between law enforcement, youth and new residents.
“This is vital to building trust between police and communities where that trust has not existed,” he said. “This is the type of proactive policing I would rather allocate funding towards, in addition to funding that seeks to recruit new officers that are from diverse cultural backgrounds.”
Promoting diversity in stakeholder leadership positions is also critical, Chambers explained. He said that learning from, and listening to the community is key.
“We must engage all of our community stakeholders, and not the ones we traditionally go to, as new and innovative, transformational methods are required to bring policing and social development to sustainable levels.”
