A bathtub surrounded by thousands of lavender plants makes you smile.
Under a clear blue sky In the middle of a farm, even better.
Happy Day Farm has opened an acre of Instagram-friendly lavender plants at their farm in Manalapan.
It’s mostly selfie-centric, no picking these plants. You can pick the raspberries but not the lavender.
Maggie Mauceri relaxes in a tub in the middle of a lavender field at Happy Day Farm in Manalapan, N.J. June, 17, 2020 Ed Murray | NJ Advance Media for
“People have a natural draw to the plant,” said farm owner Tim Stockal.
Visitors are encouraged to touch the plant and get the oil on their hands and smell the plant, said Stockal.
“It’s a calming and soothing plant,” he added.
The flowers alone make for great pictures and everyone had a camera. Mostly cell phones but a few professionals were also having fun.
Several different props are in the field but everyone tries the bathtub.
Yahudis Kaplowitz in a lavender field at Happy Day Farm in Manalapan, N.J. June, 17, 2020 Ed Murray | NJ Advance Media for
Marcie Mauceri climbed in and put her feet up on the side, her daughter Savanna Gray and granddaughter Sophia Boccelli also took a turn. Smiles for all.
The farm has made changes because of the coronavirus. Plexiglass at the cashier counters, masks for employees, hand sanitizer and washing stations are available.
Everyone must wash their hands before entering the fields.
There is a $6 charge to enter the lavender field. It’s only $3 if you pay the $3 entrance fee to the raspberry self-pick fields.
Denise Vargas checks out the lavender at Happy Day Farm in Manalapan, N.J. June, 17, 2020 Ed Murray | NJ Advance Media for
The farm is selling lavender plants if you have to take one home.
The field will be open to at least July 1, with the peak happening between June 20 and June 27.
You can bring your rubber ducky but the tub does not have running water, so sorry, no bathing.
Please subscribe now and support the local journalism YOU rely on and trust.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
