No flowers, disinfected chips and paper menus — here’s how Sun hotels, casinos will re-open
Sun International is preparing to open its casinos and hotels.
Every second seat at casino slot machines has been removed, and strict physical distancing of 1.5 metres must be maintained by patrons.
At hotels, staff will not handle guest luggage.
After being closed for almost three months, Sun International hotels and casinos are preparing to re-open. On Wednesday, President Cyril Ramaphosa’s announced that restaurants and casinos can do business during Level 3 of lockdown.
No date has been given for when these establishments will be allowed to open. Sun International will stagger the re-opening of its hotels and casinos – including Sun City, Boardwalk, Carnival City, The Maslow Sandton, Wild Coast Sun, GrandWest and The Table Bay Hotel – as soon as the date is announced.
In preparation, every second seat at casino slot machines and tables has been removed to create space between customers.
All staff and customers must keep a distance of 1.5 metres from each other.
Some of the other new rules include:
Your temperature will be screened on arrival at a casino, hotel or restaurant. If you are staying at a Sun hotel for more than one night, temperature checks will be done every day on arrival back at the venue. Anyone with a temperature over 37.3°C, or presenting with flu-like symptoms, will be isolated for a secondary assessment.
All guests will need to complete a medical screening questionnaire on arrival at hotels, and in advance for casino visitors.
Only members of Sun’s loyalty programme - Most Valued Guests (MVGs) - will be allowed on the casino floor.
Sun International will implement an “ongoing chip-cleaning programme”, to sanitise casino chips, while players will also be given sanitiser to clean their chips.
Physical barriers are being installed at check-in counters, or receptionists will wear face shields.
Staff will not handle guest luggage. However, should you need help, the porter will first sanitise their hands and your luggage.
Magazines, books, newspapers and flowers have been removed to “reduce surfaces” - but it will be available on request and will be sanitised.
Where possible, glasses, cups and teaspoons will be replaced.
Rooms may be left unoccupied for a day or more after a guest checks out, to ensure decontamination before the next check-in.
Capacity in pools will be limited, and the number of loungers at pool areas will be reduced.
Bar stools will be reduced, and tables and booths will be spaced to ensure appropriate distancing between guests.
Menus will be displayed on menu boards, or disposable menus will be used. Where not possible, menus will be sanitised after each guest interaction.
Bar snacks will be provided in single portion servings, as will condiments, sugars and sauces in restaurants. Cutlery will be provided in a closed paper sleeve, including the napkin.
Food and drinks will be placed on the table instead of handed directly to guests.
Receive a daily update on your cellphone with all our latest news: click here.
Get the best of our site emailed to you daily: click here .
Also from Business Insider South Africa:
