OCD Isn’t a Thought Problem, It’s a Feeling Problem
The real culprit of OCD may not be what you originally thought.
It is not uncommon to hear an OCD sufferer make a comment such as “OCD thoughts are ruining my life,” or “I have to get rid of these thoughts!” This refrain is echoed by many of my clients who lament their unwanted, intrusive thoughts and the seemingly endless struggle to suppress, neutralize, and explain away their thoughts.
The common belief, whether explicit or implicit, is that the presence and content of the thoughts are the problem, and getting rid of them will restore hope, confidence , and happiness .
But OCD is not a thought problem — it's a feeling problem. In other words, if the thought did not have the accompanying painful feeling, you would ignore the thought, call it “weird,” and simply move on without compulsions or a second thought.
Allow me to unpack this as it may seem like what I’m saying is controversial or missing some important point about OCD.
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder is a condition marked by a pattern of unwanted, intrusive thoughts, feelings, images, sensations, or urges that take the form of a Feared Story. This story tells the sufferer of a potential, and as of yet fictional, outcome or truth about their actions, intentions, character, or future. This story, being completely unwanted, makes the sufferer feel an overwhelming sense of anxiety.
To deal with this anxiety and to get back to a sense of normalcy, confidence, and comfort, the OCD sufferer will then engage in overt or covert compulsive behaviors as an anxiety management strategy. Compulsions can include avoidance, reassurance seeking, mental review, rituals, and other repetitive acts. Once done, the sufferer gets a false sense of security that unfortunately reinforces the anxiety cycle.
OCD’s deception is that you have to struggle with and resolve the content of the thought. You have to clarify, rectify, and examine the thoughts to determine whether they are true or false. For example, the contamination OCD sufferer believes he must be sure that his hands are fully clean, or at least clean enough, before they can interact with anyone.
In the brief overview of the OCD cycle above, you likely noticed that I mentioned thoughts and feelings. Wouldn’t this suggest that OCD is both a thought and a feeling issue? Yes, but in practice not really. People with OCD often get wrapped up in three potential issues; the trigger, the feared story, and the feeling. Ultimately, freedom from OCD requires you to face down the feeling, because OCD is a feeling problem.
OCD can be triggered by almost anything, including things we see, random thoughts we have, sensations we experience, and objects we encounter. Everything that you and I will ever encounter, think, feel, or experience is neutral until we place some value upon it. Meaning it is neither good nor bad, right nor wrong. Is a knife good or bad? It can be used to open to letter, but it can also be used to open a person. How about therapy ? It is both good and bad. It can bring about profound positive life transformation, but it can also be emotionally draining, time-consuming, and costly.
Likewise, triggers to one’s fears are also neutral. Yet those with OCD and anxiety disorders exaggerate the meaning and importance of triggering thoughts or images as they relate to the Feared Story.
Each fear has any number of neutral associations. Remember the knife example? It doesn’t have just one meaning or significance. A knife can conjure thoughts of cooking shows. It can cause someone to think of their dad’s fishing knife or Julius Caesar. The thought of a knife can also spark thoughts of suicide , harm, or crime .
If you blame the trigger (i.e. the feared thought or object) and label it as the problem, you are being misdirected. OCD, and the history of repeated compulsions, exaggerate the importance of a select number of mental associations. Over time, the other neutral or positive associations are downplayed or ignored leaving the feared associations as seemingly the only associations for these thoughts or experiences.
When you scapegoat the trigger as the problem, you believe minimizing your contact with it will make the obsession about it go away. Unfortunately, avoiding the trigger leads to isolation and reinforces the false notion that the trigger is the problem, resulting in greater fear of the trigger and the feared story it spawns.
Our brain tells us stories all day. Some we like. Some we don’t. OCD tells us stories too, and they are catastrophic, threatening, and at odds with who we are. These Feared Stories are a combination of distorted thoughts and mental images about the result of actions, one’s character, or an inevitable future that concludes in something terrible.
Some people blame the Feared Story as the problem within OCD. They think that if they were to simply get rid of the thoughts, think the opposite of the thought, prove that the thought is wrong, or simply “just think right” that their OCD would evaporate. They believe OCD is a thought problem.
To their point, treatment for OCD and anxiety disorders commonly begins by challenging the feared story using rational thought to develop a broader, reality-based view of the fear. This exercise helps the sufferer develop confidence that their intrusive thoughts are likely irrational, overvalued, and not deserving of excessive and exhausting compulsive responses.
When I challenge the Feared Story in session, my clients are quick to point out how their Feared Story is wrong. They usually say, “I know this doesn’t make sense,” then proceed to point out all the reasons why it doesn’t make sense, and they are right!
For example, a client with Pedophile OCD (POCD) might say, “I’m not a pedophile because I’ve never been attracted to a child in the past. I’ve never wanted to do anything sexual with a child. Whenever I have the thought about molesting a child, I always get anxious and have never felt feelings consistent with my typical feelings of attraction when I think about adults.”
Generally speaking, people with OCD are capable of combating their feared thoughts with rational alternatives. However, compulsions exist because a feared thought comes with, or takes the form of, an uncomfortable and unwanted feeling that overwhelms the sufferer.
Despite developing a list of rational observations and objections to the Feared Story, it does nothing long term because the issue has never been a matter of “right thinking,” but of an intolerance of the feeling brought on by the Feared Story.
Here is the actual problem of OCD. The feeling. More specifically, it is the feeling that makes you engage in compulsive behavior, which subsequently reinforces the OCD cycle. Chasing down and embracing that feeling with a welcoming and accepting posture desensitizes you to the feeling over time. Conversely, if you are unwilling to feel the feeling, but instead rely on compulsions and avoidances, desensitization cannot happen.
Remember, we are able to acknowledge that the trigger is neutral, and has a number of alternative associations. Additionally, we are very capable of telling ourselves why the Feared Story is irrational and wrong. However, we are unable to convince ourselves to not feel something because feelings are largely out of our control.
While not bad or wrong, feeling anxiety in an OCD moment is unwanted. Typically speaking, we say anxiety feels bad, but it by itself is not “bad.” It is an unwanted feeling state at the moment you’re feeling it. When we ride a roller coaster or see a horror movie, we expect to feel butterflies in our stomach, feel our heart racing, and feel jumpy. You know, anxiety feelings. But in this context, we paid good money for the experience! So, the feeling itself is not bad, just unwanted at that moment and inconsistent with the level of actual risk.
Similarly, when it comes to OCD, sometimes the feeling isn’t just anxiety, but sadness, loneliness , anger , apathy, or emptiness.
The goal of Exposure and Response Prevention treatment is to intentionally feel this feeling, acknowledge this inconsistent emotional response, and let it remain without compulsive behaviors until it passes. Remember, it will always pass.
Counterintuitively, your job in Exposure and Response Prevention is to engage the feeling. It’s the enemy and the problem. The solution is to show that you’re stronger than it by calling its bluff that the feeling is heralding in something terrible and that you are not strong enough to shoulder the uncomfortable experience. You are strong enough, and the terrible outcome probably is not coming. Stand firm and let the storm pass.
If you are not ready to do this, you are going to have a hard time overcoming your anxiety. But you can start small, and progressively work up. If you are consistent and keep pushing yourself, you will eventually find more mental and emotional strength and freedom.
Submitted by Norma Roberts on January 3, 2020 - 7:29am
I have never believed that I have OCD, (although it turns out that I have!) Because I do not feel anxiety about what I do, I have never thought that anything bad was going to happen if I didn't do what I do, nor do I think it is, totally, stupid, or, completely,irrational. (although I know it is not "normal")  My problem is that I never feel clean, never feel that I have done it "right" but, I also ,truly, think that most people do not clean themselves properly. I know I spend too long bathing, for example, as it can take me 2 to 4 hours, and I still don't feel properly clean. But, even if I didn't have OCD, I would not feel comfortable/clean with a 10 minute shower. IMO you can't clean yourself, thoroughly, in just 10 minutes. The way I explain how I feel is this: there are 3 people and they each have a dirty, stained towel. Person 1 uses the towel just as it is, they feel OK about that. Person 2 has to wash the towel first but, when they look at it, it is still stained, but they feel OK about that. Person 3 washes the towel, sees that it's still stained, so washes it again, and, when they can't see the stain, they're OK. BUT, then there's me! I want to be person 3, but, when I wash that towel, twice, I still don't believe that it's clean, I still doubt that it is. I don't think anything bad will happen if I use it, and I could use it without feeling any anxiety, but it wouldn't feel "right" and that feeling of wrongness ,incompleteness nags away at me & makes me feel very uncomfortable, unsure. That is my OCD.
Submitted by Anonymous on January 19, 2020 - 4:45am
For the overwhelming majority of human history, we were living in huts made of mud and sticks, wandering around wrapped in animal skins or naked, often barefoot, and so on.
If people were even half as fragile when it comes to any sort of dirt as you think they are, the human race would have died out a million years ago.
Submitted by Norma Roberts on January 19, 2020 - 11:07am
I do not think that we are fragile, I do not think that dirt will harm me, or anyone, nor do I think that anything  will happen if I'm not clean, it's not about risk or fear. It is just that I don't ever feel clean, and, for some deep rooted reason, being clean is very, very important to me, to my sense of well being . I don't know why, although a psychiatrist I once saw, when I had severe post natal depression, told me it could have something to do with being sexually abused, by the next door neighbour, when I was 5. I have no idea whether he was right or not. OCD seldom makes sense, look at people who have to turn light switches on and off all the time! I knew a lady who always felt she went through doorways incorrectly, she couldn't explain what she thought she'd done wrong. I once waited four hours for her to exit her home! That shows you the bizarre nature of OCD, it is seldom about the actual thing you are doing, it's not that simple.
Dangerous to simply because certain intrusive thoughts and obsessions manifest themselves in a way different than they do other times, such as rather than a specific thought of doing something, a conceptual obsessive thought of uncertainty or potential danger, choose to label them as different things and things that should be treated differently in therapy or labeled differently.  A feeling is a physical sensation, a mood, or a synonym for a mental thought that is more conceptualized as a broad or difficult to articulate concept rather than a specific one, but make no mistake, its a cognitive manifestation of a concept, or a thought.  A thought can be something u speak out loud in your head, or literally anything you conceptualized aside from physical feelings from the nerves in your body being affected by something.  PHysical pain is a feeling.  Pure o OCd is not a feeling disorder.  The anxiety is a feeling that amplifies the power of the obsessive intrusive thoughts.  But making it seem like these obsessive thoughts are feelings like a feeling your hand has covered in dirt physically on your hand, and not a contaminated obsessional thought that conceptualized feeling dirty in your head but not your hand, or feeling a plain may crash is a somatic sensation and not a mental conceptualization of a general concept obsessively entrenched in your brain, is so dangerous for people with serious conditions of pure o and magical thinking and thought disorders and the wide array of spectrum disorders that make up what we try to label as mental disorders despite the fact bits of many categorized conditions can be ever found in even those without diagnosable degrees of it. Read your article on thoughts vs feelings.  I am afraid you are going to harm peoples recovery with your strange choice to dichotomize mental conceptualizations between thoughts and feelings so distinctly as though an obsessive thought that a plane is going to Crash is not an obsessive thought simply because you believe it not to be true and don’t actually think it.  That doesn’t make it a feeling, mental states such as self doubt over something you’ve don e a million times or experiencing a mental state where you have a mental conceptualized feeling of something being wrong or your hands being dirty is not a physical feeling and simply not a thought.  We think in concepts, we dont think in words, were not born naturally knowing a language, And just because the obsessive thought your hands ar dirty feels so real doesn’t mean its a feeling and not a thought, its an obsessive thought maninfesting itself in the conceptualized state of feeling dirty, or having the obsessive thought of certainty a plane will crash despite knowing that thought which we describe as a feeling because its an obsessional intrusive thought of a conceptualized mental state rather than your normal regular thinking patterns that you genuinely believe.  The thoughts feeel real because the thought is a feeling, our mental feelings, us doubting something or believing something or having an intrusive thought that though though action fusion Makes us feel we must believe the thought cuz its there doesn’t mean its not all under the umbrella of thoughts
you don’t physically manifest a feeling of uncertainty, u dont touch it with your hands, mental feelings are the doubt and dismay or conceptualized mental state obsessively and intrusively occurring in your brain that makes the intrusive thought seem real, and we describe it as feelings something like feeling dirty, but its not like your nerves in your hand actually feel dirty or ur nerves feel an airplanes crashing, or your obsessional feelings you can’t do something till u perform a ritual aren’t a thought because it is a concept an obsessive thought that you cannot do this or you are dirty right now, or this plane is going to crash, all mental neuron-based activity firing to create mental manifestations of conceptualized events and ideas.  Just because you dont actually believe them, despite the fact they feel real, doesn’t make them not thoughts and only feelings.  Physically you can feel anxiety, but also you can have obsessive anxious thoughts , but the feeling in your stomach is not the same as the obsessional thought in your brain that’s causing you to have the anxiety that you have to desensitize yourself to
like if I have a thought that makes me feel i could want to kill somebody, thats a mental experience a thought which we used interchangeably with feeling because its more conceptual than a specific concept we can articulate into language, but that doesn’t mean you knowing a planes not gonna crash is a thought and an obsessive intrusive thought u fixate on that the plane is gonna crash is some completley different metaphysical phenom
like feeling pain or something, people are going to think they can’t gain control over their obsessions now because of articles like this because you make it sound like a feeling of being of being tired, or the physical feeling of anxiety, not the mental state of mind or a conceptualized experience like a thought of doubt or fear that simply can synonymously be described as a feeling, if you feel a plane is gonna crash you think it its a thought, you dont have spidey senses tingling and somatic intuition That tells you things you dont think.  if you dont think its gonna crash but you have an obsessive thought thats in your head telling you its likely, so that the obsessive thought makes it seem like its real even tho you know the danger is not real, thats called recognizing the thought for what it is, an intrusive obsessive thought, because you have an obessive thought making the sensation or mental state conceptualizing a likelihood of crashing, and you have the normal not-abnormal and obsessive thoughts in your head always present that know its not likely, that does not mean the two are not both thoughts.  THe difference is, the obsessive thoughts that one experiences in a way that sometimes they’d describe as a feeling given its an abrormal and nonsensical obsessive state of thinking, and not a normal pattern of thinking, means your dealing with what is obvious.  Obsessive thoughts and normal thoughts are different experiences, obsessive thoughts can take form or manifest themselves to appear as real thoughts or “feelings” aka conceptualized mentalitis concepts or perspectives that aren’t just worded out into a language.  THe thoughts are the feelings, its brain activityh, and thus the thoughts drive the feelings, the feelings drive the thoughts, but if you have an obsession that makes youfeel the planes gonna crash, thats not a feeling driving thoughts, thats the thought the planes gonna crash and the concept of it being likely as an obsessive thought being engaged and given power by you and treated like a real thought rather than an irrrational misfiring of the brain, thus inducing feelings when you believe those thoughts or intrusive conceptsual states (feelings) That you begin to feel (or obsessively conceptualize a likelihood ) they are real.
Ive fully recovered almost from one of the worst severe cases Of pure o ocd among other magical thinkin and thought disorders and though an electric approach of various therapies I’ve not only helped myself miraculously and actually managed to live a independent life and graduate law school after just 10 years prior being institutionalized twice, I did so after psychologists with no introspective experience to have any clue how to tailor a therapy or even diagnose a condition (which is stupid anyway cuz everything’s a spectrum nature didn’t create rigid categories of mental disordered abnormalities)  and the best they could do was help me keep on track, as I now am a case study on the matter, and have helped 5 other people I’ve met through the years far more than their psychologists who stick to the dogmatic ways of the Dsm close minded douchebags because most psychologists have no introspective perspective to be able to tailor mental therapy and treatments.  And thus they go telling poeple they can’t control or do anything about a thought obsession the planes gonna crash because thats not a thought its a feeling like feeling happy or feeling dirt on your hands, and the only thoughts invovled are those of you knowing deep down the obsession isn’t true, then theyre going to think they have to remain in that obsessive mental state of thinking, rather than understand they are both forms of thoughts, just one is abnormal and obsessive and one healthy, and that thoughts and mental conceptions of less precise ideas  that people often describe as feelings because they aren’t readily articulable are still both the same things, mental conceptualizations of ideas and concepts and words, they are all technically thoughts, or mental conceptualizations, words do not come first and thoughts can be used specifically for those specific thoughts articulating mentally an idea like you limit their definition to in your article, but they are also umbrella term for all the conceptualized activity and states of mentality in our minds.  I could use your logic to say that your obsessional thought that feels real that there is a likelyhood the plane crashes isa. Thought, but deep down you knowing it not to be true means that despite the thought in your head that feels real, you dont truly feel its a possibility, or synonymously you dont actually think that, but you are having an obsessive thought that you believe that intrusively in your head.  I really hate it when people like yourself don’t be careful to realize people with very severe pure o and depersonalization and magical thought disorder thought action fusion etc etc, all it takes is one incorrect interpretation or semantic mistake to completely ruin therapeutic advancements.  As someone who’s conquered a far more extreme condition you’ve ever encountered, one where 90% of sufferers cant live independently, and someone who after 24 misdiagnoses and unhelpful therapeutic approaches by psychs who dont think to combine a therapeutic approach, and lack the introspective insight to know how to tailor therapeutic approaches, I came up with my own successful and therepautic approach tailored for me from the various methods out there now. It is getting a lot of attention now in the psych world, and I’ve helped others too, and I was never supposed to be living independently at this age let alone be becoming an attorney when 8 years ago I was Howard Hughes’ing it not leaving my room for months in constant obsessive loops.  And I have people like you to thank for making it so difficult to achieve successful control over the disorder, because you all think you know how to fix something you’ve never experienced and in your case you don’t even consider how nonsensical it is to say that you knowing an obsessive thought (or as you call them feelings in the  exclusive sense) not to be true means that the obsessive thought isn’t a thought but you knowing it not to be true is, and how exactly does that obsessive feeling drive your thoughts of knowing it not to be true.  You think in concepts, feelings in the mental sense and thoughts in the mental sense are all the same thing, we just use the two synonyms to describe different manifestations of that same brain activity.  You are making people think that obsessive thoughts are like physical anxiety or like physical feelings of dirt, or that the obsessive thought a planes likely to crash isn’t something you can escape from and isn’t just a thought you can move away from, and is a feeling like being cold or emotion like being upset that you can’t have control over.  YOu control how you respond to the thoughts and obsessions, thats how you gain control of the disorder.  You don’t put those obsessive thoughts up on a pedal tool as though they’re something you can’t apply theraputic techniques to because they’re not thoughts under your narrow and ridiculously shortsighted and irresponsible definition of a thought and of a feeling, its all mental conceptualizations.  And just like feeling can mean physical or emotional or conceptual, a thought can mean all those things except the physical, which you cannot control whether you feel pain so you are setting up people to fail with your attempt to gain notoriety by dealing away with CBT.  I agree CBT isnt solely going to help complex versions of the disorder, but it damns sure does help, in conjunction with others, and your type of OCD you describe is what people with the degree of the disorder i have like to call freakin amateur hour.  I got over my counting and contamination and irrational fear obsessions before i hit middle school, before they changed like a virus into more complex distressful ones.  You dont know how relatively easy it actually is to break such a pathetically benign manifestation of the disorder, so dont go giving out advice just because you figured out that an obsessive thought your hands are dirty feels real but that doesn’t mean it is, thats no novel discovery, and it doesn’t mean it’s a feeling fuckin disorder, ur brain doesn’t think in feelings, feelings dont think in feelings they represent conceptualized perspectives or states of mind.  If you really want to help people, you can let me teach you why I am being contacted by leaders in this field about the unprecedented recovery and therapeutic approach Ive developed, so you can stop steering people into the wrong direction.
