On wedding with Ali Fazal getting postponed, Richa Chadha sums up her feelings with 'Gangs of Wasseypur' meme
Richa Chadha celebrates 8 years o Gangs of Wasseypur in a quirky way.
On wedding with Ali Fazal getting postponed, Richa Chadha sums up her feelings with 'Gangs of Wasseypur' meme , File Photo
Gangs of Wasseypur completed 8 years since its release today and actor Richa Chadha found a novel way to commemorate the same along with addressing her impending wedding with Ali Fazal, now indefinitely postponed. Taking to her Instagram account, Richa shared a meme from the film, lamenting how only 50 guests are allowed at weddings amid the coronavirus pandemic.
The post shows the actress as Nagma Khatoon from the film, sitting mute during her nikaah. Richa captioned the video saying, "#8YearsOfGangsOfWasseypur 2020 saw me postponing my shaadi, rightly so, cuz this is such an unpredictable, manhoos year ! Here’s some #NagmaSwag for you, from the film that started it all for me! Enjoy. #NagmaKhatoon #GangsOfWasseypur #ActorsLife #richachadda #GangsOfWasseypur #AKFPL."
For the uninformed, both Ali and Richa were set to get married in summer 2020, however, their plans were put on hold due to the coronavirus pandemic.
In a statement issued by the actor's spokesperson, it was said, "Given the current scenario and the unfortunate turn of events owing to the COVID-19 pandemic globally, Ali Fazal and Richa Chadha have decided to postpone their wedding functions to the latter half of 2020 tentatively. They wish for everyone to be healthy and safe and at no cost would want their friends, families, and well-wishers to be affected."
But it seems like the wedding might get delayed further as Ali also lost his mother last week. Richa had posted a sweet tribute on Instagram for her and had also promised to take care of Ali. "Love at a dead-end is grief... RIP! Aunty, you left us yesterday..but you will always be around... I will always remember you as a lady ahead of her time... a voracious reader, feminist and cupcake lover. I promise to take care of your son... hope you find your peace... And I miss you already," she wrote.
