I could spend all day on the Wuppertal Schwebebahn , a unique suspension railway system in Wuppertal. Which makes me a Schwebebahnliebhaberin (floating rail aficionado), a word as slinky as the monorail system itself, an elegant, airy, 13km engineering wonder which snakes its way through the Wupper valley (between Düsseldorf and Cologne), humming along the track between Barmen and Elberfeld, and must be one of the nearest experiences to flying.
“Why drive, when you can float to work?” was the thinking at the turn of the 20th century, when commuter numbers were growing and construction work on it began. Industrialisation had caused the western German region to develop so quickly that there was no room for broader streets to take the increase in traffic, and so the decision was made to go high. Steel girder construction was all the rage at the time – Paris got its Eiffel Tower, Wuppertal its floating railway, complete with the strident green limbs that give it its height and majesty.
The Kaiser and his wife took a ride on it in 1900, hence the Kaiserwagen (carriage 5) with its velvet upholstery and gold trimmings, which has since been restored and can be ridden at weekends. An even more famous journey was undertaken by a circus elephant called Tuffi, who was put on it as a publicity stunt in 1950 but panicked in the overcrowded carriage and plunged into the river Wupper below. She survived with only minor injuries, as did her story, which has been retold to German children ever since.
Not only is it a pleasure to ride – ideally kneeling on a seat at the back looking out of the window on to city and river life below – but also very efficient, with a train running every four minutes and reasonably priced (€2.90 for an adult single, €7.20 for 24 hours). It remains the transport of choice for Wuppertalers, moving around 25 million passengers a year.Wuppertal is also home to the dance company of the late choreographer Pina Bausch, and the Schwebebahn features in the 2011 film Pina, Wim Wenders’ tribute to Bausch.
