Check out this story on press-citizen.com: https://www.press-citizen.com/story/life/2020/04/01/soil-warming-and-spring-flowers-beginning-bloom/5106963002/
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Welcome to our new and improved comments, which are for subscribers only.
                                            This is a test to see whether we can improve the experience for you.
                                            You do not need a Facebook profile to participate.
You will need to register before adding a comment.
                                            Typed comments will be lost if you are not logged in.
                                            It's OK to disagree with someone's ideas, but personal attacks, insults, threats, hate speech, advocating violence and other violations can result in a ban.
                                            If you see comments in violation of our community guidelines , please report them.
Judy Terry, Green Thumb Published 3:20 p.m. CT April 1, 2020
Crocus are putting on their spring show right now, oblivious to the quiet chaos that surrounds us. A walk in your neighborhood may reveal clusters of them in pink, purple, yellow and white.
The crocus below are in my daughter’s yard and have been blooming and spreading for several years. Next to her driveway, they are proof that regardless of late snow, some record colds in other years and a worldwide pandemic, they bloom.
Pretty in purple, crocus open their blooms in the morning light.
In my own garden the daffodils are a few inches tall now and I hope in a couple weeks will flower. I think the bulbs I planted must have been on the tiny side as  they are slow to flower and certainly are not the popular King Alfred.
My garden thermometer is telling me the soil is more than 40 degrees so radishes, peas, lettuce, kale and spinach could be planted. But testing the soil, it is still lumpy and so I will wait. Besides I don’t have the seeds and am not inclined to leave my shelter.
I do have some special nasturtium seeds sent by my daughter, Ann—  200 seeds in fact — chosen for the name Nasturtium Nahum, I believe. They will be deep mahogany, yellow and white. Before planting though, the temperature should be 65 degrees. I think I will tuck a few in a pot and see what happens inside.
Not necessarily an early April flower, though it must be greening up, is creeping phlox. Look for it flowing down from a small incline or next to a steep sidewalk. The colors are purple, pink, red, white, even bluish and variegated.
Red carpet phlox is a low-growing, dense spring flower.
My neighbor, Bob McKenzie, had purple phlox creeping down his inclined sidewalk. They bloomed every year for about 3 to 4 weeks and then simply looked like ground cover. But they were such a welcome sign of spring whenever I passed his house. They came back every year as I remember so they are not an exhaustable perennial.
It seems as though we will be sheltering in place for some time to come. But we can start our gardens soon or take a ride and watch for spring flowers and also check out what trees are beginning to show their leaves.
