Without help from the city of Pasadena, the historic Rose Bowl stadium could go belly up in the coronavirus economy as stadium officials project hundreds of millions of dollars in losses unless there’s some intervention — about $11.5 million worth.
That’s how much one year of the Rose Bowl’s debt service costs, according to a presentation given by members of the Rose Bowl Operating Company during last week’s Finance Committee Meeting. The company acts as a steward for the city-owned stadium and its accompanying golf courses.
The Rose Bowl Operating Company had been “consistently showing annual net profits” every year, according to Darryl Dunn, the company’s general manager, who spoke during the meeting.
“With increased competition in the SoCal marketplace, the decline in attendance at some events, increased bond debt.” Add to that the declining interest in golf and “the financial challenges of the (Rose Bowl Operating Company) began to reveal themselves,” Dunn said.
Now the city is poised to intervene as the Finance Committee approved a transfer of $11.5 million to the Rose Bowl Operating Company from the city’s reserve funds. The decision isn’t set in stone yet, as the full council will still have to vote on it come Monday, June 15, as part of approving the city budget as a whole.
Still, the $11.5 million appears likely to pass given the unanimous support of the four members of the Finance Committee, plus city staff. And, given the dire straits the Rose Bowl Operating Company is facing right now, the future of the stadium is in jeopardy if city officials don’t act.
The money will be enough to keep up with the Rose Bowl’s debt payments — almost entirely acquired through recent renovations officials previously said were necessary to keep the stadium competitive. Still, the city’s help isn’t going to keep the Rose Bowl from losing a significant amount of money.
While the company’s treasurer, Rich Schammel, presented several financial scenarios to the committee, in the most likely scenarios — in which some live events happen in 2021 — the Rose Bowl Operating Company is projected to have about $5.8 million in the bank by next month.
That number will drop precipitously, according to Schammel’s presentation, every month going forward.
By November, it will be officially in the red with a loss of $101,000. By February, that account balance is projected to fall even further — a loss of about $5.3 million. By June of next year, it’ll be somewhere near negative $6.5 million.
That’s “doubly bad,” Schammel said, “because it means that not only can we not pay the debt service, but it means we have no working capital to pay salaries” or other operating expenses.
When asked if he could cut more positions, Schammel said the company could, but it wouldn’t be wise.
“We need to be able to react quickly” when opportunities come up, Schammel said. If they have to recruit and train a slew of workers whose predecessors were fired months earlier, it could make the Rose Bowl’s road to recovery much longer.
City officials were placated by the answer and have tentatively approved the $11.5 million, pending the full council’s decision.
“Is that all we’re asking for? Well, probably not,” Schammel said.
Moving quickly means having cash on hand, he explained. Most of the time, when an event comes to town, the Rose Bowl Operating Company covers most of the expenses upfront and the stadium’s tenants pay them back. But if the company’s in the hole — whether by a few hundred thousand or a few million — there’s no money to front, which means it can’t  host any events at all.
“One of the challenges we have here is that there’s still a lot of unknowns,” he said. “Will we need the line of credit? When? How much? We’re kind of at the mercy of our tenants. We don’t know what UCLA is going to do . We don’t know what concert promotions are going to pop up.”
He stressed that the slowdown was temporary but asked for a line of credit — possibly as much as $5 million, which city staff agrees is reasonable.
The city wouldn’t be giving this money away, as it’s doing with the $11.5 debt service payment. No, this is a loan that would be repaid within one to three months, Pasadena Finance Director Matt Hawkesworth said.
All that said, there was a bit of good news in the meeting: Schammel said UCLA told the Rose Bowl Operating Company that football would return in the fall “more likely than not.”
The question is whether fans will be there. And if they are, would it be at half capacity? Quarter capacity? Nobody knows yet.
It’s going to take a “tremendous amount of work” to figure out the logistics of a socially distanced crowd, Schammel said. How does the stadium manage sanitation? Security? Food? Even getting people to their seats will require rethinking.
After paying off the Rose Bowl’s debt service, the city will be left with about $2 million in one of its reserve funds — down from about $12.6 million after some other coronavirus-related expenditures also depleted the fund — while its second reserve will still hold strong with about $38 million, according to a staff report.
The city’s own financial situation isn’t looking too hot, though it’s leaps and bounds better than the Rose Bowl’s.
