Watch the video for Perfume Genius’s On the Floor.
When the new record was sent out to critics, it came with an essay written by the author of On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous , Ocean Vuong, in which he notes that in Hadreas’s most recent work, “the body (queer, healing, troubled, wounded, possible and gorgeous) sings itself into its future”. Hadreas has often sung about his body, but says that now, he feels more in control of it, more inside it. “I’m always obsessed with this idea of leaving, and changing and shifting, and just blowing everything up and going. Before, I felt like I couldn’t be in my body and do that, but I’m starting to realise that I can.”
Has he always had a tendency to want to blow things up and leave? “Oh yeah,” he says. “I figured out when I was pretty young that drinking and going out and doing drugs and stuff will just give you a really full, 360-degree feeling. It is ultimately empty, but at least there is enough in the effect that you feel quiet and satiated for a long time. It comes with its own set of really horrible shit, too. It’s kind of a death wish, in a way.”
Hadreas only started writing songs when he got clean in his mid-20s, after he dropped out of art school and eventually moved home, and has been sober ever since. Until recently, he says, he would hide from the world when he wasn’t working, and nest at home with Wyffels, stop feeling so “wild”. “I stopped looking for big ‘feeling’,” he says. “But now I’m starting to realise that maybe there’s another way. I can have more, and keep everything.” Is that liberating? “I feel free, but I also feel that I have no idea what’s going on. Internally, externally. It doesn’t help that the whole world doesn’t, either. It’s in the air, too.”
On the sleeve of the new album, Hadreas is topless and muscular, covered in dirt. On previous albums, he has been androgynous, feminine, in makeup and heels; in the videos released so far, he embraces an ultra-macho look. “I wanted the cover [of Set Fire…] and the video to have that same thing, where it’s warm and nostalgic, but something’s not quite right. It’s hyper-masculine, but there’s something off about it.
“My presentation, and what I wear, there’s definitely a performative element to it and I love that. But also, at the core of it, is that it’s just what I feel like doing, and where I am at the moment.” This matches the music, which dips in and out of 50s ballads, 80s pop and theatrical, lilting Americana.
Hadreas has always sung about sex, and has never been one for coyness. A new song, Jason, recalls an encounter with a man who doesn’t bother taking his clothes off (“That’s one of the only songs that is really just a memory that I mined, and I told the story”). On one of his best-known songs, Queen , he sings about sexuality as a menace to straight society: “No family is safe, when I sashay.”
“[Sex] is an easy place to funnel a lot of things that I can’t explain into something that’s very physical,” he says. “And it’s much easier to put a beat on a song if it’s about sex. Even when I dance, it all comes from a low place,” he laughs, and gestures down. “I think that’s just the funnel.”
