Should MLB lift Rose's lifetime ban? (1:13)
Will Cain, Mike Golic and Mike Golic Jr. discuss whether MLB should approve Pete Rose's petition for reinstatement. (1:13)
Host and co-executive producer of the new ESPN series, "Backstory"
Member of three Pulitzer Prize-winning teams for national, explanatory and public service journalism
Author of three books, including New York Times best-selling "First Off the Tee:  Presidential Hackers, Duffers, and Cheaters from Taft to Bush"
Pete Rose asked commissioner Rob Manfred on Wednesday morning to remove his name from Major League Baseball's ineligible list, which would allow the all-time hits leader to be considered for induction into the Hall of Fame.
In a petition sent to the MLB commissioner's office and obtained by ESPN , Rose and his lawyers argue that Manfred has recently opted not to punish players guilty of major game-changing rules infractions and, as a result, should end Rose's 30½-year ban for gambling on baseball while he was manager of the Cincinnati Reds .
"There cannot be one set of rules for Mr. Rose and another for everyone else," Rose's 20-page petition for reinstatement says. "No objective standard or categorization of the rules violations committed by Mr. Rose can distinguish his violations from those that have incurred substantially less severe penalties from Major League Baseball."
Rose also seeks a meeting with Manfred.
A Major League Baseball source told ESPN that the league has received Rose's petition and is reviewing it.
In 1989, Rose was permanently banned from baseball by then-commissioner A. Bartlett Giamatti after an investigation led by John Dowd, the special counsel to MLB. The Dowd report showed that Rose had illegally wagered with bookmakers on MLB games, including on the Reds, while managing Cincinnati. On Aug. 24, 1989, Rose signed an agreement accepting an indefinite suspension from baseball, though he did not admit to violating Section D of MLB's Rule 21, which prohibits players and others involved with the game from betting on baseball.
Don Van Natta Jr. examines Major League Baseball's punishments of "Shoeless" Joe Jackson and Pete Rose with new reporting and fresh interviews, exploring what has changed since they were each banned from the sport. Watch
For 15 years, Rose repeatedly denied he had bet on baseball. But in 2004, Rose admitted in his book, "My Prison Without Bars," that he had wagered on baseball and the Reds in the 1980s.
Besides Manfred in 2015, MLB commissioner Bud Selig also rejected a previous Rose application for reinstatement.
Rose declined to comment for this story. But in an ESPN interview for the Backstory episode " Banned for Life* ," which first aired last month, Rose said, "People should know that I'm very sorry that I made the mistake that I did. ... If you want to look back, which you can, I should have admitted to [Giamatti] the first time he called me in the office in January of '89, but I didn't."
Rose's petition Wednesday marks his second bid for reinstatement from Manfred. In December 2015, Manfred denied Rose's application to be removed from the ineligible list, concluding he had not "reconfigured" his life, in part because Rose continued to place bets, legally, on MLB games in Las Vegas, where he lives year-round. In 2017, the Hall of Fame rejected a separate request by Rose to be placed on its ballot.
Rose, 78, argues now that Manfred has used far less harsh punishments than permanent ineligibility on games-changing rules violations that have affected the integrity of the game.
In particular, Rose's lawyers highlight that Manfred did not punish any players on the Astros for systematically using electronic sign stealing on their way to winning the 2017 World Series. Last month, the commissioner suspended Astros manager AJ Hinch and general manager Jeff Luhnow for one year and fined the team $5 million. Hinch and Luhnow were then fired by the team.
"It has never been suggested, let alone established, that any of Mr. Rose's actions influenced the outcome of any game or the performance of any player," the petition reads. "Yet for the thirty-first year and counting, he continues to suffer a punishment vastly disproportionate to those who have done just that. Given the manner in which Major League Baseball has treated and continues to treat other egregious assaults on the integrity of the game, Mr. Rose's ongoing punishment is no longer justifiable as a proportional response to his transgressions."
Rose holds major league records for hits (4,256), games played (3,562), at-bats (14,053) and singles (3,215). His name has never appeared on a Baseball Hall of Fame ballot.
Rose's lawyers pointed out that Manfred reinstated a player, Jenrry Mejia , who had been permanently banned from baseball after testing positive a third time for anabolic steroids.
"It's in the best interests of baseball to not have as its legacy that Pete Rose is being treated grossly differently than every other player in its history, with the exception of 'Shoeless' Joe Jackson and the Chicago Black Sox," said Mark Rosenbaum, a Los Angeles-based civil rights lawyer who is representing Rose pro bono. "I don't think there has been an athlete in any sport in history who has fallen more steeply and more of a distance for a longer period of time than Pete Rose has."
Rosenbaum added that Rose's permanent ban should end because "proportionality is the cornerstone of baseball, like it is in life. ... This is a country of second chances, and I don't think Pete Rose poses a threat to the integrity of the game."
