On an early morning in April, Xai Cha, 59, and her daughter Mary Thao, 38, harvested some of the first flower crops of the year at their farm near the Pilchuck River in Snohomish County.
As they collected dark pink tulips and yellow daffodils, Thao worried about their steadily blooming fields. Most of the non-food-related businesses at Pike Place Market — including their daystall — had closed in mid-March due to Washington state’s stay-home order. Their storage cooler was nearly full.
“Our only outlet for selling flowers is Pike Place Market,” said Thao.
Xai Cha, 59, harvests tulips on a recent morning at Xai C. Farm in Snohomish. Cha and her husband fled Laos after the Vietnam War. After living in Thai refugee camps for several years, they moved to the United States in 1979 with the help of the International Rescue Committee. The couple started out farming vegetables, but found that selling flowers at Pike Place Market and other farmers markets to be more profitable. (Erika Schultz / The Seattle Times)
Xai Cha, left, and her daughter Mary Thao harvest tulips on at Xai C. Farm. Many Hmong flower farmers have been quickly adapting their business models after Washington state’s coronavirus-related restrictions closed local farmers markets during flower farmers’ busiest time of the year. (Erika Schultz / The Seattle Times)
Kher Thao, 66, works in the greenhouse at Xai C. Farm in Snohomish. Thao and his wife have been concerned about their health during the coronavirus outbreak, and have been relying on their children to help with the front end of the business. (Erika Schultz / The Seattle Times)
With Mother’s Day approaching, it’s a critical time for Washington’s Hmong flower farmers. “For most of us, it’s our first income for the year,” Thao said.
The farmers — whose colorful bouquets have become a staple at Pike Place — quickly modified their business models after the novel coronavirus outbreak closed their daystalls at the market. History has taught them resilience.
“My parents have been through worse,” Thao said. “We’ll get through this.”
Sheltered from afternoon rain showers under a tarp, Scott Chang, 35, and his mother Cheu Chang, 74, of See Lee Farm , chatted about their family history while arranging bouquets in their backyard in Burien.
Scott Chang of See Lee Farm makes bouquets at his home in Burien. “Every time you’re buying a bouquet, it’s 100% us,” he says. (Erika Schultz / The Seattle Times)
Born into a family of farmers in Laos, Cheu Chang recalled leaving her childhood home and fleeing into the jungle for safety. During the Vietnam War, the CIA enlisted many Hmong families to gather military intelligence and fight communists in Laos as part of a covert operation, hidden from Americans for years . With the communist takeover in the mid-1970s, tens of thousands of Hmong people in Laos escaped to refugee camps in Thailand.
Since 1975, around 200,000 Hmong refugees fled Laos. According to the 2010 census, about 2,000 live in Washington state.
“A lot of people, they cannot cross the Mekong River, they just died,” Cheu Chang said of the thousands of Hmong who tried to reach Thai refugee camps. “Remembering back to our country – that’s really, really hard for us.”
After living in Thai refugee camps for three years, Cheu Chang arrived in the United States in 1980. She found work as a fish cleaner and seamstress. In 1983, she started farming with the Indochinese Farm Project, a co-op for Hmong and Mien refugee farmers in Woodinville. King County, Washington State University and the Pike Place Market Preservation and Development Authority supported the program, designed to empower refugees through business support and arranging for farmers to sell their products at Pike Place Market.
Mary Thao’s family is photographed at a refugee camp in Thailand in 1979. Her father, Kher Thao, is on the far left. Her mother, Xai Cha, is on the far right. Thao said the photo was taken before her mother and father rode the bus to Bangkok to fly to Seattle. They arrived Dec 20, 1979. (Photo courtesy of Mary Thao)
Cheu Chang holds her son, Scott Chang, when he was a child at the family’s farm in Woodinville. Cheu Chang says baby Scott napped in wooden lettuce crates under their stall at Pike Place Market.
Cheu Chang, 74, of See Lee Farm arranges bouquets at her home in Burien. Chang’s son, Scott Chang, believes she is the oldest flower vendor at Pike Place Market. The family started farming in 1983 through a land co-op for Hmong and and Mien refugee farmers called the Indochinese Farm Project. “She’s technically retired but, out of everybody in the family, she’s the hardest worker,” Scott says. “Wakes up before everyone, sleeps after everyone.” (Erika Schultz / The Seattle Times)
Scott Chang learned to walk at that Eastside farm. He remembers being strapped to his mother’s back as she worked in the fields. As a baby, he napped in wooden lettuce crates under their table at Pike Place Market.
He says his family is a part of each bouquet, from start to finish: “We’re the ones who put into the ground; we’re the ones who weed it. We’re the ones who make sure it grows up straight and we’re the ones who arrange everything and cut everything. So there really is no middleman. So every time you’re buying a bouquet, it’s 100 percent us.”
