This New Yeast Strain Saves Sour Beer Brewers Time, Space And Money
“We had a glorious two weeks,” says the preternaturally positive Charles, after mentioning that their daughter and son-in-law visited from New York and their son temporarily moved in. “We decided to disregard coronavirus and friends came over, some who’ve known Rose Ann for more than 40 years. We had the best time you could have with someone dying. Over the weekend she was pretty much sleeping the whole time, and she died early (Tuesday) morning.”
The Finkels, who married in 1968, could best be described as a Renaissance Couple. Though it’s nearly impossible to list all of their accomplishments, including the fact that Rose Ann named Germany’s famed Ayinger Celebrator double bock beer, it’s worth noting some of the highlights.
After growing up in a New Orleans family that taught her “the pleasure of the table,” as she’s described it, Rose Ann met Charles while they both lived in Houston. Charles worked as a wine importer, and it was around that time that the pair started traveling together to Europe, befriending small-scale vintners and brewers and falling in love with the continental tradition of lingering for hours over a freshly prepared meal – accompanied by table wine or beer, depending on the country.
From then on, they dedicated their careers to selling and supporting independent food, wine and beer producers. First they established Bon-Vin in 1969 to sell family-owned wines, sometimes hailing from lesser-known regions of the world.
Gaining recognition for numbering among the original few to promote Washington wines, they sold the company to Chateaux Ste. Michelle in 1974. Charles accepted a job as the suburban Seattle winery’s sales and marketing director, and after moving the family to the area, went on to help transform the little-known winery into the powerhouse it is today.
For her part, Rose Ann spent the late 70s as one of three women to own and operate a progressive specialty food store that carried some of the nation’s only domestic and imported microbrews, like Anchor Steam and Bass Ale.
In 1977, Time Magazine called Truffles one of the top five specialty food stores in the U.S.
The following year the Finkels established Merchant du Vin as the first importer to bring Belgian and independent English and German beers into America. Now listed on their business website as the biggest beer importer in the world, Merchant du Vin deserves credit for breweries like Samuel Smith and Orval taking their place on U.S. tables.
“We were able to put together a portfolio of the best beers in the world because nobody (else) was doing it,” she told a book author in 2015.
Beyond importation, they used their marketing acumen to help family producers design, brand and sell their alcoholic beverages, some of which dated back hundreds of years. It’s during this period that the Rose Ann named Celebrator for their Bavarian friends Franz and Angela Inselkammer.
“We sat around one night with Michael Jackson (the beer writer) trying to come up with the name and I came up with it,” she recalled many years later. “I was very proud.”
Seattle, October 17, 1989 -- Rose Ann Finkel leads the parade to open Pike Brewing, the third craft ... [+] brewery in Seattle.
In 1989, the Finkels opened The Pike Brewing Co. (under a slightly different name) close to where it stands now in Seattle’s Pike Place Market. Seattle now boasted three microbreweries.
Their friends the Inselkammers flew in from the Ayinger brewery for the unveiling, and according to Pike’s website, Paul Shipman, co-founder of Seattle’s second craft brewery, Redhook, and later, Starbucks
Through the years, Pike hired brewers like Fal Allen, Dick Cantwell and Jason Parker, who each went on to become revered names in the craft beer world, and as one of Seattle’s best employers, still retains employees it brought on in the early days. Current president (and now co-owner) Drew Gillespie started his Pike career as a line cook in 1998; at lunch in the brewery’s sprawling pub a few years ago, both Finkels greeted every employee by name.
In the mid-90s, they sold Merchant du Vin, and, briefly, the brewery itself, then returned to turn part of the brewery/pub into a free showcase for thousands of historical beer artifacts and install a three-story gravity-flow brew system that Rose Ann loved showing to visitors. Instead of slowing down as one century gave way to another, the retirement-age couple hosted the country’s first “Science on Tap” event and some of the first American farm-to-table and beer pairing dinners and grew active in the Slow Food movement.
Along with notable beer personages like Brooklyn Brewery brewmaster Garrett Oliver, they brought the Italian movement to America and founded the Seattle chapter. Rose Ann contributed the beer content to a cookbook written by the prestigious Les Dames d’Escoffier organization for women in the culinary field, and a few years ago the Finkels opened the Tankard & Tun Tavern sustainable seafood and craft beverage restaurant above the brewery. All the while, they continued to manage the brewery and pub and maintain a separate design and branding agency for craft food and drink producers.
Over the years, international awards poured in for the couple’s contributions to drinking, dining and charity work. Women applaud Pike for its annual women’s craft beer and food fest and beer brewed to support Planned Parenthood.
What most people may not realize, however, is that behind the scenes, Charles says the partners, who are Jewish, also worked from day one to intentionally hire and promote people from all backgrounds. As Rose Ann lay dying and protests for racial justice raged outside her windows, she and Charles passed many of her last days and nights listening to audio books and watching movies by and about black historical figures and the civil rights era.
In fact, Charles spent the conclusion of a phone call Wednesday not elaborating on how he wants to get back to work at the agency (he does) or lamenting that COVID is keeping his family from holding a proper funeral for his wife (he hopes a memorial service will happen at some point in their home garden) but enumerating more than half a dozen civil rights movies he recommends.
There may not be a more illustrative example of the Finkel spirit: forward-looking, optimistic, pragmatic, gracious and genuinely working for the betterment of the community – not just their own but everyone’s.
“We have had a wonderful experience for almost 52 years,” Charles says of Rose Ann. “She had a lot of friends, a lot of people who loved her. She made a really great impression on everyone she met. I miss her, obviously. But I’m very happy she died in peace surrounded by people who loved her.”
I’m the beer and spirits contributor to Forbes -- a freelancer who primarily covers lifestyle trends with a focus on craft beer, alcohol and culinary tourism and their
I’m the beer and spirits contributor to Forbes -- a freelancer who primarily covers lifestyle trends with a focus on craft beer, alcohol and culinary tourism and their impact on economic development. My writing has been published in Food   Wine, Wine Enthusiast, USA Today and many additional media outlets, which has won me 1st place awards in business writing and commentary from the North American Guild of Beer Writers; a 1st place business writing award from the NJ Society of Professional Journalists and the Food Writer of the Year designation in a competition hosted by the Wine School of Philadelphia. I co-founded Ferment Your Event to lead craft beer pairings and seminars (specialty is beer   chocolate), and I co-host a weekly radio show called “What’s on Tap” in addition to teaching the Craft of Beer course at Wilmington University. I volunteer as the archivist for the international Pink Boots Society for the advancement of women in beer and founded NJ’s original beer-education group for females. I’m an official beer judge, a Cicerone Certified Beer Server and an urban pioneer on the scenic Camden, NJ, waterfront. Please visit my website, www.taranurin.com.
