Pittsburgh is not only celebrating Juneteenth on Friday but commemorating the life of Antwon Rose, a black 17-year-old who was fatally shot while running from a white police officer.
Today, people in Pittsburgh are not only celebrating Juneteenth, they are also commemorating the life of Antwon Rose. Two years ago today, a white police officer shot the black 17-year-old as he was running away. Rose did not have a gun. From member station WESA, Sarah Boden reports from an event honoring the teen's life.
SARAH BODEN, BYLINE: In front of a billboard of Rose's smiling face, members of his family release purple and white balloons while a couple hundred people watch and helicopters circle overhead. Andrea McNeill says it was important for her to attend today's event because it's Juneteenth.
ANDREA MCNEILL: But there's still a whole lot of injustice going on in this world with police brutality.
BODEN: Antwon Rose is remembered as loving, smart and sensitive. He was shot three times while running from a police officer who was acquitted of criminal charges. In Pittsburgh, Rose's killing is held as an example of how black Americans are treated differently by law enforcement. So while Juneteenth is a celebration of emancipation, McNeil says this inequality is an outgrowth of slavery.
MCNEILL: I like to say you're free-ish. You're free-ish. That's what Juneteenth means to me right now.
MCNEILL: Trandra Wade attended today's march with her brother and 8-year-old son, Terrance. She says Rose's death hit home.
TRANDRA WADE: Most mothers teach their kids look both ways before you cross the street or don't jump in the deep if you don't know how to swim. There is nothing I could teach my son that'll keep him alive because he's black.
MCNEILL: Antwon Rose's mother, Michelle Kenney, talked to the crowd about her lobbying efforts for police reform. She discussed her recent trip to Washington, D.C., where she met with Senator Tim Scott of South Carolina.
MICHELLE KENNEY: Who's a Republican, y'all. But guess what? He working on the same thing I'm working on, so I don't got no problem with taking a seat at that table 'cause I sure told him a few things, too.
BODEN: For change to happen, Kenney says black people and their allies are going to have to work with their enemies. For NPR News, I'm Sarah Boden in Pittsburgh.
Copyright © 2020 NPR.  All rights reserved.  Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.
NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc. , an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.
