The New Rochelle Police Department identified the officer who shot and killed Kamal Flowers.
New Rochelle police released more information about the shooting and killing of Kamal Flowers. (Shutterstock)
NEW ROCHELLE, NY — The City of New Rochelle and the New Rochelle Police Department released more information about the police-involved shooting of Kamal Flowers June 5, including the name of the officer who shot him. The officer who fired his service weapon six times is Alec McKenna, who has been with the department for five years.
Other new information released by the police includes that Flowers, 24, of New Rochelle, was struck twice by bullets fired by McKenna, contrary to the initial report from emergency room doctors that Flowers was hit by one bullet that entered his armpit and struck his heart.
The county medical examiner's office, which is conducting the postmortem and has not yet released a final report, advised the assistant district attorneys and other investigators that, contrary to what the ER physicians said, Flowers sustained a second wound which was to the groin.
According to the police summary issued Thursday, a complaint was received shorty before 6 p.m. June 3 about what the caller said was a suspicious black Dodge Charger with Virginia license plates driving around the Heritage Homes property.
The vehicle was spotted around 11 p.m. June 5 by two uniformed officers. It was stopped for traffic infractions, police said.
Flowers ran from the car after it was stopped and officers pursued him, authorities said.
The first officer chasing Flowers called out the pursuit over the police radio and at one point broadcast that he had a gun.
The officer pulled out a Taser and used it two times, but it was not effective.
"From what we can determine at this time, the fleeing subject displayed a handgun at the officer in pursuit," the summary said.
When the officer and Flowers got to Sharot Street, the officer fired six round from his duty weapon, striking Flowers twice.
A 9mm Ruger handgun and 10 rounds of ammunition were found near where Flowers was lying on the ground.
Police said the gun was subsequently found to be defaced, with its serial numbers scratched to obscure its identity. The gun is currently being processed at Westchester County Ballistics Unit.
Medical assistance was started at the scene. Flowers was taken to New Rochelle Montefiore Hospital where he was pronounced dead.
The summary said that both officers were placed on administrative leave pending the outcome of the investigation.
Police said the Dodge Charger was located and impounded by the New York State Police.
State Attorney General Letitia James said through her office that the investigation of Flowers' death fell outside the executive order on deaths of unarmed civilians caused by law enforcement officers.
Friends and family of Flowers have urged Gov. Andrew Cuomo to appoint James as a special prosecutor to investigate the shooting.
Cuomo's office said the request is being reviewed.
