Assemblywoman Amy Paulin said she supported calls for Cuomo to authorize James to investigate the incident.
"I believe that it will give the community the assurance of impartiality and confidence that we need right now," Paulin said.
Senate Majority Leader Andrea Stewart-Cousins, who represents part of New Rochelle, said in a statement the Flowers case demonstrates why lawmakers passed legislation to create a special prosecutor for both unarmed and armed deaths.
"I always think in situations like this a special prosecutor is the right call," Stewart-Cousins stated.
Sen. Shelley Mayer, who represents part of New Rochelle, echoed Stewart-Cousin's sentiment.
"I believe that the Attorney General is best suited to handle the investigation of this incident, and every incident of death involving an interaction between police and civilians," Mayer, a former state assistant attorney general, said in statement.
Neither Stewart-Cousins nor Mayer would address whether Cuomo should direct the AG's office to take over the Flowers case.
Assemblyman Steve Otis, who represents parts of New Rochelle, also said he would like to see the Attorney General head the investigation. He was a co-sponsor on the legislation passed requiring the office to take over all officer-involved deaths.
"Everyone involved benefits from an investigation that is independent and transparent which is why the legislation would create an outside entity," Otis said in a statement.
Congressman Eliot Engel, who represents part of New Rochelle, also called on the AG's office to lead the inquiry into Flowers' case.
Flowers fled police after the vehicle he was a passenger in was pulled over late Friday night for unspecified traffic violations. An unnamed police officer chased after Flowers and then in a brief standoff, fatally shot Flowers after Flowers pulled a gun, according to police. A gun was recovered from Flowers at the scene, police said.
Video footage taken from local businesses in the area of the pursuit and standoff are inconclusive.
Police have not specified why the car was pulled over, but noted it had been reported to the police two days earlier because the driver had been operating in an "unusual fashion."
New Rochelle NAACP President Minister Mark McLean, who is also vice president of the Interreligious Council, said he doesn't know what happened in the Flowers' case, but thinks James is the best chance the city has of finding out.
"She should be involved in this," McLean said. "It's good for the family, it's good for the police, it's good for the community of New Rochelle."
David Propper covers New Rochelle and the shore towns. Reach him at dpropper@lohud.com and follow him on Twitter: dg_props . Our local coverage is only possible with support from our readers. Sign up for a digital subscription here.
