Award-winning Toronto-based playwright Sunny Drake feels the playbook for masculinity needs some rewriting and he hopes his new play will add to the conversation.
Men Express Their Feelings is receiving its world premiere courtesy of Downstage Theatre and Hit & Myth Productions at the Arts Commons Big Secret Theatre Feb. 28 to March 15. It takes its audiences into the locker room of a community hockey rink to observe what transpires when two fathers and their sons try to work out their differences after a fight on the ice. It was not the young hockey players but their fathers who took verbal and physical swings at each other.
We apologize, but this video has failed to load.
Drake says the idea for this play was born when he was listening to a postgame radio show after the local team had lost.
“One man was struggling so hard to express his disappointment over the loss and I realized that his angst over this hockey game was a metaphor for how so many men struggle with expressing their feelings about being a good father, husband or partner. Psychologists have told us that the ultimate cost of men not being able to deal with how they really feel is depression and violence.”
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Drake says hockey is the ideal sport to start these essential conversations.
“Hockey is uber masculine. At its very best, it is such a fast-paced, strategic, graceful sport but, at its worst, it can be lethal. Those blades are sharp, those pent-up emotions are brutal.”
Drake grew up in Australia where he played and coached field hockey but he says that sport “is definitely a couple rungs down from hockey on the rough sport ladder. My brothers played rugby so if I were writing in Australia, that’s the sport I would have used.”
When he started researching and writing Men Express Their Feelings, Drake went to as many hockey games as possible and he even strapped on a pair of skates, recalling his entire focus “was trying not to die. Skating is not as easy as those hockey players make it look.”
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
His script also takes a hard look at racism and ethnicity.
“The play also looks at how race plays out in the locker room culture, which is why I have an immigrant dad from India and his son who was born in Canada.”
Drake says he structured Men Express Their Feelings like a hockey game.
“There are three distinct periods and we have instant replays to see moments from different characters’ viewpoints. This is how we discover what personal demons each man is grappling with.”
This may sound like pretty heady subject matter, but Drake insists Men Express Their Feelings is “first and foremost a comedy. I have learned the best way to deal with serious issues is through humour.”
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Downstage’s artistic producer Clare Pruess, who is directing Men Express Their Feelings, recalls attending a reading of the play at Toronto’s Factory Theatre where it was greeted with raucous laughter and applause. She says “it is a brilliantly funny, poignant and heartwarming play which pieces together a series of incidents that lead to one bloody nose, a dose of emotional investigation and a whole lot of laughs.”
Men Express Their Feelings is a joint production between Downstage and Joel Cochrane’s Hit & Myth Productions and stars Nathan Pronyshyn and Richard Young as the dads and Justin Lanouette and Ray Dhaliwal as their sons.
