Rabbi Emanuel Rose, religious leader and social justice advocate, dies
Rabbi Emanuel Rose, a powerful voice for social justice who led Oregon’s largest synagogue for nearly a half-century, died peacefully on Feb. 7, surrounded by family. He was 88.
Rose was known as a forceful preacher within his congregation and a strong advocate on social justice issues in Portland and across the state. As Senior Rabbi of Congregation Beth Israel from 1960 to 2006, Rose played a central role in building bridges between Jewish, Catholic, Muslim and other faith communities.
“He brought together divergent communities in a way that hadn’t been done in Portland,” said Congregation Beth Israel Senior Rabbi Michael Z. Cahana, Rose’s immediate successor at the Northwest Portland synagogue.
Rose focused heavily on building relationships between Jewish and Catholic communities, a theme of his doctoral studies.
In the 1980s, then-Archbishop William Levada of the Archdiocese of Portland joined in a prayer service at Temple Beth, believed to be the first instance of a U.S. bishop participating in prayer at a Jewish temple. Rose became the first rabbi to lecture at a Catholic college in America when he lectured at the University of Portland. Catholic and Jewish congregations worked together to establish the Oregon Holocaust Memorial in Portland’s Washington Park in 2004.
“His relationship with the Catholic Church and the archdiocese was singular and extraordinary,” said Rose’s son, Rabbi Joshua Rose of Congregation Shaarie Torah in Northwest Portland.
Emanuel Rose was born in Jamaica, in New York City’s borough of Queens, on Oct. 20, 1931 to Abraham and Mary Rose. His father was a rabbi, part of a family lineage that now includes at least six generations of rabbis.
Rose attended the University of Cincinnati and earned a masters and a doctorate of Hebrew Letters from Hebrew Union College, also in Cincinnati. Following his ordination, he served as Assistant Rabbi at Temple Emanu-El in New York. He married Lorraine Wilson in 1960 in London before moving to Portland at age 29 to lead Congregation Beth Israel, the state’s oldest and largest Jewish congregation.
Rose quickly made his mark. “He had a booming voice from pulpit,” said Cahana, his successor. “He was a classic preacher who took his responsibility very seriously.”
Rose also engaged the congregation in the social issues of the day, raising his voice on moral issues including opposition to the Vietnam War, advocacy for civil rights and gay rights, and other social justice issues. He hired Oregon’s first woman rabbi. Rose was a leader in opposing Ballot Measure 9, a polarizing statewide anti-gay initiative, in 1992.
Rose also was a fierce advocate for Israel and engaged in the complex political issues of that region.
Sen. Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat who is a member of Congregation Beth Israel, said Rose would contact him frequently whenever the federal government took action that he believed would hurt poor and vulnerable people.
“Rabbi Rose worked each and every day to root out injustice wherever he found it,” Wyden said. Rose’s work, Wyden said, “leaves an unshakeable legacy for all of us to build upon.”
Rose also was a member of the Lewis & Clark College Board of Trustees during the 1980s and 1990s, serving as the chairman for a time starting in 1988.
Within the Jewish community, Rose was the last surviving member of a group of three rabbis who each led their congregations for more than 40 years. The intertwined personal and professional lives of Rabbi Yonah H. Geller of Congregation Shaarie Torah, Rabbi Joshua Stampfer of Congregation Neveh Shalom, and Rose were presented in a 2006 Oregon Public Broadcasting documentary, “The Three Rabbis.”
Rose is survived by wife, Lorraine; children Melanie Rose, Tania Rose, Laura Rose Lewis (Scott Lewis), Rabbi Joshua Rose (Channah Rose) and six grandchildren.
The family will hold a private burial service at Beth Israel Cemetery.
A community memorial service will be held at Congregation Beth Israel, 1972 N.W. Flanders St. Tuesday, Feb. 11 at 4 p.m. A reception will follow.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
