One shot showed the Instagram star behind the wheel of a modified car, looking every inch the space girl.
Another photo taken at the August 2019 festival, saw Demi swap her silver locks for a blonde wig and a flowing white skirt teamed with a bikini top.
Ready for launch: The model posed in a racy space girl costume, as she mused in the caption: 'Basically ready to leave this planet, who’s coming with me?'
Wow: Demi looked incredible in her costume, showing off her famous curves in a silver and black metal corset
On her Stories the star posted some more recent shots as she posed in a series of racy looks for her Instagram fans.
Demi has been isolating in her London flat, after the coronavirus pandemic scrapped her travel plans for March - much to her chagrin.
The star recently lamented: 'All I have with me is crochet stuff and bikinis. I'm sick of wearing all the other stuff that I bought that is loungey.
In the driver's seat: One shot showed the Instagram star behind the wheel of a modified car, looking every inch the space girl
All change: Another photo taken at the August 2019 festival, saw Demi swap her silver locks for a blonde wig and a flowing white skirt teamed with a bikini top
Memories: The star had the time of her life at the iconic Nevada festival last summer, but this year's event has been postponed
'What is your bet that this will be over in June, July, August... What do you think, like never?
'Corona really f**ed us up, really majorly f**ked us up. I hope you're all staying safe and me... I am meditating, I'm trying to read a lot of books.
'Me and Teddy are really bored. I really want corona to f**k off, honestly.'
Stuck at home: Demi has been isolating in her London flat, after the coronavirus pandemic scrapped her travel plans for March - much to her chagrin
Lockdown wardrobe: The star recently lamented: 'All I have with me is crochet stuff and bikinis. I'm sick of wearing all the other stuff that I bought that is loungey
Share or comment on this article:
