RECYCLED LOVE What would you do to find a missing pet?
Sorry you must be at least 19 years of age to consume this content.
Iti went missing in May. His owners were incredibly grateful after he was located.
What lengths would you go to if your pet was lost?
It’s every pet owner's worst nightmare, and it happens to even the most responsible pet owners. Your pet can disappear in a split second, and you are left feeling like you'll never see them again.
Rest assured, if your pet goes missing, there is help available to assist you in bringing them home safely. Your first call should be to local veterinarian clinics and animal control. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and any other social media outlet can be helpful. Local internet-based lost pet sites are also beneficial to get the word out about your missing pet. Having your pet wear a collar with an ID tag and getting them microchipped is essential in helping your pet find their way home.
Some pet owners, like Ethan Michaels and Sonja Saksida, will take it to another level and offer a cash reward for the safe return of their beloved pet. Michaels is an established real estate agent in Halifax, and Saksida is a veterinarian. Their precious cat named Iti went missing, and they pulled out all the stops to find her.
Iti came into their lives as a stray in December 2018 when they were on a trip to Kenya. They witnessed a little kitten stealing food and eating it in the bushes. One evening, they let the little fur-ball into their room, and it was love at first sight for all three of them but especially for little homeless Iti.
They arranged a plan to get Iti to Canada because they couldn't bear to leave her behind. They did not have a travel cat crate, but with some imagination and talent, someone made them a soft pet carrier out of a night bag and a ladies' dress. They bought three return tickets, and off they went to Canada, and Iti lived happily ever after.
On a Saturday night, this past May, Iti went missing. Ethan and Sonja had just settled in for a movie when they noticed she wasn't in the room. Iti never missed an opportunity to cuddle or to play with her fur-sibling Yoo-Jii. They searched every room of their home, and when they did not find her, Sonja took a flashlight and started looking for her outside. They were heartbroken when they couldn't find her.
After a sleepless night, they made flyers and went door-to-door in their neighbourhood without any success. Families and neighbourhood kids started looking for her in groups. Ethan and Sonja offered a $1,000 reward to anyone who found her. Children refused compensation as they only wanted to help bring Iti home safely.
Four days later, the poster finally worked when a neighbour called to say Iti had just run out of her shed. Sonja grabbed Iti's bowl, put some kibble in it and started shaking it outside. Iti responded to the familiar sound and came out from behind a propane tank.
Ethan and Sonja were so dearly happy to have her home they generously donated $1,000 to the Dartmouth SPCA shelter on behalf of their community and Iti’s friends. Cats make precious pets, but maybe Leonardo da Vinci said it best: "The smallest feline is a masterpiece."
Please be kind to animals.
Tracy Jessiman writes the weekly column Recycled Love and is proud to be a “voice for those with no choice.” She supports various animal rescues. Reach her at recycledlove@me.com
Did this story inform or enhance your perspective on this subject?
