Rep. Rose calls for increased restaurant capacity for Phase 2, says industry has been ‘decimated’ by pandemic
Rep. Max Rose (D-Staten Island/South Brooklyn) cited a recent study that said over 70% of restaurants citywide did not pay May’s rent in its entirety and said the industry has been decimated by the pandemic. (Staten Island Advance/Jason Paderon)Jason Paderon
STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Restaurants have been one of the hardest hit industries during the coronavirus pandemic, especially on Staten Island, where restaurant owners have repeatedly said the curbside pickup and delivery models are not sustainable.
Rep. Max Rose (D-Staten Island/South Brooklyn) is asking Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio to increase what’s allowed during New York City’s Phase 2 reopening, which is set to be implemented at the end of the month.
Rose cited his support for the Independent Restaurant Owners Association Rescue, which asks for Phase 2 of the reopening plan to include 50% capacity for indoor dining, and Phase 3, which they would like to see implemented by July 4, to include 75% indoor dining capacity.
“Restaurant owners are on life support and desperate for a light at the end of the tunnel. Everyone is already out in the streets -- what we need are clear rules and reopening guidelines to bring structure and safety to what has become the Wild West,” Rose said.
He cited a recent study that said over 70% of restaurants citywide did not pay May’s rent in its entirety and said the industry has been decimated by the pandemic.
While he’s urging the mayor and governor to take action, Rose still highlighted the need to reopen safely and responsibly through the use of clear safety guidelines, precautions and close monitoring of COVID-19 data.
“With expenses compounding, restaurant owners are not just worrying about surviving through Phase 2—they are worried about still being in business by the end of the summer. That is why I urge you to implement Phase 3 for New York City by Fourth of July weekend, and ensure that at least 75% of indoor capacity is able to be utilized by restaurants in conjunction with significant monitoring of COVID-19 cases and statistics to ensure we are reopening safely and efficiently,” he said.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
