“Loving” is the story of an interracial couple, Mildred and Richard Loving, who fought for their right to marry during segregation.
In her review Manohla Dargis writes:
There are few movies that speak to the American moment as movingly - and with as much idealism - as “Loving“. Director Jeff Nichols has a way of easing into movies, of letting stories and characters surface obliquely. The insistent quotidian quiet of “Loving” can feel startling as it plucks two figures from history and imagines them as they once were, back when they were people in love instead of monuments to American exceptionalism. Because, in the end, it is the absolute ordinariness of their love that defined them and made it into the story of this country.
With exacting economy, Mr. Nichols borrows from the documentary — its people with lined faces, its rooms with weathered walls — drawing on signifying minutiae, textures and cadences to fill in his portrait. He captures the era persuasively, embroidering the realism with details like Mildred’s knee-skimming skirts and Richard’s brush-cut hair. One sequence restages a 1965 visit to the Lovings from a photographer, Grey Villet (Michael Shannon, a bolt of lightning), who was on assignment from Life magazine and whose exquisite, artfully casual photographs remain the most recognizable images of the Lovings, partly because they suggest the unforced intimacy of family snapshots.
Mr. Nichols’s most distinct aesthetic choice is the movie’s quietness and the hush that envelops its first scene and that eventually defines the Lovings as much as their accents, gestures, manners and battles. He wraps them in a deep-country quiet, the kind that can unnerve city people and sound — feel — utterly foreign, especially to ears habituated to the noise of American movies with their therapeutic chatter. There’s beauty in this silence, as when Mildred closes her eyes as the wind stirs the trees. There’s also diffidence and thudding fear, because while Richard’s taciturn affect may be a matter of temperament, his darting, haunted eyes also suggest those of a whipped dog.
Joel Edgerton, second from left, and Ruth Negga in the story of the Lovings, an interracial couple whose marriage in 1958 resulted in arrest in Virginia.Credit...Ben Rothstein/Focus Features
The movie lightly traces the arc of the Lovings’ story, including their decade-long legal fight to live in their home state as husband and wife, even as Mr. Nichols plays with time, omits certain facts and glosses over others. He’s more interested in showing Mildred and Richard laughing with their friends than in hanging around courtrooms, watching their defense. Here, in scene after scene, the story of the Lovings is nothing if not wrenchingly personal. (The lawyers — played by a broadly funny Nick Kroll and a rather more subdued Jon Bass, with a sardonic twist — humorously sweep in like the cavalry, courtesy of Robert F. Kennedy and the American Civil Liberties Union.)
It’s perhaps unsurprising that “Loving” elides how the real Mildred Loving saw herself, which apparently changed over the years. At times, she identified as part white, part black and part Indian; at other times, Ms. Loving said she was Indian and white, with no African-American ancestry. On the Lovings’ D.C. marriage license , she is identified solely as “Indian.” (The scholar Arica L. Coleman details these complexities in her book “That the Blood Stay Pure,” which, among other things, looks at Virginia’s contribution to white supremacy.) In “Loving,” race is a fiction, but it is a lie that continues to justify terror long past slavery’s end, reducing people to boxes, one checked black, the other white.
Movies get a lot of mileage from the fantasy that we are the heroes of our own stories. Life’s regular hum — the effort and joy of making homes, having children and nourishing love — tends to be drowned out by speeches and dramas in which characters rob banks to get out of debt instead of struggling or despairing. It’s why the insistent, quotidian quiet of “Loving” can feel so startling. It plucks two figures from history and imagines them as they once were, when they were people instead of monuments to American exceptionalism. It was, the movie insists, the absolute ordinariness of their love that defined them, and that made the fight for it into an indelible story of this country.
“Loving” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned) for racist language. Running time: 2 hours 3 minutes.
