light olive oil or vegetable oil, for deep-frying
anchovies and or pitted olives, for stuffing
Oven temperatures are for conventional; if using fan-forced (convection), reduce the temperature by 20˚C. | We use Australian tablespoons and cups: 1 teaspoon equals 5 ml; 1 tablespoon equals 20 ml; 1 cup equals 250 ml. | All herbs are fresh (unless specified) and cups are lightly packed. | All vegetables are medium size and peeled, unless specified. | All eggs are 55-60 g, unless specified.
1. Cook the potatoes in a saucepan of boiling salted water until tender. Drain and when the potatoes are cool enough to handle, peel.
2. Place the cooled potatoes in a bowl and mash until smooth. Add the eggs and stir until well combined. Combine the yeast and milk in a small bowl, then add to the potato mixture with the flour and stir until the dough starts to come together. Add a good pinch of salt and knead until a smooth dough forms. If it looks too dry add little more milk or if too wet, add little extra flour, but keep in mind that a wetter dough will yield fluffier zeppole. Cover the bowl with a damp tea towel and stand at room temperature for 2 hours or until doubled in size.
3. Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based saucepan over medium heat. To check if the oil is ready, drop little bit of the dough in. If it sizzles straight away and bubbles up to the surface, the oil is ready. Using your hands pinch off golf ball-sized pieces of dough, stuff each with an anchovy, or some olives (or both!) and drop them into the hot oil. Do not overcrowd the pan or the oil temperature will drop, causing your zeppole to absorb too much oil. Cook them in small batches for 3-4 minutes until golden and puffed up. Drain on paper towel and serve hot.
Silvia Colloca shares her Italian family secrets in the brand-new series, Cook like an Italian .
Jimmy Shu’s Taste of the Territory takes you on a culinary journey to the multicultural melting pot of Darwin and the Top End.
Beaches to bougna: Join Justine Schofield as she explores the multicultural melting pot of New Caledonia.
Donna Hay makes recipes super easy for the whole family to cook, so everyone can master the basics, then turn them into brilliance.
