Roses designated as Earth-Kind by the Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service can be enjoyed well beyond Valentine's Day.
By Susan Himes, Texas A&M University AgriLife February 13, 2020
The Marie Daly is one of 21 types of Earth-Kind roses.
If the thought of sending your loved one pricey flowers for Valentine’s Day that may quickly wilt doesn’t inspire you, the Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service has an alternative for romantics looking for roses.
AgriLife Extension has designated 21 types of roses as Earth-Kind, meaning these roses have demonstrated superior pest tolerance and outstanding landscape performance in extensive research and field trials in Texas. If planted in a container now, your Valentine could be rewarded with Earth-Kind blooms like the Marie Daly, Caldwell Pink, Belinda’s Dream and Carefree Beauty varieties throughout the spring, summer and fall. Many Earth-Kind roses have successive blooms over multiple seasons.
“Start with an Earth-Kind or another rose variety that is easy to grow. Make sure you read the label and understand how large it can get,” said Allison Watkins, AgriLife Extension horticulture agent for Tom Green County. “Many roses will grow larger than the label states, if given the room.”
People often think of February as a time to prune the roses they already have, Watkins said, but now is also a time to plant container-grown roses.
Watkins said that growing roses may seem like an intimidating project if you don’t have a green thumb, but even a novice gardener can have success. She said there are a few key things to keep in mind when planting roses, as they require full sun and need plenty of space around them for adequate air flow as well as growth.
Selecting an Earth-Kind rose not only helps ensure growing success across the varied conditions present in Texas, but Earth-Kind roses also limit the amount of fertilizers, pesticides and water needed to succeed. Like all plants with the AgriLife Extension Earth-Kind designation, an Earth-Kind rose is designed to help preserve and protect natural resources and the environment.
“‘Beauty that’s Tough to Beat’ is the slogan for Earth-Kind roses and with colors from golden pearl to cherry red, and sizes from dwarf shrubs to climbing varieties, there is something well-suited for your sweetheart for Valentine’s Day,” Watkins said.
For more information about Earth-Kind roses and growing and planting tips, visit the Aggie Horticulture website .
