by Susanne Whatley in News on January  1, 2020  6:00 AM
Laura Farber is the first-ever Latina president of the Tournament of Roses Association, which organizes the nation's most famous New Year's Day parade. (Courtesy of Tournament of Roses)
Laura Farber , a native of Buenos Aires, is the newest president of the Tournament of Roses Association , which puts on the nation's most famous New Year's Day parade . Farber is also the board chair, and as the first Latina president in the Tournament's history, she's part of a continuing effort to increase diversity at the venerable volunteer organization.
To that end, Farber named three Latinas to serve as co-grand marshals : actresses Rita Moreno and Gina Torres , and Olympic gymnast Laurie Hernandez . Farber also asked that the B-2 pilot who flies over the 2020 festivities be a woman (wish granted: Lt. Col. Nicola Polidor).
She also chose this year's theme, " The Power of Hope (El Poder de la Esperanza). " She told us the choice was inspired by her and her husband's immigrant experiences (he's from the Dominican Republic), and fueled by a desire to see a divided country come together in the new year.
The pantheon of past presidents includes just two other women (who served in 2005-06 and 2012-13). Farber is the first Latina and native Spanish-speaker to work her way up to the post.
Becoming president is an eight-year ascent that starts with serving as a vice-president on the executive committee, then as secretary, treasurer and executive vice-president.
Farber attributes her rise, in part, to a mechanism put in place relatively recently to increase diversity in an organization that was traditionally white and male. She got her Tournament start as one of the executive committee's five "at-large" members, whose two-year terms are intended for women and people from minority backgrounds, allowing them to "sit at our policymaking table, to make decisions about the direction that we're going and to also have an opportunity to display what they love and know and then go back into our membership," Farber explained.
"You have to have a pipeline, or else it becomes difficult to continue what your institution is trying to achieve, which is reflecting our diverse community," she said.
"Well, it is a lot of time. I'm not going to say it's not," Farber said of her main job, which is serving as the ambassador of all things Tournament of Roses.
Her work includes dozens of speaking engagements and decisions that must be made long before the first float glides down Colorado Boulevard on New Year's Day, including choosing the theme, artwork, and grand marshal(s), as well as scouting and selecting bands.
Her other duties include reaching out to local schoolchildren. "I have made it an important emphasis to go to schools all over the place to read at libraries in Spanish and English, and to just be out there," she told us.
The Tournament president also runs the executive committee's bi-weekly meetings and the board of directors' quarterly meetings, and shows up in support of membership events.
Farber is also an employment law attorney with Hahn and Hahn LLP (a Pasadena firm that has provided four previous presidents), and a mother of two school-age kids. "This is beyond a full-time job, but I love it," she said. "I don't see it as a job. I see it as giving back, and I've enjoyed every moment."
Farber could barely contain her excitement about some of the notable entries in the 2020 Parade, including two floats that celebrate the 100th anniversary of women nationwide receiving the right to vote.
Huntington Library is also celebrating a centennial, with tableaux from its famous gardens. And the California Mayflower Society funded a replica pilgrims' ship to celebrate the 400th anniversary of the landing at Plymouth Rock.
Farber also selected three " honored guests " to ride together in a car: the first Latina astronaut Ellen Ochoa , actress Sonia Manzano , who played Maria on Sesame Street for nearly half a century, and the Spanish-language Dodgers broadcaster Jaime Jarrín .
2020 Grand Marshals (left to right): Laurie Hernandez, Rita Moreno and Gina Torres. (Courtesy of Tournament of Roses)
Farber said this year's parade has the largest number of international bands ever — from Puerto Rico, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Mexico, and Japan, and an all-female marching band from Denmark.
But it's a Moreno Valley band that she was anxious to highlight: Rancho Verde High School's Crimson Regiment . Many of the student musicians are from low-income and military families, and their school district provides free uniforms and free instruments and maintains them so that socioeconomic status doesn't stand in the way of involvement in the band.
"Most of their kids are AP and honors students," she said. "That will be the most phenomenal, hopeful band. That will be the embodiment of The Power of Hope."
Another entry in this year's parade is the Alhambra Unified School District Marching Band , which includes musicians from Farber's alma mater, Alhambra High.
