There is a diligence about Byrne that was revealed recently in an agonising portion of Jimmy Fallon’s late-night talkshow, in which Byrne, over Zoom, was shown making a whisky-based cocktail very, very slowly, following the measurements to the letter. “I’m a stickler,” she says, and she applies that attitude everywhere. In preparing her role as Steinem, she researched widely, “reading, looking at footage, discussing with Dahvi what to bring to light”. Byrne has never met Steinem, who wasn’t involved in the show, and found the experience nerve-racking. “It’s hard when someone is still so active, and so present – trying to honour that, and also give a portrait of her.”
Some of the best parts of the show – apart from Blanchett’s campy scenes – are when it turns its attention to shortcomings within the movement, particularly its racial bias towards white women. It has been rightly pointed out (by critic Doreen St Félix in the New Yorker ) that the least well-drawn character is Shirley Chisholm, though Aduba does her best with a lot of empty, dutiful lines. But the show has a few other, more illuminating things to say about race. In one scene, set in an editorial meeting in the offices of Ms magazine, the sole black writer present tentatively brings up doing a piece on the dangers of tokenism, to be met with blank stares all round. “You don’t mean us?” says one of the white characters, and the woman is forced, weakly, to say no. As Byrne says, “intersectionality wasn’t even a word yet”.
When you’re all together doing these big scenes – how fun that is, and such a pleasure. Not every job is like that
The depressing thing about many of the issues raised in the show, from abortion rights to division of labour within the home, is that they are still raging today. A week or so earlier, the New York Times carried a piece in which a survey revealed that, under lockdown, nearly half of men said they did most of the home schooling, while only 3% of women agreed. At the start of the pandemic, some states in the US moved to limit abortion rights as “non-essential” treatment. “You understand why feminists are furious,” says Byrne. “We’re still talking about this? My God. When you realise, doing it – we’re sitting around on the set and still talking about the same thing. It was very upsetting at times.”
