The Surrey home of the PGA Championship, the European Tour’s flagship event, will stage the second round of the two-day event in August
The Rose Ladies Series will break yet more new ground when its Grand Final becomes the first professional women’s tournament ever hosted on the famous West Course at Wentworth.
The Surrey layout - which is the home of the PGA Championship, the European Tour’s flagship event - will stage the second round of the two-day event on August 6-7, with another celebrated parkland gem in The Berkshire hosting the opening round.
That will be the denouement of this unprecedented eight-strong string of events starting at Brokenhurst Manor on Thursday, with a stellar field including Dame Laura Davies and Charley Hull.
Justin Rose and wife Kate decided to set up the series after deciding it was unfair that British female pros had nowhere to play as they wait for their main pro circuits to restart. As well as detailing their management company, Excel Sports, to run this two-month mini-tour they put in £35,000 of their own money for prize funds.
This figure was matched earlier this week by American Golf, with the retail giant acting as title sponsor of the Order of Merit, for which the winner will receive £20,000. And at the 11th hour, another backer came on board: Computacenter, Britain’s leading provider of IT infrastructure services, has also put in £35,000 to become the title sponsor of the Grand Final.
“We are very lucky that Computacenter and American Golf have come on board, because they have made it a much more attractive and rewarding series,” said Paul McDonnell, Rose's agent. “The series has really snowballed and it is great that these talented players have the chance to play in a meaningful competition.”
It could be even better news for British female golf as Computacenter’s managing director Neil Hall has indicated this will be just the start of the support. “Computacenter is absolutely committed to driving diversity in the Tech industry and creating an environment where women can excel,” Hall said.
“We are very proud to support Kate and Justin in providing a powerful platform for women’s golf, both now and in the future. We look forward to a longstanding partnership”.
Rose is playing in the first round of the RBC Heritage at Hilton Head in South Carolina on Thursday, but has vowed to keep a close eye on the scores. Other venues include Royal St George’s, the Kent links that will host the 2021 Open Championship, as well as The Shire, London. Hull on Thursday plays alongside amateur Mimi Rhodes, the winner of the Justin Rose Junior Telegraph Open last November.
