Christopher Straub — Theme: Petals on the Runway; location: Rosedale Center, outside of Potluck Food Court.
Kimberly McCracken — Theme:  Alice in Wonderland – Painting the Roses Red; location: Roseville Library, 2180 Hamline Ave N.
Kao Lee Thao — Theme:  Hmong Story Cloth; location: DoubleTree by Hilton Roseville, 2540 Cleveland Ave. N.
Visit Roseville in Collaboration with TivoliToo — Theme: inSPIREd by Minnesota; location: Spire Credit Union, 1880 Perimeter Dr.
Jim Defeo in Collaboration with TivoliToo — Theme: Busy as a Bee; location: Lexington Park, 2131 Lexington Ave N
Kathy has been an arts journalist for more than 25 years. Her career goal is to interview all four Monkees, and she's three-fourths of the way there. She loves Twin Cities theater, bicycling, good books in the screen porch, the St. Paul Winter Carnival and the Minnesota State Fair.
As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here .
The Marjorie McNeely Conservatory will be reopening to the public on June 22. Visitors must make online reservations in advance and wear a face mask during their visit. Reservations are free, required for visitors of all ages, and limited to groups of four people. Other health precautions include limited admission and one-way paths through the gardens. The facility will not...
The Minnesota Zoo have announced they are offering a limited-time drive-thru experience as a way to raise funds for the zoo. The drive-thru, called “Beastly Boulevard,” will run from June 24 through July 5 and will allow visitors to see zoo animals while following proper social distancing measures. Visitors can follow a 20 to 30 minute route along the zoo’s...
Here’s a prescription for better health and happiness: Forgive. Yes, forgiving someone who has hurt you can reduce anger, depression, stress – and even blood pressure — and lead to greater feelings of optimism, hope, compassion and self-confidence. This is not just a nice, ethereal concept or something a Sunday school teacher once told you to do. There’s a method...
Transform canned beans into a savory side dish using this recipe from “The Side Dish Bible: 1001 Perfect Recipes for Every Vegetable, Rice, Grain and Bean Dish You’ll Ever Need” (America’s Test Kitchen; $35). The beans get flavor from thick-cut bacon, bratwurst and common pantry items. Don’t let the large quantities deter you. This dish makes great leftovers, or you...
St. Paul's History Theatre will host a free outdoor screening of “A Breath for George” at 8:30 p.m. Monday. Created by St. Paul's New Dawn Theatre, “A Breath for George” features songs, interviews and poems created to honor the life of George Floyd. Artists featured include James T. Alfred, Aimee Bryant, Wanda Christine, Perri Gaffney, Peter Macon, Thomasina Petrus, T....
Our children need to talk and learn about scary stuff going on in our world today, even if the conversation is difficult for adults, whether it's the death of a child or the Earth without humans. That's the message from award-winning Minnesota writers Kao Kalia Yang and John Coy, who will talk about their new picture books in a virtual...
