Rose A. (Kurczynski) St. George, of Watertown, passed peacefully on Saturday, June 20, 2020, at the Apple Rehabilitation Center of Plainville after an extended illness. She was the widow of Joseph G. St. George Sr.
Rose was born on Dec. 8, 1930, in Bridgeport, Conn., the daughter of the late Wladyctawa Kurczynski. She was raised and educated in Webster, Mass., and raised her family in the greater Waterbury, Watertown area. She was a devoted, wife, mother, grandmother and sister, and always put her family ahead of herself. She was a devout Catholic and longtime member of St. John the Evangelist Church in Watertown. She will be greatly missed by all who were blessed to know and love her.
Left to honor her memory, and cherish her love and legacy, are her daughters, Mary Alice McKinnon of Oakville, Theresa Hoadley of Thomaston, and JoAnn Laudisi and her husband, Ferdinand, of Prospect, and her sister, Louise Wolz. Rose was blessed with 12 grandchildren, Christine (Michael) Gaonach, Dr. William (Stephanie) McKinnon, Colten Gaonach, Diane (Michael) Talerico, Stephanie (Michael) Laudisi, Richard, Crystal and Tabitha Hoadley, and Brittany, Jacclyn, Brandlee and Edward St. George, in addition to many great-grandchildren, several nieces and nephews, and extended family members. Sadly, she was predeceased by her husband, Joseph; her six brothers; her sons, Joseph Jr. and John St. George; her son-in-law, William J. McKinnon Sr.; and her grandson, Edward J. Totz Jr.
Funeral services for Mrs. St. George will be held on Tuesday, June 23, 2020, when a Mass of Christian Burial will be celebrated at St. John the Evangelist Church, 574 Main St., Watertown, at 10 a.m. Burial will follow in Mount Olivet Cemetery, Watertown.
Those planning to attend are expected to be fully compliant with all current restrictions of the state of CT Phase II and the Archdiocese of Hartford for all services. There are no calling hours.
To honor Rose’s memory, and at her direct request donations to St Jude Childrens Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, would be greatly appreciated.
The O’Neill Funeral Home, 742 Main St., Oakville, has been honored to assist the St. George family during this difficult time. Memories endure only if you share them, so you are encouraged to leave a condolence, words of comfort or a personal memory with the St. George family on Rose’s tribute page at oneillfuneralhome.com.
