KATE MIDDLETON and Prince William were gifted a home on the Balmoral estate in 2006 - and the move was "massively significant" in showing Prince Charles' affection for his future daughter-in-law, according to a royal expert.
Sign up for FREE now and never miss the top Royal stories again.
We will use your email address only for sending you newsletters. Please see our Privacy Notice for details of your data protection rights.
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge are now settled at Anmer Hall in Norfolk, the family home where they are raising their children Prince George , Princess Charlotte and Prince Louis . The royal pair celebrated the ninth anniversary of their 2011 royal wedding in April.Their long-term romance started in 2001, when Kate met Prince William in halls of residence at the University of St Andrews.
In his 2006 book “William’s Princess” veteran royal editor Robert Jobson takes a look at the earlier days of their romance and how the Royal Family started to show their affection for Kate.
However, he goes on, Balmoral proved to also be a key to Prince Charles ’ great affection for his future daughter-in-law.
He continues: “To Charles it is a place that has always represented the freedom to be himself; there he and Camilla are simply Mr and Mrs Wales, happy to spend hours walking across the moors.
The Duchess of Cambridge and Prince of Wales (Image: Getty)
Kate and Charles pictured togther in February (Image: Getty)
“Perhaps part of Charles’ affection for Kate stemmed from his recognition that in her, William had found somebody who could happily share the remote Aberdeenshire landscapes  that he loved, somebody who would walk by his side as far as he wanted and curl up in front of a roaring fire at the end of the day.
“The fact that, along with the Queen , he gifted the couple a Highland home was massively significant.
Royal author Christopher Andersen, in his 2011 book “William and Kate: A Royal Love Story” also picks up on the significance of Balmoral for William and Kate’s romance.
