LOS ANGELES — “Batwoman” star Ruby Rose has left the show after one season playing its titular vigilante.
The freshman CW superhero series aired its season finale last week and had already been renewed for a second season.
Warner Bros. has announced that the role will be recast.
“I have made the very difficult decision to not return to ‘Batwoman’ next season,” Rose said in a statement issued Tuesday. “This was not a decision I made lightly as I have the utmost respect for the cast, crew and everyone involved with the show in both Vancouver and in Los Angeles.
“I am beyond appreciative to Greg Berlanti, Sarah Schechter and Caroline Dries for not only giving me this incredible opportunity, but for welcoming me into the DC universe they have so beautifully created. Thank you Peter Roth and Mark Pedowitz and the teams at Warner Bros. and The CW who put so much into the show and always believed in me. Thank you to everyone who made season one a success — I am truly grateful.”
Rose made her debut as Gotham’s vigilante in the Arrowverse’s 2018 crossover event “Elseworlds.” It was the first-ever live-action appearance of Kate Kane, Bruce Wayne’s cousin who had taken on the cape and cowl in the billionaire’s absence.
“Batwoman” premiered last fall, shortly after Rose revealed on Instagram that she had undergone emergency surgery to repair two discs herniated while “doing stunts.” “Batwoman” is the first superhero series with a lesbian title character.
“Warner Bros. Television, The CW and Berlanti Productions thank Ruby for her contributions to the success of our first season and wish her all the best,” said Warner Bros. Television, the CW and Berlanti Productions in a joint statement. “The studio and network are firmly committed to ‘Batwoman’s’ second season and long-term future, and we — along with the show’s talented creative team — look forward to sharing its new direction, including the casting of a new lead actress and member of the LGBTQ community, in the coming months.”
Like many other Hollywood productions, “Batwoman” was forced to end its season early because of the coronavirus pandemic. The series had completed 20 of its planned 22 episodes. It is unclear whether the two remaining episodes would have set up events that would explain the appearance of a new Batwoman.
Receive latest stories and local news in your email:
