Ruby Rose departed the CW’s “Batwoman” in a shocking move Tuesday. Rumors have flown about why, but both Rose, 34, and the CW have stayed mum, seemingly framing her exit as her choice.
But now, TV Line reports that an unnamed source close to the show says her departure was not only on her end. “It wasn’t 100% her decision,” they say. “It was a breakup. She wasn’t happy working on the show, and did that make her fun to work with? No. So everyone decided it would be in the best interests of the show, and for all concerned, if they parted ways. It just wasn’t a good fit.”
In a joint statement Tuesday night, Berlanti Productions and Warner Bros. Television said they’re on the lookout for another LGBTQ actress to play the character.
“[We] thank Ruby for her contributions to the success of our first season and wish her all the best,” the statement said. “The studio and network are firmly committed to Batwoman’s second season and long-term future, and we — along with the show’s talented creative team — look forward to sharing its new direction, including the casting of a new lead actress and member of the LGBTQ community , in the coming months.”
“Batwoman” was Rose’s first lead role in a show, after a side part in Netflix’s “Orange Is the New Black.” The demands of shooting a show for long hours in Vancouver were reportedly too much for the Australian actress, according to TV Line. Typically, if a lead actor departs a show, it’s well into its run, such as when Nina Dobrev left “The Vampire Diaries” after six seasons of that show’s eight-season tenure. Exiting as soon as the first season is highly unusual, such as when Farrah Fawcett left the 1970s show “Charlie’s Angels” after its first year. Sometimes it happens due to a tragic circumstance, such as “Spartacus” actor Andy Whitfield’s 2011 death at 39, prompting that role to be re-cast.
In September, Rose revealed she had surgery for herniated discs, but a source told Variety her departure was not about the injury.
“Batwoman” Season 2 has no release date, but the CW’s usual fall lineup has been pushed to January 2021 due to the production shutdowns in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. “Brooklyn Nine-Nine” actress Stephanie Beatriz, 39, has already started campaigning for the role.
“*reads everything about Batwoman,” she tweeted Tuesday night.
