Tucker Nichols knows what it’s like when life throws you a curveball. He was a 28-year-old graduate student at Yale University studying Chinese paintings when he was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease, an inflammatory bowel disease, after being hospitalized for several weeks.
“Flowers for people who don’t like to cook but here comes dinner” by Tucker Nichols.
The San Anselmo artist is now in remission, but he remembers what an isolating experience it was to be sick and how helpless others feel when trying to be supportive. From those musings came “ Flowers for Sick People ,” his free project in which he mails a small flower painting to someone who is ill — and now includes front-line caregivers — on behalf of someone else. He also creates flower works with titles like “Flowers for the quiet” and “Flowers for the sheer terror of an invisible killer” on his website that he hopes speak to what everyone is going through during the pandemic.
Nichols has illustrated Marin’s Dave Eggers’ book, “This Bridge Will Not Be Gray,” designed  placemats inspired by digestion and has been commissioned by San Francisco’s Asian Art Museum and San Francisco Museum of Modern Art.
Q What got you into art?
A My background is more as an academic, initially. I knew from a very early age that art intrigued me and it was this unspeakable language that definitely got under my skin, in a good way. In college, I was looking at an image of a simple ink painting from 500 years ago at the other side of the world –I was in Rhode Island — feeling a surge in my sternum about it. I never really stopped trying to find that and figure out what it is and make peace that it’s not something that can be explained, it’s just something you can participate in, as a maker, a facilitator and a viewer.
Q What drew you making flower art?
A I have been painting flowers in one way or another for decades. My mother was a competitive flower arranger, and a garden and floral designer, among other things, so I grew up in a house full of flowers. But, I didn’t think of them as a language, of sort, and then that started to develop more and more as I had my own health issues.
Q What inspired you to send these flower drawings?
A I have been doing that way before I ever considered myself an artist. I have always loved sending things in the mail and I have also been struck by how when things get difficult for people, it seems like nobody knows what to say. Part of the reason why flowers become such a tool for communicating in those circumstances is that they don’t mean anything, the exact same flowers can be sent to say “I love you,” “miss you” or “congrats” or “thank you,” or “I can’t believe you’re gone” or “get well soon.” I think part of the reason people have turned to them is it’s outside of words and they just do the one thing that people really want to communicate. What people really want to hear is “I’m thinking of you,” “I’m here,” an acknowledgement of relationship, whatever it is.
Q How did the project turn into what it is today?
A I just ask for people to send me an email with the full name and mailing address and almost without exception people send more than that. Like here’s the situation: “My mom is in a nursing home and I can’t get to her and she’s scared and she’s got a cough and I can’t figure out whether this is the virus, and I am desperate. Can you reach out to her for me?” “My daughter is a nurse in the ER in Brooklyn, I feel so much pride, and all these different feelings towards her. Can you send one to her?” The project is, ultimately, how I am trying to figure out what it means to live in a really beautiful place, largely that’s not overrun with the virus, and still be shut in and reading the news and hearing from friends in much more dire circumstances, and try to make sense of what is happening the only way I can. It is ultimately an act of reaching out on behalf of people, but it’s also very much a means for me to grapple with this very weird time.
