School Board hopefuls Karen Rose and David Graham talked Thursday about why they are the best choice to fill a vacancy on Sarasota’s board in the fall.
Sarasota School Board candidates Karen Rose and David Graham made their cases to the Sarasota Tiger Bay Club on Thursday, each saying they were the candidate with the experience to fill outgoing School Board Chairwoman Caroline Zucker’s District 2 seat.
Whoever wins the election will join a board that ultimately lost faith in previous Superintendent Todd Bowden and will be getting to know a new superintendent. One of the first topics brought up by moderator and Education Foundation President Jennifer Vigne was how board members should approach that relationship.
Graham said a board member’s role is to provide a vision and support whomever it is they hire to lead the district.
"It is not our job to micromanage," Graham said. "We are there to guide them."
Rose called for a stronger role than guidance and support.
"I believe strongly that the School Board has accountability," Rose said. "And that’s to hold the superintendent accountable to do all the things I have talked about, from being a responsible steward of taxpayer dollars and focusing those dollars on meeting the needs of our students."
Both candidates said they have supported a local option one-mill property tax referendum to boost school district revenue in the past, but they differed on impact fees — the one-time cost levied on new construction to offset increased demand from growth on schools.
Both want to use up-to-date data to determine what the fees should be, but Graham said he wanted to see fees collected at the maximum amount allowed by a study. The district is currently collecting just 26% of the recommended amount, which amounts to $2,032 per single-family home.
"It is not Sarasota County Schools’ job to supplement the developers’ impact fees," Graham said.
Rose advocated for a more measure approach to the fees, which have been eliminated altogether during previous economic downturns.
"I am not going to tell community members that we are arbitrarily going to increase fees," Rose said.
Graham and Rose both touted their resumes as making them the best person for the job.
Rose worked as a special education teacher before becoming an administrator and eventually retiring as executive director of middle schools. Graham has worked in a variety of industries, and he said his experience in technology, human resources, the arts (he is a professional photographer) and the school district gave him understanding of many of the areas School Board members oversee.
Rose said if it is necessary to make budget cuts in the coming years, she would prioritize teachers and give a hard look at some of the administrative positions Bowden added during his tenure.
Rose said many of those administrators were performing the mental health and behavioral duties that less costly student support employees typically provide.
"That could have been done for a much lower cost and met the same need," Rose said.
Graham, who said, "I literally take the 600-page budget to bed every night and study it," disagreed with Rose’s assessment on the added administrators.
He said those positions were necessary because administrators had been overwhelmed, but that he would continue to look at some of the ancillary expenses in the budget that could be trimmed.
Graham and Rose plan to continue their campaigns over the next two months, and voters head to the polls Aug. 18.
Choose the plan that's right for you.
Digital access or digital and print delivery.
