Ranveer Singh - Deepika Padukone, Sonam Kapoor-Anand Ahuja
With choc-a-bloc date diaries suddenly as empty as Satan’s heart, B-Townies found themselves without a script to follow, but only till they unmasked the blessing of time. With home and hearts finally in the same place, they unpacked their suitcases, traded life’s vision for some rose-tinted glasses, and set out on the quest to become the better half. After all, it’s love that makes the world go round, even one that’s been brought to its knees by a virus.
With no solitaires or lilies to do the wooing, some real work went into gifting. Anand Ahuja, for one, made
a very happy wife by bringing her home to her parents and siblings in Mumbai on her birthday. Ranveer Singh had Deepika Padukone singing his praises after he fetched her some raw mangoes and served them sliced with a sprinkling of namak and mirchi. It wouldn’t even be a surprise if the animated actor actually plucked them himself.
Salons downing shutters could have spelt doom for the vanity-van folk, but not when personal grooming assistants were at their disposal. Swooping in like a knight with shining scissors, Ranbir Kapoor put his Brahmastrawielding skills to good use to rescue Alia Bhatt from the horrors of an overgrown mane. Anushka Sharma, on the other hand, helped tame cricketer-husband Virat Kohli’s already short crop further, even winning his approval. Guess who just made it to the team?
, too, picked up a pair of shears to trim ladylove Patralekhaa’s tresses and Mana Shetty ensured husband Suniel’s hair stayed in place with a chic man bun. And when Arjun Rampal’s beard, which he was in no mood to shave off, became a tangled mess, Gabriella Demetriades jumped in for some damage control.
Kareena Kapoor indulged in her share of tucking in, what with
impressing her with his version of spaghetti. But, she was coaxed into giving him some yoga lessons, too. Sushmita Sen trained boyfriend Rohman Shawl to do some gravity-defying contortions. Wonder if she found out about the funny face he pulled off when she was not looking though.
A wise man once said that if you love someone, you must let them sleep. And that’s just what Priyanka Chopra’s singer-husband Nick Jonas did. In the one pic together that the actress had shared during the early days of the lockdown, she can be seen cosied up on the couch, her head resting on his lap, with a blanket and their German
Armed with knives and recipes, Shahid Kapoor ventured into the erstwhile uncharted territory of a kitchen to rustle up and serve his ishq vishk in a dish for wife Mira, who termed it to be “By far the best pasta I have eaten”. Pulkit Samrat turned baker boy to ensure girlfriend Kriti Kharbanda’s culinary exploits were complemented with the right bread. Meanwhile, Bipasha Basu, who feels completely at home in a gym, threw in the towel to dole out delectable besan laddoos for pati parmeshwar
as a 4th anniversary present. The actor was last seen sampling some hot Masaman curry prepared by the masterchef.
Not having to spend hours stuck in traffic jams left Farhan Akhtar and Shibani Dandekar with plenty of time to indulge in some jamming of their own. During one such particularly spirited performance, the actor strummed the guitar and his girlfriend took to the piano to belt out tunes as they crooned “Shallow” from A Star Is Born. Wonder if their pet pooches Jim and Tyson tuned in, too.
