Connecticut native Doug Allen will be among the musical performers at “CELEBRATE Choose Love,” Sunday, June 28.
Connecticut native Doug Allen will be among the musical performers at “CELEBRATE Choose Love,” Sunday, June 28.
Connecticut native Doug Allen will be among the musical performers at “CELEBRATE Choose Love,” Sunday, June 28.
Connecticut native Doug Allen will be among the musical performers at “CELEBRATE Choose Love,” Sunday, June 28.
Scarlett Lewis: ‘CELEBRATE Choose Love’ promotes kindness, positivity
Scarlett Lewis lost her 6-year-old son, Jesse, in the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in 2012.
She’s often said, “I think when something like that happens to you, you realize that we are all on earth to help one another.”
And that’s what she and others will do Sunday, June 28, through a virtual event called “CELEBRATE Choose Love.” You can be part of it, through Zoom.
This eight-hour, fun-filled fundraiser is part of The Jesse Lewis Choose Love Movement , which the Newtown mother founded after her son’s death. Supported by her Choose Love Foundation, it aims to spread kindness and positivity, and will be held in honor of Jesse’s birthday.
“CELEBRATE Choose Love” will feature everything from music by Doug Allen to presentations on meditation and mental health practices. There will also be a silent auction, performances by students and inspirational messages from Lewis and others.
The event is Lewis’ way of thanking her son for inspiring The Jesse Lewis Choose Love Movement, which provides vital resources and programs for children and adults to create a more peaceful and loving existence.
“This will be a whole day of tools to help parents and kids of all ages to thrive and survive in our current world while also having a lot of fun,” says Pam Brown, marketing specialist for Choose Love. “We will be referencing our Choose Love formula throughout the day — Scarlett will be talking about how it can be used in everyday life — and including a lot of helpful information from our partners, the Tapping Solution, David Romanelli, and Zensational Kids.
“Segments will include experts talking about collective grieving over our new normal, and the social injustices people are experiencing... There will also be yoga for kids, lots of upbeat music, story times for children, and techniques to help kids and adults cope with anxiety.”
Among the special guests will be Katherine Schwarzenegger-Pratt, who will talk about her recent book, “The Gift of Forgiveness,” in which Lewis wrote a chapter about her own experiences.
“CELEBRATE Choose Love” offers participants the kinds of tools and skills needed to create safe and loving communities. “When we practice compassion in action, all of the nurturing, healing and love that we give out comes back,” Lewis says.
“CELEBRATE Choose Love” takes place Sunday, June 28, 12 p.m. to 8 p.m. EST. To register or make a donation, visit chooselovemovement.org/celebrate-choose-love
