"I think this is a really interesting find. We already know that fewer positive emotions have a major impact on mental health. We also know that poor sleep is included in virtually all mental health diagnoses," Saksvik-Lehouillier said.
In terms of how long the lack of good feelings lasts after sleep deprivation, she says the study did not address that, but the research team plans to investigate the duration of this state of mind.
It's not just in Norway that people are sleeping less than they used to — it's an international trend, especially for people who work full-time.
"It's easy for us to go to bed later than we should, especially when we think, 'I just have to finish watching this series.' But we still have to get up to go to work, or study, or deliver our kids to kindergarten. This contributes to getting too little sleep."
"How long we sleep is just part of the picture, but when we sleep is also important. An irregular circadian rhythm can be worse than sleeping too little. Going to bed and getting up at the same time is recommended," says Saksvik-Lehouillier. She worries most about young people.
"Adolescents have a greater need for sleep and are a vulnerable group. They feel they need to be available online, there are a lot of entertainment temptations - and maybe the cell phone even goes to bed with them. But they still have to get up the next morning to go to school. Sleep deprivation can quickly become an issue.
Many teens experience sleep problems during exam times. For them, it may be a comfort to know that studies show that short-term lack of sleep doesn't affect their ability to reflect and discuss what they're learning.
Long-term studies conducted among shift workers who sleep too little over a long period of time show major negative consequences for their health, including a significantly increased risk for diseases such as cancer and diabetes.
"Sleep is an individual. Not everyone needs to sleep for seven and a half hours every night. And we're A and B people. Some of us like to stay up until the wee hours, others love to rise and shine early in the morning."
"The most important thing is how you feel. If you're in a good mood and alert when you get up, those are indications that your sleep habits are working for you," says Saksvik-Lehouillier.
Shorter sleep times aren't entirely negative either. The body compensates for shorter periods of time with more effective sleep. The time spent awake in bed is also less.
Study participants included 59 people between the ages of 18 and 35. The responsiveness and accuracy test is called Conners' Continuous Performance Test-3.
Lehouillier, I-S., et al. (2020) Mild to moderate partial sleep deprivation is associated with increased impulsivity and decreased positive affect in young adults. Sleep. doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsaa078.
