Florists are having to turn customers away as a Covid-19-induced flower shortage sweeps Australia.
Since flower imports from Africa ground to a halt at the beginning of the pandemic due to flight cancellations, local flower growers have been unable to cope with a simultaneous surge in demand from Australians in lockdown sending flowers to family and friends in lieu of being able to visit them physically.
The worst of the shortage occurred in May when flower orders peaked around Mother’s Day. Supply levels have slightly improved since then as a result of slowly increasing international air traffic, allowing more flowers to be imported.
However, domestic growers are scrambling to restore their stocks after they cut plants several weeks ahead of their planned harvest to meet the surge in demand. According to sellers, prices of traditionally imported flowers, including roses, are still about 30% above normal.
The supply problems have forced florists to advise customers to order bunches days in advance to avoid disappointment, with some stores even winding down their operating hours as a result of most of their business being conducted online and over the phone days in advance.
“If your nan is having her 80th birthday and you can’t see her, you’ll send her flowers, because she doesn’t need anything really and the flowers are a nice gesture of something physical these days,” said Hannah Matthews, a florist at Blaxland Blooms.
The flower shop in western Sydney, which is normally open on both Saturday and Sunday, has reduced its storefront hours to Saturday mornings only as a result of the shortages, with little stock in store available for walk-in customers.
Matthews told the Guardian while wedding orders had dropped by 80% since the pandemic began, the business had more than recouped its money from customers sending flowers instead of visiting older relatives, and as a condolence gift from those unable to attend smaller funerals.
She said local flower markets had been forced to shut for a period in May and now, having reopened, were selling only wholesale.
Matthews said a shortage of roses, an import-reliant flower that has consistent demand, had forced the price of a bunch from its standard $12-$18 to more than $25.
“Everybody wants the same flowers all year round, and supply is a little tricky at the moment ... All our local growers, which are our main source now, got smashed from Mother’s Day so they’re trying to grow their fields back up now,” she said.
The chairman of the Flowers Victoria branch of the Victorian Farmers Federation, Michael van der Zwet, said Australia’s greater reliance on imported flowers over the past 10 years had “decimated” local production.
“What got us here is the imports from Kenya, Ecuador and Colombia. They’ve been steadily increasing and squashing Australian growers,” he said.
Van der Zwet said flower imports had risen from $24m in 2012 to about $75m in 2020, with just under 50% of flower bunches on sale in Australia imported.
He said there had been 400-500 rose growers in Australia in 2012, but now there were only about 10.
“It has crushed a lot of the growers, we can’t compete with Kenya. Importing Kenyan flowers was financially viable because they came in as cheap freight, which is normally provided in the bellies of passenger jets ... But the passenger jets have just stopped because of Covid-19.”
Van der Zwet, who runs his flower farm Maxiflora from his property on Phillip Island, said production of flowers had been low going into the pandemic because smoke haze from bushfires had blocked the sun’s full light.
His farm, which produces up to 20,000 bunches of flowers including hydrangeas and lilies, was able to rely on his children’s help to cope with the increased flower picking in May, but he said he knew of several bigger flower farms in Victoria that had to hire workers to keep up with the orders.
“The boost in demand from people sending flowers via the internet has been fantastic for local farmers ... but they had to pick extra to fulfil orders, and at Mother’s Day [they] had to cut into the next two weeks of production.
“Hopefully one benefit that may come out of Covid is that the world will look at the practice of flying flowers from Kenya, consider the enormous carbon footprint associated with that delivery, and ask if this is the way we should be doing things. Maybe we should look back at local supply,” he said.
