December 29 to January 4 spurred the formation of huge pyrocumulonimbus, or pyroCb, clouds (SN: 10/22/10). Those
smoke into the stratosphere, which was more than any seen from a previous inferno.
Those winds have never been observed around similar plumes, researchers report
online May 30 in Geophysical Research Letters.
puff of smoke, which still hasn’t fully dissipated, spanned roughly 1,000
kilometers — about the width of Montana. That made it one of the largest, if
stratosphere, says atmospheric scientist Jessica Smith of Harvard University,
who was not involved in the study. “Any perturbation to the stratosphere has
chemical scar on the stratosphere. But observing the plume’s behavior may give
insight into what could happen if much more smoke — say, from a nuclear war —
were pumped into the atmosphere.
Fromm, a meteorologist at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington,
plume is how high it rose, says coauthor George “Pat” Kablick III, an
atmospheric scientist also at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. In less than
two months, it was buoyed up from the lower stratosphere, about 15 kilometers
off the ground, to over 31 kilometers high.
A massive smoke plume was injected into the stratosphere by wildfire-driven thunderclouds in Australia around New Year 2020. Over several weeks, the plume rose to a record altitude of 31 kilometers. In a satellite image taken on January 6, the smoke (brownish-gray, center) is seen north of New Zealand (bottom left).Space Science and Engineering Center at the Univ. of Wisconsin pyroCb blog
smoke from Pacific Northwest wildfires in 2017, but that smaller mass of smoke
whirling around the plume as it rotated, the researchers say. The team is still
trying to figure out what whipped up this newly discovered wind phenomenon.
Headlines and summaries of the latest Science News articles, delivered to your inbox
plume rose through the stratosphere, it lifted up unprecedented amounts of
ozone-rich air that typically makes up gas at these altitudes.
ozone layer not only by displacing the stratosphere’s normal, ozone-rich gas,
but also by triggering chemical reactions that destroy ozone. Future satellite
China who studied the 2017 plume but was not involved in the new work.
this one wildfire-driven plume doesn’t leave a lasting mark on the stratosphere,
that would result from a nuclear war, says Alan Robock, a climate scientist at
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J., who was part of the team that
for years and damage the ozone layer.
so much smoke into the stratosphere, Robock says. The fact that the larger
“much more confidence” that their computer simulations are accurate, he says.
Questions or comments on this article? E-mail us at feedback@sciencenews.org
