STACEY Solomon's had a bath time mishap when she added pretty flowers that were far too prickly and did not make for a relaxing soak.
The Loose Women panellist, 30, decided to jump in the bath on Tuesday night after charging partner Joe Swash with getting their son Rex, 1, to bed.
Stacey Solomon, 30, tried to have a relaxing bath on Tuesday night but it did not go to planCredit: Instagram
Stacey decorated the bathroom with elaborate pieces to set the mood including a ceramic Buddha head, potted plant and three flower terrariums with candles fixed to the top, which she lit carefully.
"I live for a good bath," the mum-of-three told her 3.4million Instagram followers.
She added a pink Precious bath bomb and then scattered hundreds of purple and pink flower petals in the water, a decision which would later come back to haunt her.
Stacey explained while in the tub: "I'm not going to lie to you, this might be the most uncomfortable bath I've ever had."
Stacey set the scene for what should've been a delightful experienceCredit: Instagram
She added a Precious pink bath bombCredit: Instagram
After "stalking" people's holiday photos, she decided she wanted to have a famous Bali bath - where tubs are filled wit flowers and oils - but rather than travel to the exotic island, Stacey decided in typical fashion to DIY her own at home.
At cost of £10 per bag, Stacey about 100 bags and after having spent a bomb on them refused to get out of the bath and endured the pain.
But things went wrong when she realised the pretty flowers she put in the water were very prickly and uncomfortableCredit: Instagram
Her plan of bringing Bali to her home didn't quite work outCredit: Instagram
Stacey decided to scoop out the prickly flowers and would dry the out for a future DIY projectCredit: Instagram
The mum, who has become famous for her home hacks, grabbed a nearby tool and decided to scoop them out so she could enjoy her bath.
Ever the ingenious DIY person, Stacey said she would dry them out and then think of another use for the pretty flowers so she wouldn't "waste them".
After salvaging the bath, Stacey was able to get some relaxation and could at least laugh at herself.
Stacey lives with partner Joe Swash, 38, and shares Rex, 1, with himCredit: Instagram
The mum said from bed: "I have the biggest smile on my face."
The 30-year-old has built a loyal Instagram audience and keeps them entertained daily with her cleaning hacks, budget-friendly interiors and being a mum to sons Zach, 12, Leighton, eight, and Rex.
The TV star recently appeared on Celebrity Gogglebox alongside her other half Joe Swash , 38, and was no surprise a hit with viewers.
With her appearance on the Channel 4 stalwart, new research found that Stacey could rake in £14,500 per Instagram post.
Her 3.4million Instagram fans love seeing her family postsCredit: Instagram
