Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker completely fails Rose Tico, sidelining the character and validating the trolls that harassed Kelly Marie Tran.
Disney and Lucasfilm's Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker completely fails Rose Tico (Kelly Marie Tran), who was introduced in Star Wars: The Last Jedi and sidelined in the new film. J.J. Abrams' Star Wars: The Force Awakens introduced fans to the sequel trilogy's new trio: Rey (Daisy Ridley), Finn (John Boyega) and Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac). Then Rian Johnson's The Last Jedi introduced the new character of Rose, a mechanic whose sister Paige (Veronica Ngo) died in battle. Rose went on a mission with Finn to the casino planet of Canto Bight teaching him about the everyday people the First Order hurts. It was an important turning point for Finn's character as he was finally forced to decide whether he wanted to truly join the Resistance's fight. The film ended with Rose confessing she loved Finn, telling him they'll win not by "fighting what we hate" but by "saving what we love."
Continue scrolling to keep reading Click the button below to start this article in quick view.
Though Rose wasn't introduced as a true new member of the trio's group, she was an integral part of not only The Last Jedi, but Finn's story, and Johnson's movie left the relationship between Rose and Finn unresolved. After The Last Jedi hit theaters, Rose became a favorite among many Star Wars fans, but there were also those who didn't like Tran's character. Some took their dislike of the character too far and harassed Tran off social media , with the actress receiving such racist, sexist and altogether toxic hate she deleted her Instagram in June 2018, six months after The Last Jedi released. Both Boyega and Johnson defended Tran against the online harassment , but the trolls had made themselves heard: They didn't want Tran or Rose Tico in their Star Wars. Tran and her character still have fans, though, and those fans were met by disappointment when Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker released and it appeared Abrams had capitulated to the vocal, hateful minority.
There have been many complaints about Abrams' latest Star Wars movie in the days since its release, but perhaps the most widely held is the movie's handling of Rose Tico, especially in light of the harassment Tran endured for simply appearing in The Last Jedi. Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker reduces Tran's role to the point that Rose Tico is barely in the new movie. Rather than accompany the trio on their mission, Abrams' and Chris Terrio's script has Rose remaining at the Resistance camp to study Star Destroyer specs. But then she largely operates as a background character with as much screen time as Lieutenant Connix (Billie Lourd) and Commander D'Acy (Amanda Lawrence). The Rise of Skywalker fails Rose Tico by relegating her to the sidelines of the action and story, while instead introducing new characters or bringing back previously established ones in bigger roles.
Rose's reduced role is all the more confusing due to the way the character was talked about by the cast and filmmakers ahead of The Rise of Skywalker's release. Abrams praised Johnson for casting Tran as Rose , but then didn't give the character much of anything to do, let alone an arc of her own. One of the valid criticisms of Rose's story in The Last Jedi is that the character mainly exists to teach Finn a lesson about the Resistance and the war they're fighting. So, many fans were hoping the character would get a story arc of her own in The Rise of Skywalker. Before the film's release, Tran even promised Rose had a bigger role in the Resistance in The Rise of Skywalker, which some may have taken to mean she'd have more story. Instead, it seems to mean her place in the Resistance is higher up than the maintenance worker she was when she met Finn. Even though that's true and established in the movie, it doesn't make up for Tran's lack of screen time.
The Rise of Skywalker also fails to give Finn and Rose's romantic relationship any real resolution. The movie doesn't explicitly address the unresolved feelings between Finn and Rose, even with a throwaway line. The only closure appears to be Finn squeezing Rose's shoulder in a manner that can be read as platonic, indicating he doesn't feel the same way as Rose did at the end of The Last Jedi. Since there's a time jump in between movies, it's reasonable to think the pair have talked it out and moved on, but it's not clear within The Rise of Skywalker if that's what actually happened. As a result, how The Rise of Skywalker addresses Finn and Rose's relationship comes across as a poorly handled resolution at best or blatant ignoring of this particular Last Jedi story thread at worst.
It's possible Rose's reduced role and lack of screen time may be due to Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker already being too stuffed with story. The film was tasked with wrapping up both the sequel trilogy and the Skywalker saga as a whole, so as a more recently introduced supporting character, Rose's storyline wasn't as high of a priority as Rey or Kylo Ren's (Adam Driver). However, The Rise of Skywalker doesn't exist in a vacuum, it exists in a world where Tran was harassed by racist, sexist trolls to the point that she erased her Instagram - all because she had a role in a Star Wars movie. No matter how much fans might hate a character, it does not justify harassing the actor who portrays that character. While Tran's director and co-stars defended her publicly, the decision to essentially write Rose out of The Rise of Skywalker sends another message entirely. Whether or not it was Abrams or Lucasfilm's intention, they validate the racist, sexist criticism of Tran by reducing Rose's role in The Rise of Skywalker.
Fans don't know the exact details of Abrams' creative process on The Rise of Skywalker, and they won't know why he decided to sideline Rose until he offers an answer. All fans know is the outward appearance of the movie, which boils down to Tran joining the franchise in The Last Jedi, being harassed off social media as a result, then having her role reduced in The Rise of Skywalker. No matter the reasoning, The Rise of Skywalker had the potential to invalidate the trolls by giving Rose more to do, but didn't. Instead, Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker fails the character by sidelining Rose and reducing her role to the point of insignificance, and fails to stand up to the trolls that tormented and harassed Tran off social media. For his part, Johnson continues to support Tran and Rose after The Rise of Skywalker , and both the actress and the character have fans in the Star Wars community.
There's still a chance for Lucasfilm and Star Wars to rectify their treatment of Rose with a future movie or TV show. But with Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker concluding the sequel trilogy and the Skywalker saga, there's little hope that fans will actually get to see more of Rose Tico's story on screen. That said, this is Star Wars, and there should always be a spark of hope. Even if Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker's biggest failure is its handling of Rose , there's still time to get justice for Rose Tico.
