Steelers OT Zach Banner attends Antwon Rose II balloon release, protest
Pittsburgh Steelers offensive lineman Zach Banner (72) abd Alejandro Villanueva (78) block Miami Dolphins defenders Davon Godchaux (56) and Raekwon McMillan (52) in the fourth quarter at Heinz Field on Monday, Oct. 28, 2019 in Pittsburgh.Pittsburgh Steelers defeated the Miami Dolphins 27-14. Barry Reeger | Special to PennLive PennLive
PITTSBURGH — Zach Banner joined the crowd in East Pittsburgh on Friday morning, celebrating the life of Antwon Rose II and protesting police brutality.
Friday marks the two-year anniversary of East Pittsburgh police officer Michael Rosfeld shooting Rose in the back and killing him as the teenager ran away from him. Rose was 17. Rosfeld would go on to be acquitted of a criminal homicide charge by a Dauphin County jury in a trial in which the prosecution called no expert witnesses.
Though multiple Steelers have voiced their support for protests following George Floyd’s death with Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin’s knee on his kneck for eight minutes and 46 seconds, Banner is the first Steeler in recent years to be seen at a local protest.
I wear no mask on purpose, because my platform needs to be used to inspire. I will sacrifice my health to inspire young black and brown kids. I’m also proud of my little sister for joining while still keeping herself safe. I love you Pittsburgh #J4A ...3 shots in the back... Dam https://t.co/eetYNzZ0k6
— Zach Banner (@ZBNFL) June 19, 2020
A balloon release followed a march and a performance by local artists Treble NLS, JM the Poet and Livefromthecity, who all work with the activist collective, 1Hood.
Balloon release including bio degradable balloons to honor Antwon. #j4a pic.twitter.com/ToS9zhe8Gw
Players are not allowed in team facilities anyway, per NFL coronavirus protocols, but the Steelers did formally recognize Juneteenth on Friday but closing its headquarters. Coaches and staff would otherwise be working on-site.
@1hood Media’s, JM the Poet and Treble NLS perform at the spot where Antwon Rose was killed 2 years ago today. pic.twitter.com/rDix1JeC8Z
— Jake Mysliwczyk (@jake_mysliwczyk) June 19, 2020
Balloon release including bio degradable balloons to honor Antwon. #j4a pic.twitter.com/ToS9zhe8Gw
Cameron Heyward speaks to what he wants to see change with Pittsburgh, police
Proud of my little sister for joining me today. Keep tweeting about me not wearing a mask today. Keep wasting time talking about that. Let’s discuss changes in legislation and our justice system that will keep black people from being treated differently by police pic.twitter.com/Jrcl5PeoQE
— Zach Banner (@ZBNFL) June 19, 2020
Thanks for visiting PennLive. Quality local journalism has never been more important. We need your support. Not a subscriber yet? Please consider supporting our work .
