The soldier has posted videos saying, 'I love you, I really love you.'
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad seen here in Idlib province Credit: SANA/Handout via REUTERS
A Syrian soldier who posted a series of videos on social media declaring his undying love for Bashar al-Assad’s teenage daughter has been allegedly arrested and beaten in the latest brutal crackdown by the regime.
The man, identified as Yazan Soltani, began posting videos last week addressed to Zein Assad, 16, declaring his love and proposing marriage, despite warnings that he was coming “very close to the red line" that could see him arrested.
“I love you, I really love you,” Mr Soltani says in one clip. “I’m crazy about you. You are mine and I am yours. Be mine.”
On Saturday, a post appeared on the Syrian Arab Army soldier’s Facebook page, apparently written by his brother, claiming that he had been “arrested and beaten” over the videos.
A further update posted on Monday reads: “For more than eight years he has served in the army, away from his family, his home and friends, but because he expressed his feelings and said ‘I love you’… he is now in the hands of the army he serves in and has lost his future. Everyone makes mistakes [but they] will kill him and torture him… What is this criminal dictatorship?”
During Syria’s nine-year civil war an estimated 400,000 people have been killed, while tens of thousands of opponents to Assad’s regime have “disappeared” into prisons or met an unknown fate.
Yazan Soltani began posting videos last week addressed to Zein Assad Credit: Facebook
Mr Soltani’s videos previously received a mixed reaction in Syria, with some users celebrating him as a “romantic hero” while others warned him that his posts could be dangerous.
“There were others before who appeared on social media and made tiny requests, and we don’t see them anymore,” warned one Syrian blogger. “In my opinion you are very close to the red line.”
The soldier’s arrest came as thousands of people rallied in Deraa province, southern Syria on Saturday to demand the release of political prisoners and end to Iranian interference, in the largest anti-government protest seen since regime forces regained control of the area in 2018.
The US last week targeted Assad and his family with a raft of new sanctions under the so-called “Caesar Act” , named after the codename of a Syrian military police photographer who testified to the US Congress in 2014.
His evidence included 55,000 images of torture victims from the early years of the war that he had helped to smuggle out of Syria. Images from the “Caesar files” are still being released, helping some families finally identify loved ones who were among the disappeared from 2011 to 2013.
With pressure growing to find and indict the perpetrators, in Germany, prosecutors on Monday announced the arrest of an alleged Syrian intelligence agent on suspicion of crimes against humanity. Two former Syrian regime officials are already on trial for war crimes in Germany, in the first such case of its kind.
The latest suspect, named only as Alaa M, is said to have worked as a doctor in a prison of the Syrian military secret service in Homs, where he is accused of assaulting and torturing a man in 2011 who had taken part in anti-government demonstrations, and who subsequently died.
“The accused left Syria in mid-2015 and entered the Federal Republic of Germany. He practised here as a doctor after entering the country,” the German Prosector’s Office said.
Announcing the new sanctions last week, Mike Pompeo, the US Secretary of State, singled out Assad’s London-born wife, Asma, as a “war profiteer” who would be among the targets of a "sustained campaign" of political and economic pressure.
“We anticipate many more sanctions and we will not stop until Assad and his regime stop their needless, brutal war against the Syrian people,” he added.
The Syrian authorities have condemned the US sanctions as “criminal”, while new pictures of the 54-year-old president and his wife, 44, were published online this weekend. They showed the couple visiting a military base, and posing with a flock of goats on a day trip with their three children, Hafez, 18, Zein and Karim, 15.
