Farhill Flowers took up the creative window challenge for British Flowers Week (June 15-21) Credit: Farhill Flowers
This week, don't be surprised to see seasonal, scented, romantic blooms of roses, delphiniums, campanula, peonies and sweet peas spilling out of upstairs windows and down walls, appearing to float in mid air and bursting out of farmhouse windows.
This wildly creative floral design is in celebration of British Flowers Week Windows campaign (June 15-21). Below, four members of Flowers from the Farm , the not-for-profit co-operative of British cut flower growers,  have shown the way with creative flower arrangements to inspire you.
The British Flowers Week initiative by New Covent Garden Flower Market champions the beauty, variety and quality of cut flowers grown in the UK, and is calling on businesses and the public to place a flower bouquet or even a single stem in their windows during the week-long festivities.
The campaign coincides with a snapshot membership survey by Flowers from the Farm that shows 97 per cent of its members have seen an increase in demand for their flowers during lockdown. Whilst most growers still anticipate a drop in turnover from the loss of weddings, events and workshops, they have been taken by surprise by the surge in orders from new customers and florists.
“It’s like Mothering Sunday every day!” says grower Beth Hillyard of Cornish Blooms , whose family-run flower farm specialises in flowers by post.
“After the initial shock of weddings, events and workshops being postponed or cancelled, the phones thankfully started to ring with orders from people wanting to send beautiful bouquets to friends and family they were unable to visit,” says Justine Scouller, owner of Farhill Flowers and co-chair of Flowers from the Farm.
“Florists too have been desperately seeking our flowers as their usual wholesalers closed for the duration. The more people who discover the benefits of beautiful, locally grown, seasonal, scented cut flowers over hothoused, imported flowers, the better. We hope to inspire local buying habits that will last well beyond lockdown.”
Here, four florists and flower growers revel in the creative window challenge for British Flowers Week:
In the idyllic location of Comrie Croft in Scotland, Kristie Gilbert and Judith McGowan have developed a thriving cut flower farm on 1.25 acres, part of a five acre market garden growing vegetables and soft fruits. Whilst the onsite tea house, restaurant and wedding venue closed to the public at the start of lockdown, sales of local bouquets, stems for florists and funeral flowers have soared. Tomnah’a flowers are now being delivered to homes across Scotland as part of a grocery box delivery scheme. tomnaha.com
Wherever military life has taken her and her family around the world, Justine Scouller has created a flower-filled garden, only to be heartbroken when the time came to leave for the next posting. When the family finally moved into their forever home, a farmhouse in the Monmouthshire hills, Justine’s first priority was the garden.
It was after studying horticulture at Sparsholt College that she embarked on a career as a flower farmer. Justine has demonstrated and designed exhibits at RHS flower shows, created arrangements for countless weddings and events and in 2019, she took on the role of co-chair of Flowers from the Farm.
Lockdown has been challenging for Justine’s business, tucked away down the rural lanes and away from passing traffic, and yet she has noticed a marked increase in people seeking her out for local bouquet orders, funeral flowers and buckets of flowers for arranging. farhillflowers.co.uk
A member of Flowers from the Farm since its inception in 2011, Fiona Pickles is a celebrated floral artist, teacher and a passionate advocate of sustainable, foam-free florals. Known internationally for her wild, seasonal, sculptural designs inspired by her love of nature, Fiona cultivates a stunning array of flowers and foliage in her cutting garden for use in her floral installations and design workshops.
Foraging in the hedgerows around her Yorkshire home and turning to local growers among the Flowers from the Farm network to supplement her stock, Fiona is able to guarantee that her flowers will always convey a sense of the seasons, nature and authenticity. Justine has used lockdown to work on her cutting garden and on design projects for later in the year. firenzafloraldesign.co.uk
Sharon Millen is a flower farming pioneer and Northern Ireland’s first member of Flowers from the Farm. A florist by training and a plant-lover by nature, Sharon embarked on her cut flower adventure just two years ago to offer “a little something extra” to her brides and event hosts. Fuelled by the enthusiasm of the flower farmers she met at the organisation’s annual conference, she returned to Coleraine as a flower farming evangelist, converting customers to the beauty of locally-grown, seasonal and scented cut flowers.
Under lockdown, Sharon has been amazed by the upsurge in demand. She has launched farm gate bouquets, and has found herself selling as fast as she can grow. occasionsfloraldesign.com
To find your local flower farmer, visit flowersfromthefarm.com . For further information on British Flowers Week and a gallery of window ideas, visit britishflowersweek.com
