Golf. It’s a maddening game, one that isn’t kind to us most of the time. But we love it anyway, and it’s the good moments that keep us coming back.
We asked members of our How To Hit Every Shot facebook group, which you can join yourself here , to share what they think are the best feelings in golf.   They’re listed below; which one relates to you the most?
The longest and most popular version, the Orange Whip Trainer provides the greatest feedback for tempo, balance, and swing plane training.
A little bit of swing oil to get things going.
Now time to help them find their ball.
Especially when you walk it in.
They don’t come often, but they’re wonderful when they do.
A 1-up lead is tenuous; a 2-up lead is emphatic.
It sets the tone for the round.
Good or bad, your performance on the 18th is the one you’ll remember.
11. Thinning a shot to three feet.
Yea, totally meant to do that.
12. Hitting a chip too hard but seeing it hit the pin and stop close.
Just how I planned it.
13. Getting to the next tee and not having to wait.
This might be THE best feeling in golf.
Especially when it rolls up onto the green.
A famous line in The Golf Swing, by Roy McAvoy.
You weren’t expecting to make it, but you’re happy you did.
No one ahead or behind you to disrupt your rhythm.
The sun just starts to set, as you race against daylight to finish the round.
Golf isn’t a game of perfect.
Golf is a game the entire family can enjoy.
Everyone loves a good chip in.
25. Hitting a good shot during a terrible round.
Sometimes, it’s that one shot that keeps you coming back.
Passing the torch to the next generation of golfers.
A score in the 80s sounds so much better, doesn’t it?
It’s a truly monumental achievement.
This ball is about to be HIT.
31. The sound of a pure strike.
Like a crack of thunder.
You already know where that shot is going.
Often it only happens once in a lifetime. Savor it.
35. Making all your short putts.
The perfect day to play.
Each product we feature has been independently selected by GOLF.com ’s editorial team. If you make a purchase using the links included, we may earn a small commission.
