Every item on this page was hand-picked by a House Beautiful editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.
It’s no mystery why spring-flowering plants are popular. They provide much-needed color and loveliness after a long, drab winter and officially say, “Spring has arrived!” But their significance goes deeper: Many of the most popular plants associated with Easter and the season of rebirth have deep traditions: The lily is considered a symbol of purity, for example, and is associated with the Virgin Mary in art dating all the way back to Medieval times! Most traditional Easter plants are easy-care and inexpensive, and you can find them online, at nurseries, and even in grocery stores this time of year. Many of these plants are potted and “forced” into bloom in time for Easter, so they also make pretty gifts. After enjoying these flowering plants indoors, some can even be transplanted into your garden, or into patio containers or planter boxes for a show again next year and for years to come.
Here are a few of our favorite Easter flowers for springtime displays:
This Japanese native has large, white trumpet-shaped blooms with a strong scent. Look for plants with flowers in various states of bud so you can enjoy them for a longer period of time indoors. As the flowers open, remove the yellow anthers from the centers before pollen starts to drop (it can stain fabrics and the flower petals). Easter lilies need bright light, but they don’t like drafty windows. Keep the soil moist, but remove the foil sleeve on the pot so the plants don’t get waterlogged.  Plant outdoors in full sun when danger of frost is past, and watch for blooms next summer.
Bright Easter-egg color blooms in pink, white, or purple dance above heart-shaped leaves, with new flowers appearing for months. Cyclamen need bright light and constant moisture. They also prefer temps around 60 to 70 degrees, or the leaves tend to yellow and die. It’s tough to get these to rebloom, so enjoy them at their peak and then compost.
Chose potted tulips in tight bud because they will open rapidly once in your home. Keep the soil moist, but remove the pot covering so water drains out. Tulips typically look good for a week or so, then they fade fast. Tulips that were forced in pots are unlikely to bloom again next year (though there’s no harm in trying!). Plant the bulbs outdoors after danger of frost is past. But be aware they’re particularly tasty to rodents.
Tiny pots of azaleas with ruffled petals of pure white, bright pink, and lavender are a welcome addition to any Easter tablescape. They prefer cool conditions and don’t like to be in full sun while in bloom. Keep the soil moist! Remove faded flowers. Potted azaleas don’t usually rebloom without major fussing, so compost spent plants.
The dainty blooms of orchids are not as delicate as they appear. They’ll bloom for months and live for years with little care. You’ll see them available year-round, but especially at Easter in pastel colors. Give them bright, indirect light, and water once a week until water drains out of the bottom of the pot.
These late spring bloomers are gorgeous—though their powerful fragrance may overwhelm some people. Buy potted plants when the flower heads are just beginning to peek through the soil, then plant the bulbs in ground after flowers fade. They’re very hardy, and they’ll usually return for many years (especially because rodents don’t like them!).
These plants, known by their botanical name of Rhipsalidopsis gaertneri, are similar in appearance to the more well-known Christmas cactus, or Schlumbergera—except that these bloom during the Easter season. With segmented stem growth and gorgeous brightly-colored starry flowers, both types of holiday cactus can live for decades. These plants are native to rain forests and need bright light and mostly moist soil.
These sunny yellow cupped flowers nodding on bright green stems are the classic flower of spring. They like bright, indirect light and will bloom for a week or two indoors.  Save your bulbs after the blooms fade and plant in your garden. Although they may not bloom the following spring, they typically recover and flower in subsequent seasons. Pesky rodents tend to leave them alone, too.
These early spring bloomers are lovely naturalized in your garden beds or even in drifts in the lawn, or you can sometimes find them potted up for Easter. Plant these in fall for spring blooms the next year. They’re extremely cold hardy though the downside is that the tiny bulbs (called “corms”) are delicious to rodents.
These gorgeous shade-lovers, also known as hellebores, bloom in late winter or early spring, often during the Christian season of Lent. They’re occasionally offered in pots as houseplants, but their delicate, exotic-looking blooms and evergreen foliage make them worth seeking out the plants for adding to your garden beds. Lenten rose are extremely cold-hardy and deer and rodent-resistant.
Arricca Elin Sansone Arricca SanSone has written about health and lifestyle topics for Prevention, Country Living, Woman's Day, and more.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
