Today on Rock N’ Roll True Stories we take a look at the style evolution of Queen frontman Freddie Mercury’s legendary mustache and how it came about.
Today we take a look at the short lived and tragic tale of Ole Beich who played bass for Guns N’ Roses for a very short period of time in 1985 and also played with LA Guns and Hollywood Rose , two bands who predated GNR. Check out the full story below!
The First Guns N’ roses Tour Took Place in 1985!
In 1985, Guns N’ Roses embarked on their first tour with what would be known as the “Appetite For Destruction” lineup featuring Axl Rose, Slash, Duff McKagan, Izzy Stradlin and Steven Adler. The idea for the band’s first tour came from Duff McKagan who thought they should do a west coast tour up to Seattle. Things of course didn’t go that way. We explore what happened on that tour in today’s video. This tour became known as “The Hell Tour” Check it out below!
Recently we reported that Riki Rachtman has started a new podcast where he talks about old stories from his club the Cathouse in Los Angeles. He shares quite a few Guns N’ Roses stories and revealed how guitarist Slash thought he was a bad influence on singer Axl Rose. He said the following
During a recent edition of former MTV personality Riki Rachtman’s podcast, The Cathouse Hollywood Podcast, Rachtman described the altercation between Motley Crue’s Vince Neil and Axl Rose of Guns N’ Roses during the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards. He said the following:
Rachtman: Then you have Axl Rose. Axl was a really good friend, we had a lot of good times at the Cathouse and a lot of good times away from the club. We used to do a lot of late night into early morning partying. Believe it or not, one time after being up for five straight days Slash once said that I was a bad influence on Axl. Can you believe that?! As a friend Axl was very loyal and very supportive of those who were on his side. If you were in his circle, he would be more than willing to hook you up. Axl went out of his way on more on one occasion for me. Yes, he wore Cathouse shirts on stage and in photo shoots. Axl would also mention Cathouse in interviews and even when they were selling millions of records he would bring Guns N’ Roses back to the club to play unannounced shows.
It’s funny that Slash was so concerned with Axl’s bad influences considering he himself was indulging in his vices around this time. Maybe it had to do with the fact that the partying was catching up with Axl when it came to band business.
