“She’s likable, messy, a little goofy and untamed. She’s also nothing like Kate Kane, the woman who wore the batsuit before her. With no one in her life to keep her on track, Ryan spent years as a drug-runner, dodging the GCPD and masking her pain with bad habits. A girl who would steal milk for an alley cat could also kill you with her bare hands, Ryan is the most dangerous type of fighter: highly skilled and wildly undisciplined. An out lesbian. Athletic. Raw. Passionate. Fallible. And very much not your stereotypical All-American hero."
Like 90% of that description sounds like they’re talking about a variant of Catwoman, so much so that I wonder if somehow, they might be doing something weird and wild with that concept. The character’s name is “Ryan Wilder,” which could be a placeholder or the actual name. That is not the name of an existing DC character, so this would be an entirely new creation by the CW writers. Unless the true name ends up being “Selina Kyle” and we get some crazy, non-comics storyline about how Catwoman becomes Batwoman and switches from bad to good.
This raises a lot of questions, namely how the show will write Kate Kane off the series. Before, all they had to do is maybe explain why she looks different, but now they will literally have to either kill her off or have some sort of “ah she’s off visiting Bruce Wayne at the League of Shadows” excuse or something.
I am not surprised that the character will remain a lesbian, as the showrunners said explicitly they wanted to cast another LGBTQ actress to replace Rose, which is how they casted her the first time. I do wonder if they realized that part of the main issue with the show was Rose’s somewhat flat portrayal of Kate Kane, and this new character sounds like they will boast a lot more energy than she had. Her backstory sounds more interesting too, as Kane’s backstory was…being Bruce Wayne’s cousin and currently…a real estate agent? I never really even understood what her day job was supposed to be. In short, this character sounds a lot more engaging, even on paper.
We’ll see how all this plays out in the second season. I would expect a casting announcement next, and I am curious to see which LGBTQ actress lands the part.
