2 / 5 stars 2 out of 5 stars.
Rupert Everett steals the show as an evil inquisitor, but this messy adaptation of Umberto Eco’s mystery in the abbey requires the patience of a saint to follow
Daft monk … John Turturro in The Name of the Rose.
It’s monk soup, basically. Within 20 minutes of the start of John Turturro ’s passion project, The Name of the Rose (BBC Two), an adaptation of the Umberto Eco novel in which he stars, having executive produced and co-scripted it with three other writers, we are drowning in them.
Turturro plays William of Baskerville, a learned and diplomatic Franciscan friar on his way to an abbey in northern Italy to try and settle the hashes of Ludwig the Bavarian (Holy Roman Emperor-in-waiting, because this is 1327 and all sorts is kicking off) and Pope John XXII, who have vastly different opinions about how medieval religion and politics should be separated and just how closely the clergy should follow Christ’s annoying teachings about poverty.
Beautifully cruel … Rupert Everett with Tchéky Karyo in The Name of the Rose. Photograph: Fabio Lovino/BBC/Palomar/11 Marzo Film
William accrues a follower on the way, an almost-Benedictine baby monk called Adso (Damian Hardung). He, in turn, is followed by a young Occitan refugee known only as the Girl after he showed her some basic human kindness on their way across the Alps. I think. It’s all quite dark, and monks and Occitan peasants wear a lot of earth tones so it is hard to tell.
As they make their way across picturesque terrain, John XXII at the papal palace is briefing his religious inquisitor Bernardo Gui ( Rupert Everett , whose beautifully cruel countenance perfectly suits the sadist’s role) to attend the conference in his stead. Nothing can go wrong here.
As they near the abbey, they intersect with a group of brothers trying to determine which way their abbot’s runaway horse has fled. William, who turns out to be a kind of tonsured Sherlock Holmes, deduces the answer in seconds.
They reach the abbey, and we are submerged in the flood of Benedictine brothers. Venantius, Remigio, Berengar, Malachi – the list goes on, but only two are readily distinguishable: Jorge, who is blind and irascible, and the very blond Benno, who looks like a mendicant Malfoy. Oh, and Adelmo, who is dead. He fell from a window.
As the difficulty of unlocking the windows precludes accidents, William realises the abbot must consider it murder rather than (sinful) suicide. The abbot begs him to find the killer or killers before the papal and Ludwiggian delegates arrive. William does the rounds, asking questions, hearing about the mysterious library housed in a labyrinth at the abbey, and uncovering many tensions along the way. Malfoy is particularly forthcoming, but because the script is so oblique it is hard to know about what.
