Apple stock surged 2.6%, helping to lift the Dow. The Nasdaq rallied more than 1%.
U.S. stocks opened in the red on Monday but rose to end with gains. The Dow Jones Industrial Average added 153.50 points, or 0.59%, to close at 26,024.96. The S&P 500 rose 20.12 points, or 0.65%, to end at 3117.86, and the Nasdaq Composite is up 110.35 points, or 1.11%, to close at 10056.47.
The market’s Monday gains were not widespread. Only four out of the 11 S&P 500 sectors rose today, with tech stocks—rallying 1.6% on Monday—contributing to most of the index’s upward move. Consumer-discretionary stocks rose 0.8%, while utilities and communication services closed with only slight gains. Three sectors—real estate, consumer staples, and financials—closed with losses of more than 1%.
Tech extended its recent outperformance, as Apple stock (ticker: AAPL) jumped 2.6% as the company kicked off its first-ever virtual Worldwide Developers Conference with a series of new announcements. Two other Dow components, Microsoft (MSFT) and Nike (NKE), actually surged more than Apple.
Consumer-discretionary stocks also beat the market as a few retailers, including Gap (GPS), Chipotle Mexican Grill (CMG), and Best Buy (BBY), jumped on hopes of a reopening economy and Wall Street’s renewed optimism .
On the other hand, travel stocks continue to suffer as worries about a second wave of coronavirus infections kept the bulls at bay. American Airlines Group stock (AAL) tumbled 6.8% as the airline seeks to raise $3.5 billion in debt and equity to boost its liquidity. Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings stock (NCLH) dropped 6.4%, and Royal Caribbean Cruises (RCL) declined 6.2%. They are the three worst performers in the S&P 500 today. Elsewhere, Tyson Foods stock (TSN) fell 2.9% after China suspended some imports of chicken from the company following a Covid-19 outbreak at its plant in Springdale, Ark.
Investors continue to watch the rising coronavirus cases around the world , which has just recorded the largest single-day surge, according to the World Health Organization. Germany and several U.S. states are seeing particularly worrisome uptick, while China moves fast to contain the latest wave of infections related to a food market in Beijing.
Oil prices continue to recover as global demand increases and production cuts were sustained. The West Texas Intermediate crude futures rose by 1.8% today to finish above $40 for the first time since early March.
Latest data show that sales of previously owned homes slid 9.7% in May to a seasonally adjusted annual pace of 3.91 million, the National Association of Realtors, or NAR, reported Monday. It was the third-straight monthly decline following the coronavirus pandemic and reached the lowest level since July 2010. Compared with the same period last year, existing-home sales were down 26.6% in May.
Still, NAR’s economist noted that sales are expected to rise in the coming months following the reopening of the economy. The National Association of Home Builders reported last week that home-builder sentiment came in well ahead of expectations in June, while the Commerce Department said housing starts rose 4.3% in May and permits for home-building activities jumped an even sharper 14.4%.
