The Fed announced on Monday it will begin buying corporate bonds for its Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility. The announcement pulled stocks out of the red and propelled them to gains at the close.
U.S. stocks spent the morning in the red, but surged on positive news from the Federal Reserve. The Dow Jones Industrial Average added 157.62 points, or 0.62%, to close at 25763.16. The S&P 500 gained 25.28 points, or 0.83%, to end at 3066.59, and the Nasdaq Composite rose 137.21 points, or 1.43%, to close at 9726.02.
The Fed announced on Monday it will begin buying corporate bonds —in addition to exchange-traded funds (ETFs)—for its Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, starting on June 16. The program is aimed to support market liquidity and credit accessibility for large employers, and will mostly focus on investment-grade bonds. The central bank also announced today that its Main Street Lending Program is open for lender registration.
Fed Chair Jerome Powell will begin his two-day testimony before Congress on Tuesday. He has emphasized the need for continued fiscal policy support for the economic recovery in recent public remarks, which was echoed by San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank President Mary Daly on Monday.
But exactly how that money should be spent is still up in the air. Negotiations in Congress continue this week over the next round of potential coronavirus-relief package. White House economic advisor Larry Kudlow said the U.S. needs to stop providing the extra $600-a-week in unemployment benefits and replace it with a smaller bonus for workers who return to their jobs. House Democrats, on the other hand, passed a package last month that features an extension of the additional unemployment benefits, along with funding to state and local governments and another round of stimulus checks to American households.
Chinese economy continues to recover as the latest data showed improvement across a variety of indicators. Industrial production rose 4.4% in May from the previous year, up from the 3.9% reading in April, but less than the 5.0% expected by economists. Chinese consumers are also reopening their wallets, though spending is weaker than a year ago. Retail sales dropped 2.8% in May from the year-ago period, a far smaller decline compared with April’s 7.5% slip. Fixed-asset investment declines also narrowed to 6.3% year to date, as compared with 10.3% in the prior month.
Meanwhile, business activity in New York state stabilized in June after plummeting for two straight months. According to the Empire State Manufacturing Survey released on Monday, business conditions index came in at negative 0.2, far better than the negative 30 that economists had expected, and above May’s disastrous drop of negative 48.5. A reading of zero indicates that business activity is flat.
