Every item on this page was chosen by a Town & Country editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.
A generous delivery of the most beautiful blooms comes with instructions from the master, Lewis Miller, on how to arrange them.
My most reliable indulgence during lockdown has been flowers. Don't get me wrong, I tried wine and online shopping and carbohydrates (and second helpings of carbohydrates), but those mostly offered short-lived relief. Nothing has lifted my spirits as consistently as flowers.
There was a beautiful bouquet sent by a friend, another one sent by my wonderful co-workers, and then countless bunches of flowers bought from our local Brooklyn grocery stores. But by far the most transcendent floral delivery was the Flower Flash Box from Moda Operandi .
This content is imported from Instagram. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
The box is a collaboration between Moda Operandi Co-Founder Lauren Santo Domingo and Lewis Miller, florist extraordinaire and the man behind the exuberant flower arrangements that have shown up around New York City, bursting out of trash cans and perched next to subway entrances.
Each box—there are two you can choose from, Country Wildflower, or Beach Bloom—contains enough blooms for several generous arrangements. They're also accompanied by a series of breezy instructional videos starring Miller himself, explaining how to trim, hydrate, and arrange your flowers.
The gift here is not just the gorgeous blossoms but the chance to spend an hour arranging them. My box arrived, neatly packed with 15 creamy white peonies, 10 stems of upright bouvardia, 10 stems of soulful, green helleborus, and 20 stems of cheerful white spray roses. I arrayed my collection of vases, pulled out my clippers, and for a brief moment in time I thought about nothing more than color, proportion, and the balance of green and white. It was a tonic.
Here's a sampling of my handiwork:
(My only complaint is that I do not own a lazy susan for properly positioning my vase as I work to fill it. I may have to upgrade my set up for future floral-arranging sessions.)
The incredible arrangements are available for one more week; a Standard Box is $265 and a Delux is $425. Even better, Moda Operandi will donate $15 from the sale of each Standard Box and $25 from each Deluxe Box to The Loveland Foundation , in support of its mission to bring opportunity and mental health services to Black women, girls, and communities of color.
