In this year’s wonderful, Oscar-tipped drama Marriage Story, Noah Baumbach similarly shows how divorce can bring out the worst in a couple, especially in one virtuosic show-stopping argument, but he also shows how humanity can still be maintained and, in a gut-wrenching final scene, how tenderness remains. In The War of the Roses, there’s no such relief. As the crumpled-up couple lie dying on a broken chandelier, one that’s crashed to the ground, Oliver reaches to touch Barbara, music swelling, but she pushes him off, a final, brutal rejection that remains one of the coldest endings I can remember in studio cinema.
Critics at the time were unsure what to make of it, unsure exactly how to enjoy watching a sprightly holiday comedy involving two big stars inflicting verbal and physical abuse on each other. In a mostly positive review, Roger Ebert nonetheless remarked: “There are times when its ferocity threatens to break through the boundaries of comedy – to become so unremitting we find we cannot laugh,” while Janet Maslin praised its “outstanding nastiness” but worried that the ending took things too far.
It was rare in 1989 and arguably rarer now to see a film of this scale have the courage of its convictions, maintaining its dour worldview right up until the bitter and bloody end. Dark studio comedies tend to end with light in fear of scaring off the wider crowd needed to justify a hefty budget, but global audiences embraced The War of the Roses in all its filthy glory. It was a box office smash, making $160m worldwide (with inflation, that number doubles). And what’s most revealing about its success is that it outgrossed both Romancing the Stone and The Jewel of the Nile, a happy ending for a film so keen to avoid one.
But for all its critical and commercial wins at the time, it has not had the afterlife one might expect. In the years since, its cultural impact has been surprisingly slight and despite talk of adapting Adler’s rather mediocre follow-up novel, The Children of the Roses, it’s the rare 80s hit not to receive a sequel, remake or reboot – a blessing, I’d argue. Its DNA can be felt, though, mostly in Gillian Flynn’s cynical marital thriller Gone Girl and its faithful big-screen adaptation, with the author herself naming Adler’s source novel as one of her favourites. What’s fascinating, on my umpteenth rewatch this year, is just how cruel it still is, 30 years on, at a time when it’s much harder to shock. It’s less the behaviour of the couple and more how it found its way into a film of this scale and gloss, uncensored, played for laughs.
As a child, I think I found something cathartic in its garish excess. It gave me the chance to laugh at a situation that was humourless in real life. As an adult, I’m far removed from that experience, of witnessing my parents divorce, but closer to my own romantic history and there’s something similarly fulfilling about witnessing the fall of the Roses. They act in ways that I would never but their relentless spite, right up until the finale, is oddly satisfying, a dogged commitment to not forgiving, forgetting or pretending that wounds have healed.
It’s an untamed assault, a frantic, shameless race to, as Oliver puts it, “the deepest layer of prehistoric frog shit at the bottom of a New Jersey scum swamp” and, ultimately, a horribly convincing argument against matrimony. I remain unmarried.
