The Academy of Country Music’s charitable arm ACM Lifting Lives®, CMT, GLAAD, and country music star and philanthropist Ty Herndon today announced new appearances and performances for the upcoming 2020 Concert for Love and Acceptance, set to take place as an online event amid the ongoing COVID19 crisis. Musicians Lauren Alaina, Lewis Brice, Terri Clark, Billy Gilman, Dennis Quaid, Kalie Shorr, and Rita Wilson will join the performance lineup, which already includes two-time 2020 Grammy® winner Tanya Tucker, who is set to open the show. In addition, singer Mickey Guytonwill make a special appearance, as will actor, producer, and director Matt Bomer, who will introduce Wilson. The event will be live-streamed on YouTube, Facebook , and at www.F4LA.org/concert , with additional appearances and performances to be announced.
“This show just gets better and better each year, and while we would rather be doing it as a live event in Nashville, we know that we have the opportunity to reach so many more people with our message of love and acceptance through this one-time online format. And, of course, our message takes on an especially elevated meaning this year in light of all that is happening around us. Our hope is that on this night we can all stand together in unity as one,” said Ty Herndon.
ACM Lifting Lives® is a first-time event partner in 2020 and will be allocating proceeds to its initiatives.
“ACM Lifting Lives is honored to join forces with Ty and the Concert for Love and Acceptance,”said Lyndsay Cruz, Executive Director of ACM Lifting Lives. “We’re honored to support the message of creating a more accepting environment and jumped at the opportunity to help inspire awareness, and healing, through the power of music.”
For the third consecutive year, CMT returns as Presenting Partner of the event, with Cody Alan serving as co-host, a role he’s held for the past four years. A well-known and respected veteran personality, producer and programmer in the broadcast industry, Alan is a past recipient of the ACM National On-Air Personality of the Year award, and host of  CMT Hot 20 Countdown, CMT’s flagship music TV show, delivered to over 90 million homes weekly,  as well as host and executive producer of CMT After MidNite and CMT Radio Live, heard on 220+ stations, with nearly 8 million monthly listeners.
“This event has become one of the most meaningful events of the year for me, not only for the vital causes the show supports, but also because of the generosity of the talent who support inclusion in the Country-community. I’m thrilled to be back representing CMT, with the added bonus of bringing the show into country fans’ living rooms. Proud without the crowd!” said Cody Alan.
GLAAD and Herndon created the first Concert for Love and Acceptance in 2015 shortly after Herndon became the first male country artist to come out as gay. Event appearances and performances have included Vince Gill, Tanya Tucker, Reba McEntire, Lee Brice, Tyler Rich, Michael Ray, Rita Wilson, Chris Daughtry, Terri Clark, Chris Carmack, Gavin DeGraw, Crystal Gayle, Billy Gilman, Cassadee Pope, Calum Scott, Mickey Guyton, Levi Hummon, Cam, Cale Dodds, Tayla Lynn, Runaway June, Chely Wright, Billy Dean, Hunter Hayes, Brandon Stansell, Meghan Lindsey, Thompson Square, WWE Superstars, Meghan McCain, and more.
“GLAAD is proud to have been Ty Herndon’s partner in this groundbreaking endeavor since 2015, and as we press on through this very difficult moment in the health and safety of our nation, LGBTQ Americans are especially vulnerable – including LGBTQ youth who may be isolating in homes that are not accepting of them. Many of them – and their families – are country music fans, and this event will send affirming messages of support and encouragement around the globe,”said Sarah Kate Ellis, President & CEO of GLAAD.
Herndon will also serve as executive producer of the 2020 Concert for Love & Acceptance, alongside returning executive producer Zeke Stokes, who has been in that role since the Concert began in 2015. Stokes is President of ZS STRATEGIES and a former Vice President of GLAAD.
For more information and ongoing updates, as well as to RSVP for the live online event, visit the Foundation for Love and Acceptance at www.F4LA.org .
About ACM Lifting Lives®:ACM Lifting Lives® is the philanthropic arm of the Academy of Country Music dedicated to IMPROVING LIVES THROUGH THE POWER OF MUSIC™. Through partnerships with artists and strong ties in the music industry, ACM Lifting Lives® funds music health programs while also serving members of the music community who face unexpected hardships through its Diane Holcomb Emergency Relief Fund. With generous donations and the support of artists and fans, ACM Lifting Lives® has funded national music therapy programs serving various mental and physical health organizations. Some of the recipients have included patients at children’s hospitals and other healthcare facilities, recovering veterans, people with Williams syndrome, and individuals suffering from mental illness. For more information, please visit www.ACMLiftingLives.org .
About CMT: CMT is the leading authority on country music and lifestyle, offering a mix of original series, music events and specials. CMT is everywhere its fans are including two cable channels (CMT and the 24-hour music channel, CMT Music), radio (CMT Radio), digital (‪ CMT.com ) and social (CMT on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and YouTube). CMT is a unit of ViacomCBS Inc. (Nasdaq: VIACA, VIAC) (“ViacomCBS”). For more information, please visit cmtpress.com .
About The Foundation for Love & Acceptance: Founded by Grammy-nominated and Dove Award-winning country music artist and philanthropist Ty Herndon, the Foundation for Love & Acceptance uses the power of music and media to support the country music community and raise vital funds to support LGBTQ youth and families. For more information, visit www.F4LA.org .
About GLAAD: GLAAD rewrites the script for LGBTQ acceptance. As a dynamic media force, GLAAD tackles tough issues to shape the narrative and provoke dialogue that leads to cultural change. GLAAD protects all that has been accomplished and creates a world where everyone can live the life they love. For more information, please visit www.glaad.org
Copyright 2020 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
