Save this story for later.
In 2011, when Akhila Ashokan was eighteen, she left her home in T. V.
watched them pray. Soon after—it is unclear when, exactly—Akhila started
to read books and watch videos that helped her understand Islam. Feeling
the stirrings of a new faith, she began to pray. In 2015, she decided to
To her father, Akhila seemed a changed person in November, 2015, when
she returned home for a funeral. She was quiet and reserved, reluctant
to join in the rituals. After the funeral, Aasiya resolved to declare
her new faith, and returned to school wearing a hijab. Her mother, when
she heard of the conversion, told Aasiya that her father had broken his
leg and asked her to come home to see him. But Aasiya, wise to the
extravagant emotional blackmail of Indian parents, refused. She began a
residential program for new converts at Sathya Sarani, a religious
a man, bearded and lean, who worked at a pharmacy in Muscat, Oman.
Shafin Jahan played goalkeeper for the F.C. Kerala soccer team, had a
pictures of food and football to photos of open skies and sunsets.
Even before Hadiya and Jahan got married, last December, Ashokan had
taken his concerns to court, arguing that the people behind his
over to the petitioner.” Ashokan was convinced that Jahan, who had ties
to the radical-Muslim Popular Front of India political party, was sent
links to the Islamic State. (“I can’t have a terrorist in my family,” he
said.) The judgment from the Kerala High Court, which came in the last
week of May this year, sided with Ashokan. “In the first place, it is
not normal for a young girl in her early 20s, pursuing a professional
alien faith and religion,” the judges wrote. They were clearly
intellectual capacity,” who had “apparently memorized” Arabic verses.
Hadiya’s five-month marriage to Jahan was annulled; Hadiya was put in
the care of her parents.
read the headline “Kerala girl denies forced conversion.” Onscreen, a
windows. The young woman seemed to be venting to another, older
house for three months, and was not allowed to leave.
news channels, its echo is heard for days. In short order, Hadiya became
of wanting to be saved. In August, the National Investigation Agency,
the Indian government’s top antiterrorism organization, began investigating Hadiya’s
Muslim men lure Hindu women away from the faith, have circulated in one
form or another in India for more than a century. According to Charu
extensively about Hindu-Muslim marriages in India, Muslim rulers were
of the late nineteenth century. “In the nineteen-twenties, it went from
rulers to all Muslims,” she told me. “They were called abductions then.
caste. Such fears have increased since 2009, with the emergence of Hindu
nationalists as a dominant political force in India. In 2014, the
development and freedom from corruption. In the past year, there have
been selective bans—on films that are deemed to be sacrilegious, and on
eating beef—while extremist mobs run wild. Modi has used Twitter to
so rarely talks about the religious eruptions in the country he governs,
such as the lynchings of Muslims in B.J.P.-ruled states, that his merely
order that the story of Hadiya became the soap opera we all watched.
After the High Court’s ruling, one headline read, “ISIS Recruitment?
Kerala HC Cancels Marriage Between Hindu Girl, Muslim Man.” The Times
Links,” above a picture of a masked ISIS fighter. The reports, which
rarely mentioned Hadiya’s version of events, left the reader with the
vivid image of a father protecting his daughter from the Islamic State.
Lawyers I spoke to thought that the whole thing was nuts. “This should
have been thrown out of court,” Amba Salelkar, a legal researcher, told
media’s hunger fuelled by the difficulty of catching a glimpse of her.
Her appearances on television were furtive and fleeting: unauthorized
recordings, glimpses through a phalanx of policemen hurrying her along.
The video clip I saw, of Hadiya and her mother arguing, was filmed by a
Hindu activist named Rahul Easwar, who was dismayed by her treatment.
Jahan wrote Hadiya letters, but they were returned to him by Ashokan.
Days after the High Court ordered Hadiya to return to her parents’ home,
Jahan contacted a young Supreme Court lawyer named Haris Beeran, and
asked him to appeal the ruling. The case excited Beeran. “I thought it
justice system is its own unique brand of punishment, and for months,
while Hadiya stayed with her parents, Jahan’s case wound through its
endless plumbing. In the last week of November, both sides argued over
whether Hadiya should be heard at all. “Their case was that Hadiya was
legal blogs and on Twitter. Hadiya stood listening for two hours before
the judges turned to her. It was the first time in months that someone
who mattered asked her what she wanted. And yet her presence in the
that she was worthy of freedom.
Later, everyone I spoke to was struck by her calm, and her lack of
interest in lamenting her months of being held against her will. “I need
the freedom to meet the person I love,” she said. “I am asking for
convert her back to Hinduism. She wanted to complete her education and
that Hadiya didn’t sound brainwashed. They ruled that Hadiya could
return to school and could once again make her own decisions. Even so,
Popular Front of India into January, 2018. This month, Hadiya and Jahan
met for the first time in six months. The room in which they met was
The court moved on, but the Hadiya story had reached a vast audience. “So many people who hadn’t believed in
it before now do,” Gupta told me, of love jihad. The idea has a way of
prying open hidden prejudices through multiple means, like so many keys,
one of which might just turn the lock. In Rajasthan, schoolteachers
women as a form of counteroffensive. One key turned. The day after the couple’s meeting, a video surfaced
that abruptly replaced Hadiya in the national mind. I watched it after
late one night. In the footage I saw, a Muslim laborer, later identified
as Mohammad Afrazul, apparently unaware that he is being filmed, strolls
takes aim, and lodges it in his upper back. Afrazul turns around,
uncomprehending. “What did I do, sir?” he manages to shout. His
attacker, later identified as Shambhulal Regar, from a town north of
follows, at a distance. “I am dead, I am dead,” Afrazul cries. Finally,
he lies motionless where he has fallen. Regar speaks to the camera.
if you spread love jihad in our country.” Then he sets Afrazul on fire.
Hours after the video appeared, the Rajasthan state police brought Regar
before a group of reporters. One journalist asked if he felt regret. “I
am a regular man,” he replied from under a hood. By then, support for
video online. Dozens of others offered their support. A fund drive for Regar’s wife raised more than three hundred thousand rupees (equivalent to nearly five
Regar, as well as those calling for his death, the nearby city of
Udaipur did what worried officials everywhere in India do these days:
Internet. Even so, on December 14th, as the light dimmed in the city, a
orange—a declaration of Hindu supremacy over the police and the courts.
Rahul Bhatia is a journalist based in Mumbai.
