Nicole Briese , Reviewed.com Published 7:03 p.m. ET May 7, 2020 | Updated 7:04 p.m. ET May 7, 2020
Flower deals are in full bloom.
— Recommendations are independently chosen by Reviewed’s editors. Purchases you make through our links may earn us a commission.
Mother’s Day (that's Sunday, May 10) may look a bit differently this year, what with brunches or festive gatherings all but out of the question, but there are still plenty of ways to make mom smile on her special day. One of the most tried-and-true ways to say “I love you?” A gorgeous flower bouquet , of course! While you’ll have plenty of quality options for delivery, you’d do well to do a little comparison shopping in regard to pricing.
Need help finding products?: Sign up for our weekly newsletter. It’s free and you can unsubscribe at any time.
That’s where we come in: I’ve managed to track down five of the best deals you’re likely to find on Mother's Day flowers, with coupon codes and specials in abundance. That means you’ll be able to snag stunning roses, tulips, lilies and more just in time for the holiday—all at a discount, no less.
Those worried about delivery procedures amid the coronavirus pandemic can also rest assured that several of these retailers, such as ProFlowers and 1-800-Flowers, are also forgoing their usual signature requirements to help you keep mom safe. Keep reading to save.
These local arrangements are sure to please.
Not only will you earn brownie points with mom for sending your Mother’s Day flowers early, you’ll save money, too. While May 10 delivery slots are sold out in select zip codes at ProFlowers (enter yours to see what’s available), I saw spots for May 8 and May 9 still up for grabs. Better yet, customers who splurge for larger arrangements will save 25% on their spend of $60 or more with coupon code GSG25 at checkout. This Sweet As Lemonade Sunflower bouquet , for example, drops from $86 in the “Best” version down to $64.50 with the code. This bright, spring-ready design will be arranged by a local florist and can be delivered with no signature required.
Teleflora has not one, but two great deals going on for Mother’s Day: You’ll get 15% off your entire order with coupon code MAY15 or $10 off your order of $50 or more with code MAY10 on the final page of checkout. This pretty Country Blooms Basket, regularly $79.99, falls to $67.99 with the first code, though selections will vary, as these flowers are arranged by local florists. These flowers comes with an array of pretty blooms that are delicately situated inside a natural basket, plus faux purple butterflies for added decoration. Same-day delivery may be available depending on your zip code, but you’ll want to act quickly to nab your spot.
From now through Monday, May 11, you’ll get 10% off your entire order at FTD. That means jaw-dropping displays, like the aptly-named Truly Stunning Bouquet (pictured above), will drop from $65 to $95 to between $58.50 to $85.50. This mix of red roses, purple double lisianthus, pink lilies and red spray roses comes complete with a clear glass vase, and no signature will be required for contactless delivery. You’ll want to snag your delivery slot early, however, as these arrangements, which are put together by local florists, are going fast!
Give the gift that keeps on giving.
With a focus on farm-fresh, eco-friendly arrays, you can be sure every single order you place through Bouqs will be well-packaged and lively—which is great news, since the site's current deal allows you to gift mom with an ongoing monthly subscription. For $36 to $60 per delivery, you can have roses, classic assemblies or farmer’s market favorites shipped to mom on a bi-weekly, bi-monthly or monthly basis, plus, you won't be charged for delivery. That’s 30% off the normal price, which typically ranges from $52 to $86 per shipment. What’s more, you’ll earn $10 in monthly credit (up to $120 per year) to treat yourself or others to some fresh blooms, too! You can skip, cancel or change up your subscription plan at any time, and you can also change your recipient on a monthly basis should you ever want to spread the love around. Those looking for a shorter-term commitment can check out the company's Roses , Classic or Farmer's Market Trio , marked down from $135 to $114, which will be delivered for three consecutive months. Talk about a gift that keeps on giving!
Choose local florists over gift boxes at this flower delivery service.
Looking for something out of the ordinary? Check out the One-of-A-Kind bouquet selection at 1-800-Flowers. While the order you’ll receive will vary by zip code—we saw shipments that ranged from impeccable to inaccurate when testing out the service in four different cities—we were highly impressed by the loveliness of all of the deliveries that were arranged by a local florist (as opposed to the box selections, which left us feeling meh). Luckily, these unique Mother’s Day bouquets fall into the former category, and right now, you can get them for 15% off in the large-to-premium size range for a savings of $9 to $15. This may also be your best bet if you need May 10 delivery, as slots were still available in my zip code as of press time.
The product experts at Reviewed have all your shopping needs covered. Follow Reviewed on Facebook , Twitter , and Instagram for the latest deals, reviews, and more.
Prices were accurate at the time this article was published but may change over time.
Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/reviewedcom/2020/05/07/mothers-day-flowers-shop-gorgeous-bouquets-mom-discount/5181402002/
