If the past few weeks in Indianapolis have been hard to live through, Saturday afternoon was a reminder to celebrate life.
More specifically, the lives of Dreasjon Reed and McHale Rose.
Roughly 200 people gathered at the intersection of 62nd Street and Michigan Avenue, the area where Reed was fatally shot by police last month. Within 24 hours, police shot and killed Rose while responding to a burglary. Police have said both men were armed.
But for at least a few hours Saturday, the scene in the lot of the public library offered some respite from the racial strife that has rocked the city and the nation.
Music for all generations blasted through the speakers as people lined up for a family-style cookout.
Attendees mouthed the words to "Never Too Much" by Luther Vandross. Toddlers ran around in rainbow tutus as a younger crowd danced to Dem Franchize Boyz. Shirts plastered with "I am Dreasjon Reed" filled the crowd.
"I appreciate everyone and anyone that has anything to do in a positive manner for my son," said Reed's mother, Demetree Wynn, as she thanked the crowd. "Just remember to do everything in love and everything in peace."
The celebration was one of several that occurred Saturday as Indianapolis attempted to heal.
Protesters still rallied at Monument Circle throughout the day.
On the east side, the family of Chris Beaty — who was killed during the downtown riot on May 30 — put him to rest.
In the parking lot library, Chicago resident Curtis Mays danced with abandon. Mays' sister, who lives in Indianapolis, knew Reed.
But even from Chicago, Mays watched in horror on Facebook Live as Reed was pursued and shot.
"It just like, broke my heart because that could have been one of my nephews that's older than me or my uncles or my brothers," Mays said. "And it's just like — it's just wrong."
It's the same reason Michelle Smith and her daughter, Shamika Hayworth, came out. They worry about their son and grandson, 12-year-old Elijah.
"When he gets to be 18, 19 years old, we've got to worry about him when he comes out here in the streets," Smith said. "You could be innocent, you know — you never know. That's the thing you never know when your young Black men leave home, are they going to make it back home?"
Meanwhile, seventh-grader Elijah Hayworth openly admits that he's uncomfortable around police.
He's seen the death of Black men, he said, and he does not want to be next.
"Put the gun down," he said he would tell police. Don't use force unless it's absolutely necessary.
The group still took to the streets after eating, shutting down the corner of Michigan Road and 62nd Street. Police blocked off Michigan Road as the group chanted in memory of Reed.
"Whose streets?" the crowd chanted. "Dre's streets!"
Organizer Joshua Griffin noted another reason to celebrate: the release of the names of the officers who shot Reed and Rose .
But the fight for justice, Griffin noted, is not over.
"This is going to be a long fight," he said. "It's not going to be easy, there's going to be long days, we're not going to sleep, but guess what — it's for a bigger cause."
The Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department is still investigating the killings of Reed and Rose.
Reed's family disputed earlier claims that he exchanged gunfire with police, citing a Facebook video from two eyewitnesses who commented that police shot him in the back for no reason.
This week, a special prosecutor for the case asked that the matter be assigned to the Indiana State Police for an independent investigation.
Meanwhile, police have claimed that Rose apparently attempted to lure officers in an "ambush-style attack" hours after Reed's death. The police and Marion County Prosecutor Ryan Mears have refused to release video of the incident, citing it as an ongoing investigation.
The events have forced Black Indianapolis residents to fear even more for their sons, nephews, uncles — even themselves.
"What if I start running right now from when an officer sees me with a gun?" said Griffin, who carries a firearm. "Do he have grounds to shoot me — at point-blank range, though. After he tased me?"
Amid all the deaths, though, Griffin still maintained a focus on the positive.
"Today is a celebration of life," he concluded. "I want to celebrate everybody's life."
Call IndyStar reporter Amelia Pak-Harvey at 317-444-6175 or email her at apakharvey@indystar.com. Follow her on Twitter @AmeliaPakHarvey.
