President Donald Trump weighed in early in a New York City congressional race, endorsing Nicole Malliotakis, right. Left photo courtesy of the Associated Press.
PUBLISHED 9:31 PM ET Feb. 12, 2020 PUBLISHED 9:31 PM EST Feb. 12, 2020 UPDATED 5:36 PM ET Feb. 13, 2020
President Donald Trump on Wednesday endorsed Republican Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis in the race for the 11th Congressional District, a key swing district in the battle for control of Congress.
Citing the Assemblywoman's support for his policies, including his crackdown on immigration, Trump said on Twitter that he was giving Malliotakis his "complete and total endorsement."
The endorsement could be a boon for the Malliotakis, whom represents New York's 64th Assembly District and lost to Mayor Bill de Blasio in the 2017 mayor's race. Trump is popular in the district, which he won by 10 points in the 2016 presidential election — and by over 50 points on Staten Island, which comprises a majority of the 11th Congressional District, which also includes parts of southern Brooklyn. Staten Island was the only borough Trump won in 2016.
Registered Democrats outnumber Republicans in the district, but voters have been known to favor the GOP. Most of Staten Island's elected offices are held by Republicans. And with a few exceptions, in recent years Republicans have won the congressional seat.
Democrat Max Rose was one of those exceptions, beating incumbent Republican Rep. Dan Donovan — who had Trump's endorsement — in November 2018, one of the biggest upsets as Democrats wrested back control of the U.S. House of Representatives.
Rose was able to beat Donovan on both sides of the district, in both Brooklyn and Staten Island. The Army veteran dominated the North Shore of Staten Island and Brooklyn, and he also made inroads in areas that are typically GOP territory.
Hot takes - 2014 turnout map (last time #ny11 was competitive in general election) versus 2018. @MaxRose4NY barely won #StatenIsland but made inroads in what had been #gop territory. Also #brooklyn went big for him pic.twitter.com/Nju8B0ndeK
— Courtney Gross (@courtneycgross) November 7, 2018
But during that campaign, Rose mostly stayed clear of the president. Likely cognizant of the political risks of angering Staten Islanders fond of Trump, Rose for years did not commit to supporting a potential impeachment inquiry . As he campaigned for Congress, he tried to pivot away from Trump, saying he didn't appreciate the president's rhetoric and avoided attacking him. Instead, Rose said he was willing to work with the president if he worked on some of his campaign promises like infrastructure and fighting the opioid epidemic.
