What happened: Ordering from The Bouqs Company was relatively easy. There’s a large selection of bouquets, ranging in price from around $30 up to $99. You can filter by flower or occasion; or if you need inspiration, you can browse handy sections like Bestsellers or Under $50. We chose a selection of bright pink lilies - a rather unconventional choice for Valentine’s Day flowers, but we think it was well worth the price.
We won't lie. At first, we weren’t very impressed with our bouquet from Bouqs. The website warns that lilies are sent in bud form (so that they’ll last for longer), but we were still a little underwhelmed when ours arrived with only four lilies in bloom. Eleven buds had yet to open, making the rest of the bouquet seem somewhat sparse.
The lilies that had bloomed on arrival, though, looked absolutely stunning, and the arrangement became increasingly beautiful throughout the week as more buds opened. In fact, our bouquet from The Bouqs lasted the longest of all those on test, making it excellent value for money.
Bear in mind that The Bouqs doesn’t offer same-day or next-day delivery for much of its selection. It also doesn’t deliver on Sundays or Mondays for some of its bouquets, which is why we’ve marked it down in that section - the delivery service itself was fine. If you want to order Valentine’s Day flowers from The Bouqs, we'd recommend placing your order by Wednesday, 12 February, latest.
VERDICT: The Sierra Sunset was the best-value bouquet we tested, and is definitely worth the price. What it lacked in instant impact, it more than made up for in freshness and longevity. We loved watching the lilies bloom throughout the week. You can upgrade the size of the bouquet for an extra $15, or add a vase to your order for $10.
See more Valentine's Day flowers at Bouqs: $20 off
The Bouqs is offering $20 off with code: HOT20 - not just its wide selection of Valentine's Day flowers, but plants, gift bundles and more. We especially like the Valentine's Day mixed bouquet ($38
) and scented Ace freesia bouquet ($44) , pictured, but there's plenty of choice on the site. View Deal
