Florists and growers are calling for country-of-origin logos to be placed on bunches of flowers this Valentine's Day to support growers battling a glut of cheap imports and years of drought and bushfires.
They're concerned about biosecurity issues with imported roses, and want us to think about giving Australian native flowers on Valentine's Day instead
But one of the biggest challenges will be convincing consumers to move away from the tradition of giving imported roses and instead buying Australian wildflowers or other locally grown alternatives.
Salvatore Russo, secretary of the NSW Flower Growers group, said the flower industry was going through a big structural change.
"We've gone through nearly 20 years of importers dominating our market and the decimation of the flower industry in Australia," Mr Russo said.
"In the 90s we had around 6,000 florists [in NSW], now we are down to 1,800. We used imports as supplements for seasonal changes."
Salvatore Russo says importers have dominated the flower market for the past 20 years.
On the whole, consumers have had no idea that their flowers come from Colombia, Kenya or Malaysia and that, over time, had decimated the flower industries in Queensland, Tasmania, and NSW.
Having been left out of country-of-origin labelling, the flower industry is fighting back — developing a trademark to lift consumer awareness.
"We developed our own logo to allow local growers to be able to utilise a common mark on [plastic sleeves] that identify that the flowers have been grown in Australia," Mr Russo said.
He also thought supermarkets should demand Australian-grown flowers, demonstrating support for the industry like other agricultural products that have struggled.
"Once consumers know the problems associated with imported flowers, and the dangers that it poses to the Australian flower industry and agriculture generally, I believe consumers will gravitate towards Australian-grown flowers," he said.
The Australian country-of-origin logo is hard to miss.
With pest infestation rates as high as 60 per cent from Kenya and 40 per cent from Colombia and Ecuador, NSW flower growers have been advocating that the 20 or so flower importers should be licensed, and carry product liability insurance.
"That would ensure that the operators who import flowers are people with high levels of integrity, who are committed to the 2018 Biosecurity Act," Mr Russo said.
"If you are an importer you have to become biologically responsible, with a biosecurity perspective because the risks are enormous for the industry."
Chrysanthemums are hardy and Australian-grown.
Aldo Vumbaca is a third-generation flower farmer who has been growing chrysanthemums for 40 years.
The impact of competing against imports has created challenges for the family who is particularly concerned about pest control, and relieved to participate in trialling the country-of-origin labelling.
Due to modern greenhouse design the business has eliminated more than 95 per cent of all fungicides.
