In a video that quickly went viral Wednesday, a police officer begins to cry after ordering a breakfast sandwich from McDonald's, as she fears, due to a growing backlash against cops, that her food has been tampered with; she then requests citizens "have a heart" and echos sentiments recently expressed that by other officers, wishing more appreciation be shown toward cops.
STOURBRIDGE, ENGLAND - JUNE 04: A person takes their food at a Drive Thru McDonald's on June 04, ... [+] 2020 in Stourbridge, England. The British government further relaxed Covid-19 quarantine measures in England this week, allowing groups of six people from different households to meet in parks and gardens, subject to social distancing rules. Many schools also reopened and vulnerable people who are shielding in their homes are allowed to go outside again. (Photo by Cameron Smith/Getty Images)
The video, posted on Twitter late Tuesday night by a user named "Ann" who identifies as a conservative Trump supporter, has been viewed over 10 million times as of Wednesday afternoon, and sparked a vigorous debate over the officer’s reaction.
In the 2:20 minute clip, a female law enforcement officer identified as “Stacey”— a 15-year veteran of a Georgia police department—  fights through tears as she describes that her drive-through order at a McDonald's in Georgia was delayed, and ultimately says she decided not to eat the food because she “can’t see it being made.”
The officer then breaks down crying about her recent experiences being a police officer, and asks viewers to "Have a heart, and if you see an officer, tell them, 'Thank you,' because I don't hear thank you enough anymore."
The owners of the McDonalds location featured in the clip contacted the officer and apologized for the service issues, according to Newsweek .
Earlier this week, three NYPD officers stopped at a Manhattan Shake Shack for food and then fell ill, in what two of the city's largest police unions alleged was an intentional attack or poisoning—although, hours later, the force's top detective cleared Shake Shack workers of criminality, as the food was accidentally contaminated.
The video provoked passionate responses on social media which quickly split along political lines, with Donald Trump, Jr., tweeting , "Disgusting what's going on right now."
Anthony V. Clark of the Suburban Unity Alliance wrote , "You know who can't order any more food because they were in a nervous terror as they lay there being killed or were shot at least 8 times in their own home? You know who was just killed in a fast food parking lot? Say their names!"
Per Newsweek , the owners of the McDonald's apologized for the service issues in a statement and hoped to make it up to the officer in the future. "Our priority is for all customers to feel welcome and enjoy a great customer experience in our family-owned restaurants, including local law enforcement officers who protect and serve our community," Gary and Jill Stanberry, the local McDonald's owners said in a statement provided to Newsweek. "We have been in contact with this officer to apologize for this unsatisfactory experience and let her know that we would love to correct the inaccurate order when she has time." The local Richmond Hill Police Department posted a Facebook message Wednesday saying the woman was an employee of another local agency.
Some commenters, mockingly referring to "Stacey" as "Officer Karen," questioned whether she was stable enough to be an armed enforcer of the law, or whether it "should preclude her from carrying a weapon and a badge that confers full legal immunity ."
Back in January, a Kansas police officer claimed McDonald's employees wrote "F*****g pig" on his cup. However, the department's police chief investigated and "found that McDonald's and its employees did not have anything whatsoever to do with this incident, this was completely and solely fabricated by a Herington police officer." The officer resigned. In July 2019, a sheriff's deputy in Indianapolis accused McDonald's employees of taking a bite out of a McChicken sandwich he had purchased. The Marion County Sheriff's Office launched an investigation into the incident, but it turned out that the officer took a bite out of the sandwich at the start of his shift and had later "forgotten that he had previously bitten the sandwich." The sheriff's office acknowledged the accuser, "wrongly concluded that a McDonald's employee had tampered with his food because he is a law enforcement officer."
“I can't imagine being the woman working for minimum wage at McDonalds who is now seeing a video go viral of an unstable and armed police officer—for whom she brought out a cup of coffee—accuse her of suspicion of tampering with a McMuffin. I would be terrified.” - Twitter user Charlotte Clymer .
“I wager most people joyfully dunking on McDonald’s cop, would not do the same if it was the cashier having the breakdown from being exhausted and demoralized. Easier to assume she’s “crazy” than to consider there are human beings caught in both sides of this clash,” twitter user Rob Messel .
