If you want to make your wife or girlfriend feel appreciated, then giving her a thoughtful reminder of your feelings is a great place to start. But great romantic sayings are more than just a string of clichés put together—they're a sincere expression of your affection! Whether you're celebrating a particular occasion or simply reminding her that she's special, these romantic love messages for her are sure to bring a smile to her face!
If I could give you one thing in life, I'd give you the ability to see yourself through my eyes, only then would you realize how special you are to me.
If you were a movie, I'd watch you over and over again.
In a sea of people, my eyes always search for you.
What on earth did I think about all the time before you?
If loving you was a job, I'd be the most deserving, dedicated, and qualified candidate. In fact, I'd even be willing to work for free!
Your smile is literally the cutest thing I've ever seen in my life.
If someone asked me to describe you in just two words, I'd say "Simply Amazing."
You do a million little things that bring to joy to my life.
I know fairy tales come true because I have you.
There are only two times that I want to be with you: Now and Forever.
My six word love story: "I can't imagine life without you."
Men may not always be the most verbal or openly emotional creatures, but that doesn't mean they don't want to hear how you feel! Letting that special man in your life know that he's your world with a short love message will surely make him glow with pride. To help you express just how much you enjoy his presence in your life, take a look at these romantic love messages for him!
You have no idea how much my heart races when I see you.
I love when I catch you looking at me.
You're weird…but I like it!
Your voice is my favorite sound.
So far, every moment we've spent together has been awesome. But I promise you, that the best is yet to come.
If only you knew how much those little moments with you matter to me.
Since the time I've met you, I cry a little less, laugh a little harder and smile all the more, just because I have you, my life is a better place.
Every day with you is a wonderful addition to my life's journey.
You're my paradise and I'd happily get stranded on you for a lifetime.
Just when I think that it is impossible to love you any more than I already do, you prove me wrong.
Some tokens of love and affection never go out of style—and the love letter is certainly one of those! In today's digital age, giving a handwritten letter to your girlfriend or wife is a truly unforgettable romantic gesture that's sure to impress. Of course, composing a personalized, honest letter is easier said than done. It can make you feel vulnerable—and you may even find yourself at a loss for words! Luckily, these sample love letters for her can give you a great starting point.
Sometimes I just think back to the first time I laid eyes on you. I knew right then that I had found someone incredible. Ever since that very moment all I have ever wanted was to be with you. No matter how dark my day is, seeing you always brightens it and makes me realize that with you, I am doing right. Your heart is so pure and so forgiving that it will always be the center of my attention, no matter what else is going on in my life. I look forward to this day and many more just like it for you will forever be in my heart.
You have gripped my soul with a ferocity reserved for a castaway clinging to a raft in the middle of the ocean. If my soul is the raft, it is your hold that keeps me afloat. Don't ever let go. I love you.
Whenever I am with you, it is like having my emotional batteries recharged with joy. Your smile radiates into me. Your touch sends little shivers through my body. Your presence pleases my mind and your soul pours peace on mine. I love you…madly, sincerely, completely and with no reservation, in a way that is blissfully wonderful.
Since writing was first invented, couples have exchanged romantic letters as a sincere expression of undying love and affection. Giving your boyfriend or husband a love letter is a timeless and carefully crafted way to say that you care about him. Of course, putting your deepest thoughts about your loved one on paper can be a daunting task. If you need a little inspiration, take a peek at these sample love letters for him to get those writing juices flowing!
I want you to know that there's no one who can replace you. The way you look, the way you always know what I am thinking about, the way you gave me hug when I need it the most, and the way you listen to me is priceless. You have touched me more profoundly than I ever thought you could. I love you.
I'm so completely in love with you. I wake to think of you and I sleep to see you in my dreams. Everyday seems like a blessing since I have met you. I feel so lucky and honored to be in love with you with all of my heart. Thank you for sharing your love with me. It's a truly wonderful gift. I will love you always.
You were already on my mind when I woke up this morning. Funny how I just can't stop thinking about you. Six months ago we hadn't even met, and now you are the most important person in my life. So, I just wanted to say I love you, and I can't wait to see you again.
Love letters may be ageless, but in today's day-and-age, romantic text messages are the easiest way to let your special someone know that you're thinking about her. The best part? Sweet texts can pack a big emotional punch without spending a lot of money, time, or effort. Whether you're giving your girlfriend a creative "good morning" or shooting your wife a midday compliment complete with emojis, these love text message ideas are sure to make her heart flutter!
You make me forget how to breathe.
All I need is you right here.
The only time I stupidly smile at my phone is when I get text messages from you.
What is love? It is what makes your cell phone ring every time I send text messages.
I always wake up smiling. I think it's your fault.
I can't explain the way you make me feel when I hear your voice or see your face, but I adore it.
Can I borrow a kiss? I promise to give it back 😘
If Van Gogh had you as a subject, the sunflowers would have gone in the trash 🌻🌻🌻
If I were a stop light 🚦, I would turn red every time you passed by so that I could stare at you a bit longer.
You wanna know who I'm in love with? Read the first word again ❤
🐳 you be mine forever?
🍊 you glad we found each other? You're a great 🎣
Want to let your boyfriend know that he's on your mind first thing in the morning? Wish you could give your husband a little midday pick-me-up? Luckily, technology has made this not just possible, but easy! Sending a romantic sms is a great way to make your man feel good anytime, anywhere. Whether you're saying "I love you" in words or emojis, these romantic text messages will help you put a smile on his face.
Stop making me think about you! I'm busy.
If nothing lasts forever, can I be your nothing?
You make my heart melt! 💕
I couldn't ignore you even if I wanted to.
Next time I hug you, I probably won't let go for a long time.
I can't decide if the best part of my day is waking up next to you, or going to sleep with you. Hurry home so I can compare the two again.
Everyone has their own motivation to get up in the morning and face the day. You are mine.
Whenever my phone vibrates, I hope you're the reason for it.
You're just like bacon . You make everything better.
Forget the butterflies, I feel the whole zoo when I am with you! 🐻🐼🐨🐯
You know I really want you to come over, but you're so hot my air condition bill would skyrocket the second you stepped foot in the door!
Most everyone would agree that few things in the world are more swoon-worthy than love poetry. After all, sometimes poetry expresses feelings in a way that normal words just can't manage. Whether you hope to win her over or steal her heart all over again, these quintessential Southern love poems for her are a great way to add a romantic touch to her day!
"I lov'd thee from the earliest dawn, / When first I saw thy beauty's ray,/ And will, until life's eve comes on, / And beauty's blossom fades away; / And when all things go well with thee, / With smiles and tears remember me. / I'll love thee when thy morn is past, / And wheedling gallantry is o'er, / When youth is lost in age's blast, / And beauty can ascend no more. / And when life's journey ends with thee, / O, then look back and think of me." — "Early Affection," George Moses Horton
"There's no doubt in my mind / a Southern girl was born / for a man to hold, / to sway as one / to the sound of country music, / in his arms he embraces pure gold. / A man is born to love a Southern girl / blond hair, black hair, brown hair, / straight or curled, / a man is born to love a Southern girl." — "Born to Love a Southern Girl," Steven S. Walsky
Male poets are often shown composing sonnets for their leading ladies, but many women throughout history have written masterpieces in the name of love. You too can carry on this tradition. Tell your man exactly how you feel by channeling the power of the written word. Whether you pen a poem yourself or borrow from the classics, your loved one is sure to appreciate the eloquent message you're throwing his way. Make your Southern romance truly come alive with these love poems for him!
"Love arrives / and in its train come ecstasies / old memories of pleasure / ancient histories of pain. / Yet if we are bold, / love strikes away the chains of fear / from our souls. / We are weaned from our timidity / In the flush of love's light / we dare be brave / And suddenly we see / that love costs all we are / and will ever be. / Yet it is only love / which sets us free." — "Touched by an Angel," Maya Angelou
"My monkey-wrench man is my sweet patootie; / the lover of my life, my youth and age. / My heart belongs to him and to him only; / the children of my flesh are his and bear his rage / Now grown to years advancing through the dozens / the honeyed kiss, the lips of wine and fire / fade blissfully into the distant years of yonder / but all my days of Happiness and wonder / are cradled in his arms and eyes entire. / They carry us under the waters of the world / out past the starposts of a distant planet / And creeping through the seaweed of the ocean / they tangle us with ropes and yarn of memories / where we have been together, you and I." — "Love Song for Alex, 1979," Margaret Walker
"I had not thought of violets late, / The wild, shy kind that spring beneath your feet / In wistful April days, when lovers mate / And wander through the fields in raptures sweet. / The thought of violets meant florists' shops, / And bows and pins, and perfumed papers fine; / And garish lights, and mincing little fops / And cabarets and soaps, and deadening wines. / So far from sweet real things my thoughts had strayed, / I had forgot wide fields; and clear brown streams; / The perfect loveliness that God has made,— / Wild violets shy and Heaven-mounting dreams. / And now—unwittingly, you've made me dream / Of violets, and my soul's forgotten gleam." — "Sonnet," Alice Moore Dunbar-Nelson
In those quiet moments before we surrender to sleep, most of us think of the people in our lives that matter most. Sending a good night SMS is one of the most simple, yet moving ways to let that special someone know that they're on your mind. It also gives them the perfect ending to even the lousiest of days. Send one of these good night text messages and give your loved one the closest thing you can to a good night kiss!
Come to my dreams if you can. I'll kiss you there.
Tonight I'll fall asleep with you in my heart.
You will be the last thing I think of before I fall to sleep and first thing to remember when I wake up.
Everyday I spend with you is the new best day of my life. Can't wait for the morning. Good night
My days are worth it if I can end them with you by my side. Good night.
Sleeping is impossible when all I can think about is you. Good night!
The brightest thing in this world are your eyes when you look at me. I don't want to see stars, but your eyes. Have a good night.
Before I fall asleep, I always picture what it would feel like to fall asleep in your arms. It's the best feeling in the world
I'm in my bed, you're in your bed. One of us is in the wrong place.
Every night I love coming back home. Because home is being in your arms. Goodnight.
All in all, birthdays are a celebration of a person's existence, so what better time to remind your partner how much you adore them? Romantic birthday wishes not only congratulate your sweetheart on their joyous day, but also make them feel appreciated and truly loved. With the help of these romantic birthday messages, you can give your partner a "Happy Birthday" that's truly unforgettable!
Although your birthday only comes once a year, my love for you will last forever. Today is your special day, I am glad we are spending it together.
I hope your birthday is as incredible as my love is for you. You are very special to me and you deserve an even more special day.
There is not enough words in the dictionary to express how much you mean to me, and to express how much I love you. Life could not be better without you. You complete every missing part of me. Happy birthday, my angel. I love you very much.
It doesn't matter where you are or what you are doing, what matters is who you are. I love who you are. Happy Birthday!
Congratulations to your parents to have given birth to such a beautiful person many years ago on this day. Your Birthday reminds me that you are the only person I want to spend my life with. Happy Birthday!
No matter how many birthday cake candles you've got lit, they'll never light up my life like you do. Have a good one!
I can't put a price on our memories, but I can make them better by adding a few more to the pile! Happy Birthday, love!
Wishing you a birthday as perfect as you are for me. Enjoy your day to the fullest!
Every day with you is one great celebration filled only with beautiful moments. I love you baby. Happy Birthday!
You're the reason I enjoy the taste of fine wine, the smell of fresh flowers, and the flavors of the best food. Life is good because of you. Happy Birthday!
We don't get as many opportunities as we should to tell our partners that we care. In keeping with the spirit of the holiday, Valentine's Day is the ideal time to write sweet messages for your beloved. Need a little inspiration? Take a peek at these romantic valentine messages to help you find the perfect words for that "someone special!"
Valentine's Day only comes once a year, but every day you fill my life with joy. Thank you for all you do in our relationship!
No matter where I go, the warmest place will always be in your arms. Sweetheart I love you today, tomorrow, and forever after.
I love you for all that you are, all that you've been, and all that you're yet to be
Falling in love is like looking at the stars. If you pick one out of the billions and stare at it long enough all the others will melt away.
I love all the adventures we have together.
As busy as we get, we need to be reminded that we are still sweethearts. Valentine's Day is a good day for me to stop and realize how wonderful you make me feel. Happy Valentine's Day!
When I'm with you, the only place I want to be is closer.
I love two things, you and the rose. The rose for one day, and you forever
For love I'd do anything. For you, I'd do more
Weddings are by their very nature a celebration of love and romance, so why not tell your spouse-to-be exactly how you feel? If your emotions are too overwhelming to articulate, call upon these moving words to help you along. Whether you're writing one-of-a-kind wedding vows or a cute pre-ceremony letter to your betrothed, these romantic wedding messages and quotes about love will allow you to put that special touch on your big day !
When you fall I will pick you up. When you are happy I will share your joy. When you need a friend I will be the first one there. I will always love you.
I used to not believe in soulmates. I'm here with you because you made me believe.
Even though I'm unsure about most things in life, I am certain that I love you and I will continue to love you forever.
If you live to be a hundred, I want to live to be a hundred minus one day, so I'm I had never lived without you.
I feel like everything in my life has led me to you. My choices, my heartbreaks, my regrets. Everything. And when we're together, my past seems worth it. Because if I had done one thing differently, I might never have met you.
I choose you. And I'll choose you over and over. Without pause, without a doubt, in a heartbeat. I'll keep choosing you.
I never could grasp the meaning of "perfect"—until I met you. Suddenly the definition fell into place and my breath was taken away each moment I spent with you.
My soul saw you and it kind of went, "Oh, there you are. I've been looking for you."
"You have me. Until every last star in the galaxy dies. You have me." — Amie Kaufman, Illuminae
When you spend most of the day-to-day with someone you love, it can be easy to take them for granted. Anniversaries are a wonderful time to shower your spouse with the attention that they deserve. After all, just because you can already call them "yours" doesn't mean that the romance needs to disappear! Giving your wife or husband romantic anniversary messages on your anniversary ensures that they'll never forget why they choose you in the first place!
When I tell you "I Love You," I don't say it out of habit or to make conversation. I say it to remind you that you are the best thing that ever happened to me.
The best thing about having forever is you. We are timeless. Together, we will always have stability, friendship, laughter and joy. I love you. Happy Anniversary!
I'm the tea bag and you are my cup of hot water. Being drenched in you brings out the best in me. Happy anniversary!
Growing old together is my favorite gift I've ever got from you. Happy Anniversary!
"As we grow older together, as we continue to change with age, there is one thing that will never change. I will always keep falling in love with you." — Karen Clodfelder
If I had my life to live over again…next time I would find you sooner so that I could love you longer. Happy Anniversary to us!
Our anniversary marks 365 more days you've made me laugh, appreciate you, learn, grow and be oh-so-glad we're together!
Life can't get any better—I tend to overuse this phrase because my life keeps getting better with you every single day. Happy anniversary.
The years seem to be going faster and faster. I think that's because I am having more and more fun with you.
Making your love known to that special someone is one of those little things that not just keep relationships alive, but also helps them flourish . Whether it's a special occasion or simply another day on the calendar, your loved one is sure to appreciate any romantic messages you might leave them!
