Every item on this page was hand-picked by a House Beautiful editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.
Herbs are on the way.
Spring is in full swing now, and it’s time to get serious about planting! For warm regions, heat-loving vegetables such as tomatoes and eggplants are ready to go in the ground. But you may need to hold off until the end of the month or later in northern climates, especially if the nights still get down into the 40s. For much of the country, annual flowers can be planted now. For less hardy annuals that don’t like a bit of frost—impatients, for example—wait until after your area’s last expected frost date. Hardy flowers, such as sweet alyssum and snapdragons, will take some cool nights, though not a hard freeze. Check with your local university coop extension service (find yours here ) for the last frost date in your area.
Typically, here’s what you can plant in May:
Spinach prefers cool weather and will bolt (go to seed) when temperatures warm up. It’s your last chance to plant this hardy green until fall, so get it in the ground to enjoy baby leaves in a few weeks. Sprinkle seeds in a row, and cover lightly with soil. Keep moist.
These pretty annuals have strong upright forms, and they keep blooming all summer long. They're a little more cold-hardy than many other annuals, so you can set them out earlier in the season in northern climates. They also make a long-lasting cut flower for vases.
This beautiful plant is a good choice for mixing in with ornamentals with its large pale green or bronze leaves and stems in every color of the rainbow. Direct seed, and cover lightly with soil. It prefers cool weather but has some heat tolerance and may overwinter in mild climates. Swiss chard also grows well in containers.
This low-growing annual loves cooler weather, so enjoy it now before temperatures soar. If it starts to look shaggy, a haircut will help it rebound when the weather cools down again in fall.
In warm climates, beans can go in the ground at the beginning of the month. Northern climates should wait until the end of the month, as beans don’t germinate well in cool soil. Plant seeds because transplants aren’t usually successful. Bush beans and pole beans, which require a trellis or net to climb, are prolific plants—the more you pick, the more they produce.
Now is the time to get your herbs in pots or beds. Cilantro actually prefers cool weather, and rosemary, parsley and thyme are hardy enough to get in the ground if it’s still cold in your part of the country. Wait for warm nights before planting more tender herbs such as basil.
Marigolds are tried-and-true for a reason: They bloom all season,  they're bright and perky, and pests don't bother them. Plant them between edible crops to keep away bugs and bunnies (it sometimes works!).  Seeds or transplants are both okay to plant now.
Traditional cabbage takes up a lot of space in your garden, so this is a good alternative since it grows upright. This sturdy Chinese cabbage can be planted from early spring to midsummer. You can clip baby leaves as you would with other greens.
This delightful annual tolerates cold, so it's fine to plant now if weather is still a bit iffy in your region. Its sweet scent attracts pollinators, and it looks lovely in baskets, containers, or edging walkways.
Directly sow seeds into the garden after danger of frost has passed. Transplants do not work well. Thin the plants to 3 inches or so between plants. Use scissors to trim off tops, as pulling up seedlings may damage others nearby.
These perennials need fertile soil, so make sure you add plenty of compost to your bed. Put transplants in the ground so that the crown, the central growing bud where the leaves emerge, is at soil level. Look for types that are “everbearing,” which means they produce fruit until the first frost. Most types grow well in containers.
In most of the country, plant seeds now. Corn needs lots and lots of water, so make sure it’s not too far from your water source (you don’t want to be hauling water too far during dry spells!). Plant in blocks of short rows for proper pollination.
Never heard of this heirloom green? Sorrel is making a comeback because it’s pretty, perennial and one of the first greens to appear in spring! Plant it this year to enjoy its tangy, lemony leaves in spring and early summer salads, and look for its return next spring!
Cucumbers are sensitive to cold, so be patient and wait until all danger of frost has passed in your region. Seeds are okay, as plants only need 50 to 60 days to mature.
Lavender is a perennial, so it will come back every year. Just make sure to choose a variety that is hardy in your USDA zone. Its sweet scent and long-lasting flowers make every garden a little more romantic! Bonus: Save the dried flower heads to make sachets.
Arricca Elin Sansone Arricca SanSone has written about health and lifestyle topics for Prevention, Country Living, Woman's Day, and more.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
