What are the similarities, differences between Rayshard Brooks and Antwon Rose police killings?
What are the similarities, differences between Rayshard Brooks and Antwon Rose police killings?
What are the similarities and the differences between Rayshard Brooks, who was shot and killed in Atlanta by police while running away, to Antwon Rose, who was also shot here in Pittsburgh while running away?
“The similarities are obvious in that both incidents were caught on film. Both of the victims were fleeing or appear to be fleeing and both were shot in the back. The interesting thing or juxtaposition between what happened here locally last year and what happened in Atlanta I believe on Saturday night is that Mr. Brooks turns around with a taser in his hand and appears to deploy the taser. The officer then fires shots in Mr. Brooks’ back. When Antwon Rose was running, according to the video that everyone saw, there was nothing in his hands and he was shot in the back,” said defense attorney Blaine Jones.
Channel 11′s Ryan Houston also asked Jones if the officers in Atlanta should be charged and do you think they will be able to be convicted by a jury?
"Should both officers be charged in my opinion? No. The other officer, I don’t understand why he would be charged. I don’t believe it was a conspiracy. So why would he even be considered to be charged? It’s my understanding he’s on administrative duty. Now let’s look at the officer who fired the fatal shot. Should he be charged? It’s an interesting question because the climate that we find ourselves with the Black Lives Matter movement right now specifically what are they talking about? The police killings of unarmed black men. This is the worst possible time for this incident to occur for that officer. Do I think he will be charged? Yes. Should he be charged? I’m not so sure it’s that easy. Because we operate in two parallel worlds. The real world and the legal world. In the real world, people may say ‘yeah he shot someone and the level of force is not equal.’ But in the legal world there’s a little bit of a difference here because the officer can say he feared for his safety,” Jones said.
A jury found Michael Rosfeld, the former East Pittsburgh police officer, not guilty of criminal homicide for shooting and killing Rose.
