If you caught Night 1 of Derrick Rose Week on NBC Sports Chicago on Monday, you were privy to an all-time Stacey King call:
“Somebody cool him off!” King exclaimed as Rose splashed a floater from nearly behind the basket midway through the fourth quarter of a tightly-contested game the Bulls would eventually pull out in OT.
How we feeling watching this insane performance again? pic.twitter.com/CI24tnCnMi
— Bulls Talk (@NBCSBulls) June 9, 2020
There’s more where that came from on Tuesday at 7 p.m. CT.
On the schedule: A 115-104 Bulls victory over the Phoenix Suns from Jan. 22 2010 — a game that featured 32 Rose points, the loudest of which will be remembered forevermore.
Your browser does not support iframes.
Here’s what to watch for:
To even moniker Stacey King’s soundtrack of Rose posterizing Goran Dragic a singular “call” would be a massive understatement. What makes this moment so iconic — beyond an emblematic show of explosion from Rose, in a time when his star was rapidly ascending — was King’s ability to deliver (speaking conservatively) five catch-phrases, back-to-back, off the top of his head, and with impeccable form. It hits all the notes:
"What are you doing Dragic? Did you not get the memo?...
That’s a career’s worth of wit, all in a span of about 20 seconds. It perfectly encapsulates the Rose era. Look out for it around the six-minute mark of the fourth quarter.
That dunk, combined with a free throw by way of a Dragic foul, marked Rose’s 28th, 29th and 30th points of the night, and stretched the Bulls’ lead from six to 10 amid a back-and-forth game the Suns refused to bow out of.
As mentioned, Rose finished the night with 32 points on 15-for-21 shooting (including a buzzer-beating 3-pointer to cap the third quarter). He carried the Bulls throughout. It wouldn’t be a featured Rose Week game if he hadn’t.
What’s more, he took it to Steve Nash and a Suns team that, while at the tail end of their run of greatness, was still 5.5 games better than the Bulls entering play and on their home floor. The guard was changing.
There are some signature Remember Those Guys cameos in this one, to boot:
Also: The man in the middle for Phoenix? Robin Lopez, of course
Not remotely obscure, but we also get rookie Taj Gibson starting alongside Joakim Noah (19 points, eight rebounds, two blocks) in the frontcourt, and our first Luol Deng sighting of the week. Rookie James Johnson logs three minutes for Chicago
Nash-Amare pick-and-rolls, Grant Hill buckets and Jared Dudley/Channing Frye longballs to come...
… And, of course, a Bulls win. Should be a fun one.
