Every item on this page was hand-picked by a House Beautiful editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.
There's plenty of time to keep gardening!
For much of the country, the growing season is in high gear with temperatures soaring and gardens overflowing with their bounty. While you may think it’s too late to sow anything else this year, that’s simply not so! You still can plant some short-season edibles and other ornamentals to refresh faded flower beds. For edibles, pay attention to how long it takes them to mature to decide if you really do have enough time for a harvest before frost. Check with your local university coop extension service (find yours here ) to find the first expected frost date in your area, then count backwards. So, if your first frost is usually mid-October, and the seed package or plant tag says an edible is “45 days to maturity,” you likely still have time for a harvest—especially plants that prefer cooler weather, such as greens. If your flower pots and beds are looking shaggy, it’s also a good time to add perennials that will have time to establish root systems before winter. And no matter what you plant now, keep watering during dry spells!
Typically, here’s what you can plant in August:
These sturdy annuals will keep going strong until the first hard freeze, so add some to fill in sparse containers or to dress up beds that need late season color. Marigolds come in bright yellow, orange and cream so they complement autumn’s hues if you plan to decorate later with gourds and pumpkins.
This hardy green doesn’t much care about the cold, and in fact, it may taste even better after a light frost. Kale also may surprise you and overwinter—that is, survive winter to appear again next spring!
These cheery-faced flowers have golden daisy–like blooms and brown or black centers. Some black-eyed susans are annuals, but others are perennial. Pop perennial types in the ground now so their roots have time to get established, and they may come back again next year for months and months of color from summer to fall.
Talk about instant gratification: Radishes are one of the fastest-growing crops around. In about 30 days, some types are ready to pick; in fact, you don’t want to wait too long to harvest because they can become woody.
Spinach is another green that doesn’t mind the cold in the least. Sprinkle seeds in rows, and cover lightly with soil. Or interplant it between taller crops, such as pole beans, to provide some shelter from the late summer sun.
These perennials are often planted too late in the season for their roots to establish, so they may not return next year as you expect. Get mums in the ground now, and you’ll have a shot that they’ll come back next year.
If you’ve never tried turnips, now’s the time to experiment! New varieties are sweeter and mature in about 60 days so there’s still plenty of time to grow them in many regions of the country. Some heirloom types don’t form a bulb but are eaten as you would other greens such as spinach.
If you didn’t plant any earlier in the season, there’s time to put in some transplants now! Some types, such as bok choi, and other new varieties don’t hog as much space so they’ll fit nicely into small plots.
These pretty annuals don’t mind a bit of cool weather, so you’ll still get loads of blooms before a hard freeze. Plus, pollinators love them! Add snapdragons to planters or beds that need refreshed now.
Cukes are fast-growers, so sow seeds in the ground now for fall picking. Some are ready in as little as 40 days. Look for bush types, rather than vining varieties, if you’re planting in containers.
Arricca Elin Sansone Arricca SanSone has written about health and lifestyle topics for Prevention, Country Living, Woman's Day, and more.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
