Every item on this page was hand-picked by a House Beautiful editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.
Here’s what to plant before the season’s over!
Peak growing season may be winding down for much of the country, but there’s still time to plant a few short-season edibles and add to your flower garden's overall beauty . It's time for planting fall color, such as mums and asters, as well as sprucing up planter boxes . You also may be surprised to learn that it’s the best time of year to plant perennials and shrubs ( trees , too!) while plants still have an opportunity to establish their root systems before the ground freezes. Autumn is much less stressful on plants because it’s generally cooler and rain still is ample. And let’s face it: The work isn’t as hot and sweaty for you either while you dig! Make sure any perennial or shrub is suited to your USDA Hardiness zone (check yours here ) so you know they will survive winter in your climate. And don’t neglect watering your garden, especially new plantings, if you’re having a particularly warm and dry late summer or early autumn.
Typically, here’s what you can plant in September:
These stunning perennials do best when planted in the fall to bloom next spring. Make sure to give them full sun, and don’t plant too deeply, which is a common mistake. Peonies need to be planted just 2 inches below the soil surface.
This is a short season crop so there’s still time for growing it, especially because it prefers cooler temperatures. Most types of spinach mature in about six weeks, but you also can snip off baby leaves as soon as they’re big enough to eat. Some types have extreme cold tolerance and will last over the winter and reappear next spring.
Radishes are another quick crop, with some types ready in 20 to 30 days. Plant them shallowly in the ground or in pots, and keep seeds moist while you’re waiting for them to germinate.
These charming annuals in every color of the rainbow look fabulous in pots, window boxes, and beds. The flowers also are edible, so toss them on salads or decorate cakes and cupcakes with them. In mild climates, pansies may last all winter.
Kale is a sturdy crop that doesn’t mind the cold. Plant now for fall harvests, as cold weather actually makes it tastier! That’s because cold weather turns starches into sugars in the leaves. Some types will survive winter and appear next spring.
These beautiful fall-flowering perennials are a lovely companion planting to chrysanthemums, the other stars of the autumn garden. Give asters full sun, and water to get them established (but don’t overdo it; they don’t like soggy feet).
Plant garlic when the weather cools down for a crop next summer. Soft neck types consist of many cloves, and it stores a long time. Hard neck types are easier to peel, and you can harvest the stems, or garlic scapes, next summer.
Late summer and early fall are ideal times for planting lettuce in cooler climates. Baby lettuce is ready to harvest in as little as 30 days. Look for gourmet blends, called mesclun, for a variety.
Nothing says early spring like the bright, beautiful flowers of daffodils! Plant these bulbs late in the month because they tend to do better when planted after the first frost. Daffodils are a good choice if you have critters such as deer and chipmunks in your garden because the bulbs and leaves are poisonous (so your little friends will leave them alone!).
Spicy arugula is delicious on its own or in a mixed salad. Plant this crop for a quick harvest in about 3 to 5 weeks, depending on the variety.
Arricca Elin Sansone Arricca SanSone has written about health and lifestyle topics for Prevention, Country Living, Woman's Day, and more.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
