These Denver-made arrangements can be ordered for same-day delivery (48-hours notice outside of town) for $55-$125. Weekly subscriptions for homes or businesses are also available, and grocery shoppers can find bouquets at Leevers Locavore, 2630 W. 38th Ave.
Longmont’s Aspen Moon Farm provides a 10-week organic flower add-on to its summer vegetable CSA. Flower lovers can also order dahlia tubers now (which provide weeks of flower growth in season) for $6-7 each. See varieties from white Bride-to-Be to deep burgundy Jowey Mirella.
A bouquet from Fresh Sends, which is based in Denver but ships nationally. (Provided by Fresh Sends)
A new Denver-based national florist, Fresh Sends wants to “freshen up the cookie-cutter floral industry,” according to the brand’s social media. Next-day nationwide shipping is available on designer’s choice bouquets ($45), and the cards are extra cute for Mother’s Day — “Home is where your mom is” and “Got it from my momma” among them.
Johnstown’s Little Seed sells DIY flower buckets for at-home arranging for parties or special occasions, and summer flower subscriptions ($170) providing six fresh bouquets from June to October. Subscribers get a free floral arranging class with their summer bouquets.
Little Hollow Flowers is a cut-flower farm in Berthoud. (Provided by Dustin Saunders)
This Berthoud-based farm is collaborating with two local businesses for Mother’s Day flowers. Shoppers can find their bunches at Babette’s Artisan Bakery in Longmont on Mother’s Day, or they can order DIY arrangements ahead from Wild Blossoms Studio in Fort Collins.
This Highland neighborhood shop shows a selection of dreamy bouquets and showstopping arrangements on its website (around $50 to $300), with a number of special Mother’s Day centerpieces. Art-piece custom creations are also available, and when the store is open, customers can walk into the flower cooler for color, varietal and scent inspiration.
Pickletown Flower Co. owner Jessica Sparzak, left, is offering floral arranging classes for Mother’s Day. (Provided by Jessica Sparzak)
From her home studio in Littleton (and a traveling flower truck), Jessica Sparzak creates fresh and everlasting flower arrangements, as well as dried floral art installations and hanging shower bundles ($20) for your home. For Mother’s Day, Sparzak is offering springtime bouquets ($48-$98) and at-home video workshops that come with an assortment of peonies, roses, ranunculus and a mix of greens ($85).
The Lyons Farmette’s eight-week flower CSA starts the Saturday before Mother’s Day and continues through June. Flower buyers can pick up their bunches weekly at the farmstand or take advantage of contactless delivery around Lyons. Watch for edible flowers and classes coming this summer.
Denver floral designer and grower Kim Zimmerman hosts Saturday sidewalk sales where she sells bouquets created from her garden on a sliding scale ($10 suggested donation) with a percentage of proceeds donated to a different local charity each week. For Mother’s Day, Zimmerman has also created gifts of perennials paired with ceramic vases and custom flower drawings ($150).
Arvada-grown lavender and cut flowers are available for CSA members during the summer and fall months (spring has sold out). Summer memberships cost $120 and include ranunculus, poppies and sweet peas among others. In the fall, find zinnias, dahlias and sunflowers from August to September ($165).
