While some scramble to adapt to outdoor dining, Springfield’s iconic Red Rose Pizzeria is hoping indoor dining returns in the next two weeks
Rita Caputo-Capua, co-owner and manager of Springfield's Red Rose Pizzeria hopes for an early announcement for inside dining. (Douglas Hook / MassLive)
What lies beyond the pandemic? MassForward is MassLive’s series examining the journey of Massachusetts’ businesses through and beyond the coronavirus pandemic.
Rita Caputo-Capua, co-owner and manager of Springfield's Red Rose Pizzeria hopes to have people coming into the restaurant on June 23. Staff have moved tables 6 feet apart ready for the next phase of the reopening.
The second section of industries included in Phase 2, including indoor dining and industries that offer personal services such as nail and tanning salons, will reopen at an unspecified date as long as the trend of COVID cases continues to decline.
The latest figures come as Gov. Charlie Baker on Friday said that the entire health care system in Massachusetts is “out of surge," and that officials have “opened up” the system once again for routine service.
Red Rose Pizzeria is a Springfield institution. Regulars and first-time visitors alike know good food when they taste it and the restaurant owners and staff welcome hundreds of guests daily through the establishment’s doors at 1060 Main Street. It is not unusual to find sisters Carmela Fraziero and Rita Caputo-Capua seating guests and serving meals at the Red Rose where they have both been working since childhood.
At this time, restaurants and diners can only be served outdoors with tables 6 feet apart and away from high foot-traffic areas. Tables will be allowed to be closer together only if protective barriers are in place.
Springfield’s Mayor Domenic J. Sarno has been eager to open businesses and restaurants quickly once Phase 2 was announced. With the help of the Business Improvement District, Fort Street has been transformed into outdoor seating across the road and the plaza between 1350 Main St. and Nadim’s Mediterranean restaurant now has lights strung between the buildings to improve lighting in the evenings for diners.
Chris Russell, executive director of BID told MassLive on Friday that the BID provided nine businesses that applied for the funding up to $1,800 each to secure whatever they needed to help set-up outside.
“This could be a really cool idea in the future,” said Russell. “So, we told them to buy their own umbrellas. If they wanted to rent a tent ... If they wanted to buy tables and chairs or what have you, we’re reimbursing them.”
For Caputo-Capua and the Red Rose this wasn’t an option. The pizzeria has been in Springfield since 1963 and the atmosphere is also essential and adds to the overall experience of the Red Rose, according to Caputo-Capua.
“We could do [outside dining]. We could rent a tent, rent tables and chairs. We just don’t like that feeling of eating in a parking lot,” said Caputo-Capua. “A lot of places have outdoor dining [because] they have a patio or an outdoor deck. They have a designated area for outdoor eating, so it looks like an outdoor dining room.”
Instead, Caputo-Capua is waiting for Gov. Charlie Baker to announce the next stage of the reopening plan. She and other eatery owners in Springfield are hoping for June 23 to be the day. Two weeks after Phase 2 was announced.
There has been no official date given by the state or city in regard to the opening of inside dining, as BID confirmed on Friday. Caputo-Capua also said that it is just wishful thinking on her part.
Red Rose was able to cater, pre-pandemic, more than 600 people in the restaurant. After rearranging the tables to six feet apart inside, it can now fit roughly 130 people.
“The bar is a definite no-no,” said Caputo-Capua showing MassLive the new set-up inside the restaurant for when a date is announced. “But I can put tables up against the bars. We have to follow the rules. It’s Massachusetts and I don’t want to get shut down.”
On May 19, the pizzeria reopened for curbside pickup after closing for two months and Caputo-Capua spoke about the reaction she and the staff received from her customers.
“Our customers just want to get back in,” said Caputo-Capua. “They were showing up an hour early on Friday night [while waiting for their order] just hoping to bump into me or my hostess Solange [Remillard] because they feel like they’re part of our family.”
Massachusetts health officials announced today another 46 people have died from coronavirus . Across the state, deaths now stand at 7,538.
Officials also confirmed another 392 cases, including 85 probable, of the virus, for a total of at least 105,059 confirmed and probable cases. The new cases are based on 10,186 molecular tests and 1,210 antibody tests reported on Friday.
Although Caputo-Capua and other businesses in Springfield have been hearing rumors of indoor dining coming sooner, until the governor and state confirm a date, June 23 is just conjecture at this point.
The reopening of restaurants across the state does not necessarily mean clear roads ahead.
Bob Luz, of the Massachusetts Restaurant Association , joined a group of state senators for a listening session Friday morning and painted a picture with data from his members that reflected turmoil within the restaurant industry.
Luz said two different sources projected about 3,600 restaurants of the more than 16,000 in the state may close permanently in the aftermath of the coronavirus.
Gov. Charlie Baker prohibited on-site dining on St. Patrick’s Day in an order that was meant to originally last three weeks. In the three months following, Luz said 54% of the restaurants in the state remain closed even with the state allowing takeout and delivery and outdoor dining with restrictions.
MassForward is MassLive's series examining the journey of Massachusetts' small businesses through and beyond the coronavirus pandemic.
