Born in Mexico, Serrano arrived in the United States on July 4, Independence Day, when he was only 2 years old. He’s safe now, but there’s more to do, he said.
#DACA is finally safe (for now) but we still have work to do. What does this mean? A thread.
1. Dreamers still have no pathway to citizenship. Only a stay of deportation. We must work to resolve H.R. 6, The Dream and Promise Act and grant us a path to citizenship.
— armando, king of the weebs (@UtterPWNedNoob) June 18, 2020
President Obama passed DACA in 2012, allowing undocumented immigrants who were brought to the United States as children to receive a renewable two-year period of deferred action from deportation and eligibility for a work permit.
There are about 660,000 active DACA recipients in the United States today, 81 percent of whom were born in Mexico. More than 250,000 U.S. citizens are the children of DACA recipients, according to the Center for American Progress . And an estimated 27,000 are health care workers, many of whom are on the frontlines of the coronavirus pandemic — which the Supreme Court considered in their decision. DACA recipients also pay an estimated $1.7 billion a year in taxes, according to a 2018 report .
For Juan Escalante, another one of those DACA recipients, the decision was validating, but he called on Congress to go a step further and pass the American Dream and Promise Act of 2019, which provides a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
“Today is an exciting day for the immigrant community, specifically for DACA recipients across the country. Once again the courts, and in this case the Supreme Court, has stood by the Dreamers and told the President that his attempts to nullify the DACA program were illegal,” he said in a statement. “To the Trump administration, they should back off from any attacks on the DACA program and not use us as pawns in their anti-immigrant attacks ahead of the election.”
Our country is in a historic fight. Add Changing America to your Facebook or Twitter feed to stay on top of the news.
On social media other DACA recipients and undocumented immigrants shared their reactions to the Supreme Court decision.
DACA lives but our fight is far from over. We must fight for all of our families! #Not1More means not one more deportation, detention, or separation! We must defund the police and #AbolishICE .
— Erika Andiola (@ErikaAndiola) June 18, 2020
Sooo hyped that almost a million young Americans like me can take a temporary sigh of relief.
Adrián Escárate, 31, never slept well the night before Supreme Court decisions were announced, knowing that his future as a DACA recipient hung in the balance. When he logged onto Twitter this morning, his confusion quickly turned to shock.
“It was like a whirlwind roller coaster of feelings,” he said.
Escárate was born in Chile but moved to Miami when he was 3 years old. When the DACA program was first announced, he was scared to apply and send over his paperwork to the federal government. But he was approved in mid-2014 and just renewed his status a few months ago, despite the uncertainty of the program’s future and challenges posed by the coronavirus pandemic.
Now a tennis coach living in the Bay Area, he manages communications for Define American, a campaign to change the narrative and shape the discussion of immigration and citizenship in the United States.
“Even in this moment of the uprising for black liberation and racial equality and equity, we know that and we see that immigrant justice is a racial justice issue,” he said. “[Define American is] trying to expand that narrative and be inclusive and know that we don’t have two different fights. We have to show up together in the fight for equality and justice.”
