Then comes anger – which in this situation, can come as a result of many different things, as explored above.
Psychotherapist and Counselling Directory Member Pam Custers agreed that the five stages of grief accurately sums up our feelings right now – and explains that we might be feel angry, simply because we’ve lost a lot.
“What we are experiencing as individuals and as a society is grief. We have lost our lives as we know it. We understand the loss we are experiencing now, of our friends, family or livelihood but we are also experiencing anticipatory grief. We do not know what the future holds so we are fearful of what loss may unfold,” she said.
Pam also explained, “In the bargaining stage, people were starting to try and configure the rules around trying to have more freedom. Depression comes when we feel angry, frustrated and are staying at home for extended periods, which can easily turn that depression inwards. The fifth stage is acceptance – when we embrace the time we have, and start complying with it.”
Karen Kwong noted that while it’s normal to feel agitated from time to time right now, you shouldn’t let any anger fester into something bigger. She said, “It is normal to feel this way for the reasons cited. But it is not normal to feel this way for a prolonged period of time. Short-term bursts of stress can actually help productivity and spur action. However, when something is agitating one for a long period of time, it will lead to chronic stress, anxiety and depression, if these have not already been triggered.”
So how can we address any feelings of irritability?
Don’t ignore it – instead, try and turn it into kindness towards yourself
Dr Donna explained, “We should not try to ignore anger as it won’t go away. If anything, it will grow as tension builds, and finally, feelings of frustration and anger will overspill.”
Instead, she suggests treating ourselves as if we were children, and handle our anger as such.
“We need to try and self-soothe through compassion, tenderness and love, as we would do towards a child if they were upset,” Donna said. “It is important to recognise when we are feeling angry and show ourselves kindness, without becoming critical of ourselves for feeling angry. It may help to talk to someone in order to work out what is going on beneath the anger. “
Other self-care techniques can also be invaluable, too.
Donna said, “Ensuring a good sleep pattern is also very important, as if we don’t sleep well, we can generally feel more irritable. Breathing exercises, mindfulness , yoga and exercise in general are all good self-soothers that can help to bring us back into a state of calm. By self-soothing, anger will naturally dissipate.”
In order to let go of anger, it might be good to try and understand why others are reacting to the situation as they are – even if you don’t agree with it.
Pam Custers told w&h, “The vital component is to have compassion. We are all dealing with things in different ways. We will all be experiencing our personal grief at different stages.”
“Compassion for ourselves and for others is key. Allow yourself and others some leeway in terms of how they are managing. They may not be themselves right now, but this too will pass.”
There are online resources that can help you to tackle your anger if you’re finding it tricky to deal with yourself. Often, seeking help from a professional is the best way to get you feeling better, so it’s so important to reach out if you need it.
Websites like Mindbox give its users practical tools in order to help them manage anger through exercises and online counselling sessions. Their mission is to “provide the best therapy, in the right place, when you need it the most”.
We believe that good mental health should be accessible for everyone. So we have partnered with Mindbox to offer you an exclusive discount of up to 50% off their services.
It mightn’t be easy, but trying to work out the root cause of your lockdown anger can help to tackle it.
Karen suggested, “Change your relationship with those difficult feelings. By identifying [your feelings of anger] and accepting them, you can now look at what those feelings are trying to tell you.
“You might be grieving for your old lifestyle – ‘I am feeling really sad about not being able to do stuff I used to do. I miss my freedom. Clearly freedom is important to me, so what else can I do to recognise this is important to me?’
She then explained that you can try and redefine what freedom means to you at the moment.
