Alaska and the Arctic are warming twice as fast as the rest of the planet. This rapid warming is melting glaciers, intensifying algae blooms, killing salmon and fueling wildfires.
As neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux reminds us, "Body hormones, such as cortisol, help us cope with stress. But as with any useful chemical, you can have too much of a good thing. Prolonged, intense stress can raise the levels of cortisol beyond the point where they are useful and can impair memory processing and decision making systems that normally help us be effective amidst uncertainty and change. If we can keep our stress at levels that are useful rather than harmful, we can help ourselves and others be in the zone where we are able to use memory and foresight to cope with the situation. But because we are each different, we each have a unique tipping point."
The question is, how we can do this, particularly when the stakes are so high. Psychologists have a term, "self-regulation" -- ways we can keep our stress levels in a zone that enables us to be functional, proactive, agile and resilient.
"It requires huge self-regulation to contemplate and open our minds to apprehend the edges of these massive issues," said neuroscientist Sarah Peyton , author of "Your Resonant Self." This would include climate change, the pandemic, the economy, who we were pre-Covid-19 and who we are now becoming. "No wonder people get their fuses blown: being asked to take action, mourn, engage, with something so big."
When anxiety or being overwhelmed hits, we can move outside of our "window of tolerance." Siegel describes this "window" as the optimal zone of arousal where we are able to manage and thrive in everyday life, despite the ups and downs. On the one end, when stressed we can go into a "rigid" response, which may look like despair or depression, or a more "chaotic" mode of agitation and rage. Often we ricochet between, bouncing around based on how well we can cope with these stressors.
There are many things we can do -- individually, socially and collectively -- to move us into our window of tolerance. We are all doing them every day: walking, playing with our pets, cooking meals, joking around with our friends. We can also try calming practices like deep breathing and meditation known to powerfully change our stress levels. And, what truly helps us all, is our ability to open up, be honest, and have candid, compassionate conversations with those who feel similarly or who are open to listening.
Many of us are afraid that we'll get pulled down into a black hole if we call out pain, guilt and shame that arises when we recognize that we are responsible for some big things going wrong, and that we are now reaping what we've sown. But in fact, it's exactly the opposite.
Compassionately naming our emotions actively decreases activity in the amygdala, as cognitive scientist Golnaz Tabibnia and her team have discovered in their groundbreaking work. Or what Siegel calls "name it to tame it."
Each of us need to support this kind of public global climate conversation. And it starts with, "of course."
