Batwoman will feature a new character in the title role, rather than recasting Kate Kane, and here’s why the show might have made that decision.
Batwoman is replacing Kate Kane in season 2, instead of recasting Ruby Rose, because there is a long history of superheroes having successors in comic books. First joining the Arrowverse as part of the Elseworlds crossover in 2018, the character of Batwoman was spun off into her own television series. Recently concluding its premiere season, Batwoman had all the pieces in place for an exciting sophomore installment. Plans were complicated, however, by the exit of Batwoman star Rose in what has been reported as a mutual decision that came as a result of on-set tensions.
The shocking news led to a flurry of speculation about the future of Batwoman, specifically whether the creative forces behind the show would choose to slot in a new actress for the title role or go in a different direction altogether. In spite of some inspired potential recasting options, including Stephanie Beatriz and WWE’s Sonya Deville , it is now known that Kane Kane will be replaced with a new character for Batwoman season 2 . In a casting notice, which has since been deleted, it was revealed that the producers of the CW series are looking for an actress to portray Ryan Wilder. The name is likely a pseudonym to conceal the character’s real identity. Wilder is described, specifically, as being “nothing like Kate Kane.” It begs the question of why there would be a decision to replace Kate Kane, fundamentally altering Batwoman as a result.
Continue scrolling to keep reading Click the button below to start this article in quick view.
The decision to replace Kate Kane, and not just Ruby Rose, is likely because comics have had a long tradition of having successors in place for their marquee heroes. That makes it easier to introduce a new persona rather than go through the process of recasting. Similarly to Batman and Superman, a number of individuals have assumed the moniker of Batwoman. Debuting in the Silver Age of Comics, Kathy Kane was the first Batwoman. The role of Batwoman has been assumed in the comics by Brenna Wayne, Selina Kyle, Helena Wayne, Bette Kane, and Cassandra Cain, among others. Any of those comic book creations could ultimately inform the choices which will be made in the case of Ryan Wilder.
The striking success of comic book adaptations, especially over the past decade, has mainstreamed the idea of beloved protagonists having successors. The third act of Avengers: Endgame was explicitly premised on the fact that Tony Stark and Steve Rogers were saying goodbye, leaving the likes of Peter Parker and Sam Wilson to pick up where they’ve left off. Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse similarly pushed for the idea that there can be multiple heroes, each distinct and unique, despite sharing comparable abilities and backstories.
Beyond the source material, choosing a new character to lead Batwoman alleviates some of the pressure from whoever ends up headlining season 2. While there will inevitable comparisons, favorable and otherwise, to Rose’s tenure, the decision to forge ahead with a separate persona from Kate Kane allows the next lead of Batwoman more room to be considered on her own terms. In general, recasting tends to be awkward solution for writers on a television series. Even for an inventive series like Crazy Ex-Girlfriend , not everyone is going to be happy with the decision to put a different face on the same character.
Another positive of Batwoman’s plan not to recast Kate and instead look for a new protagonist is that it provides Rose a chance to return in a guest-starring capacity, down the line, to wrap up her character's lingering arcs. It’s not at all clear, at this early stage, if that will happen but it’s possible given how so many of the show’s characters are linked to Kate. For now, what is clear is that Batwoman has chosen a fairly elegant path forward that will inevitably lead to an increased interest when the series returns for new episodes.
