With the Practice Booming Due to COVID-19, Norton Rose Fulbright Adds Data Privacy Partner
Will Daugherty left Baker & Hostetler to join Norton Rose Fulbright in Houston, not long after Baker & Hostetler grabbed a Norton Rose cybersecurity partner in San Francisco.
By Brenda Sapino Jeffreys | June 21, 2020 at 02:18 PM
Your article was successfully shared with the contacts you provided.
Norton Rose Fulbright offices in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Norton Rose Fulbright has added Baker & Hostetler data protection, privacy and cybersecurity partner Will Daugherty in Houston to help meet rising demand related to COVID-19.
Senior reporter Brenda Sapino Jeffreys covers the business of law in Texas. Contact her at bjeffreys@alm.com On Twitter: @BrendaSJeffreys
Here are Texas Lawyers election Q&A's with Terry Adams and James Lombardino, who are vying to become the Place 5 justice on the First Court of Appeals in the July 14 runoff election.
A fire Thursday in the downtown Austin law office of immigration firm J. Sparks Law caused $200,000 in damage. Now owner Julie Sparks is hustling to get her client files treated for smoke damage.
For businesses that are impacted by state, local and federal government regulations, it’s time to get involved. As crises occur, governmental entities…
Law Offices of Mark E. Salomone
With this subscription you will receive unlimited access to high quality, online, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry. This is perfect for attorneys licensed in multiple jurisdictions or for attorneys that have fulfilled their CLE requirement but need to access resourceful information for their practice areas.
Our Team Account subscription service is for legal teams of four or more attorneys. Each attorney is granted unlimited access to high quality, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry along with administrative access to easily manage CLE for the entire team.
Gain access to some of the most knowledgeable and experienced attorneys with our 2 bundle options! Our Compliance bundles are curated by CLE Counselors and include current legal topics and challenges within the industry. Our second option allows you to build your bundle and strategically select the content that pertains to your needs. Both options are priced the same.
