Some of my friends grow lovely flowers and others sew beautiful quilts.
I would rather curl up with a book than plant a flower.
I neither sew nor grow.
I think it’s good that we are not all alike. Diversity is a good thing.
Still, every morning, looking out my kitchen window, I delight in the diverse assortment of beautiful flowering plants in my neighbor’s gorgeous yard.
The thing that impresses me most about flowers is their diversity. Research reveals that there are over 400,000 plant species in the world. That’s more than the number of bird, butterfly and bee species, combined!
These days, turning on my TV, as I watch marchers in support of racial diversity, I’m reminded of the diversity of flowers, birds, trees and everything else God has made. He does love diversity.
I’m also reminded of a conversation I had a long time ago with our young son, Daniel, as I tucked him into bed one night.
Although Daniel’s experience with racial diversity was limited to the people on his paper route, we talked about the different kinds of people in the world. Like they sang about in Sunday School – “All the children of the world – red and yellow, black and white. All are precious in His sight.”
I later wrote a poem for a class I was taking at Illinois Valley Community College. It goes like this:
I sat one night upon your bed,
at the close of a busy day.
We laughed and talked of many things,
Before we knelt to pray.
Kinds and colors you might see.
“God likes variety,” I guess, I answered patiently.
I’ve often thought of what you said,
That night I sat upon your bed.
Everyone thinks everyone else is IRREGULAR.
When I view my neighbor’s flowers, I’m reminded that the Creator God loves variety. A garden with only one kind of flower would lack the wonder and beauty that HE intended.
Surely this is true of people too.
And all should be celebrated!
CAROLE LEDBETTER is a native Ottawan, author of two books and a speaker consultant for Stonecroft Ministries. She can be reached at tsloup@shawmedia.com.
