Take the tense moment between John Dutton and Jamie, for example. Despite previous betrayals, Jamie tells his father "Trust me," before heading into a meeting with the governor and attorney general to discuss the ways John abused his position to rescue his grandson from the Beck brothers . The meeting doesn't go as the Duttons had hoped, forcing John to resign as commissioner. Initially, he asks Kayce to take over his position, but he turns it down given the recent events with his son, Tate. Beth, who normally does everything in her power to go against Jamie, urges her father to give him the position to help them stake a claim on their land. To appease his daughter, John gives Jamie a second-chance as the ranch's commissioner, but warns him that "if you betray me again, you're dead to me." Kayce, on the other hand, remains in John's good graces, even though he feels he let his father down by not taking the commissioner job.
Family drama aside, the rest of the episode tackles the main question at hand: What's going on with Dutton family ranch ? Even though the Beck brothers are out of the picture, John and Thomas Rainwater still have a common enemy looking to take over their land. This season, their rival is Roarke Morris, played by newcomer Josh Holloway — and they won't let him get his way.
Although the episode threw a few curve balls — Beth's run-in with Roarke Morris , mainly — it stayed true to what we've seen in previous years.
Some Yellowstone viewers were hoping for more.
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
Low key disappointed in the season premiere of #YellowstoneTV 😭 guess I was expecting them to start with a bang! Excited for the season though! #Yellowstone #DuttonRanch
— ashley (@ashley_grana2) June 22, 2020
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
First episode of @Yellowstone was pretty vanilla per last season, but they sure set us up for a lot to come #YellowstoneTV
— BTR (@eihcirekalb) June 22, 2020
Others felt like the frequent commercial breaks got in the way of the show's flow.
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
Anyone else feel they got robbed tonight? 20 mins of show w/ 40 mins commercials. #letdown #YellowstoneTV #Season3 #Premier I hope it gets better & less interruptions so we can actually emotionally invest in the show
— Hatz (@hatrat) June 22, 2020
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
#YellowstoneTV .  Anxiously waited for S#3 - but the limited commercial interruptions was a miss!  Too many!  A few cute moments but was a disappointment. Will tune in next week as we’re faithful fans and know it will get better. #WelcomeBackYellowstone . We missed you
— WomanRancher (@AbbysMaster) June 22, 2020
But overall, many fans are excited to see how the show unfolds and if they'll finally get answers to their most-asked questions, including why Beth hates Jamie so much.
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
Man...that first episode of @Yellowstone was incredible. The land is so beautiful. So good to see Beth again. I can’t wait to see what happened years ago with her and Jamie and why she hates him so much. #YellowstoneTV #Yellowstone #BethDutton
— Korrey Blount (@KoKoBagginz) June 22, 2020
No matter where you stand after watching the season premiere, keep in mind that the show's newest addition Josh Holloway warns that season 3 will have a gradual build: "Expect a beautiful opening to a slow burn to a crashing, wild finale." Wes Bentley , who plays Jamie, promises that the season will address top questions, but "the answers eventually lead to even more questions." So, it looks like we're in for a wild ride, and it's only the beginning.
This content is imported from {embed-name}. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
Amanda Garrity Associate Lifestyle Editor As the Associate Lifestyle Editor for GoodHousekeeping.com, Amanda oversees gift guides and covers home, holidays, food, and other lifestyle news.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
