Farmers load soybeans from a grain bin onto a truck.
American farmers, particularly soybean farmers, have been whacked by the US-China trade war.
Soybeans were a huge export from the US to China, but tariffs were imposed by Beijing on American goods, including the crop.
But now a combination of factors leading to lower soybean supplies, including bad weather and a potential easing of tensions between the US and China, could boost their fortunes.
Sal Gilbertie is the president, CEO, chief investment officer, and founder of Teucrium Trading.
A continued media theme throughout the trade war is the supposed devastation hitting the US farm belt from a drop in Chinese demand for American farm goods. In turn, this has sparked warnings that political support for President Donald Trump is fading faster in the region than a mountain sunset.
But new data shows that things may be turning around for the farm belt, which could be a good sign for the president.
There has been almost no news coverage of a remarkable occurrence: More than half of projected US soybean inventories have disappeared since June. While worries about the soybean market have been prevalent, there has been almost no news coverage of the sudden decline in projected soybean inventories.
Since June, the US government's estimate for the amount of surplus soybeans, or carryout, that will be left over this crop year — released in the World Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates report — has dropped 55%. A lower carryout, either from lower supply or increased demand, would help drive up the price of soybeans and relieve some of the pressure on farmers.
What's more, the latest carryout estimate, announced on November 8, seemed to confirm the new, much-lower level of expected soybean carryout versus what was expected less than six months ago.
This turnabout for farmers is being driven by two things: increasing global demand for soybeans and declining global soybean inventories and production.
China had long been the No. 1 buyer of US soybeans before exports dropped precipitously when the trade spat began in 2018. But the demand shortfall that caused pain for US farmers now seems to be coming around. In fact, the US has exported more soybeans this crop year, which started on September 1, than it had last year at this same point in time. Total global soybean demand is projected to rebound this year, which is helping to drive US soybean exports higher.
China has continued to purchase US soybeans during the trade war, and the anticipated partial resolution to the US-China trade war could increase both global soybean demand and demand for US soybean exports to China.
Increased soybean exports, led by a resumption of Chinese buying, could be good news for US farmers who faced the loss of Chinese export markets for soybeans at the commencement of the trade war.
On the other end of the dropping-soybean-inventory equation is the drop in supply because of weather.
In the spring, US farmers were hit with bad weather across the farm belt that prevented or delayed planting. This delay marked the beginning of the US Department of Agriculture's monthly drop in the soybean-supply estimates. Late planting this year also means US soybeans may not have had enough time to fully mature before harvest.
These combined factors have helped drive down the USDA's estimate of ending inventories to 475 million bushels, down 55% from its peak estimate of 1.04 billion bushels in June. Similarly, projections for total global soybean ending stocks have also fallen by over 15% since June .
Such dramatic decreases in ending inventories could eventually prompt a price response in soybean markets around the world, which, in turn, could directly benefit farmers and give a much-desired boost to the US farm-belt economy. Farmers have already received support payments from the government for their trade-war woes. These payments seem to have buffered political damage to the president thus far.
But higher soybean prices will enable farmers to sell their existing inventories at better prices than were anticipated when the support payments were made, which should put even more money directly into farmers' pockets.
It is no stretch of the imagination to assume that more money for farmers will mean more farm-belt support for Trump in the voting booth next November. In short, lower soybean inventories may raise soybean prices, raising Trump's reelection hopes along with them.
It is clearly in the president's best interest to facilitate a partial trade agreement between the US and China because if a deal were consummated, its effects would be felt around the world, perhaps most importantly in the US farm belt and in the 2020 presidential election.
Sal Gilbertie, president, CEO, chief investment officer, and founder of Teucrium, brings deep experience in commodities markets, particularly in the areas of trading and liquidity, providing insights that enable him to design exchange-traded products (ETPs) for a variety of investors.
Disclosure: Gilbertie is the CEO of Teucrium Trading LLC, the sponsor of the Teucrium CORN Fund ETP (NYSE Ticker "CORN"), the Teucrium SOYBEAN Fund ETP (NYSE Ticker "SOYB") and other agricultural ETPs listed on the NYSE. He often holds in his portfolio his own funds along with other agricultural ETP products and agriculturally related securities.
This is an opinion column. The thoughts expressed are those of the author(s).
Read the original article on Opinion Contributor . Copyright 2019.
