Analysts discount trade war, swine fever impact on UPL, stock recovers
Historically, UPL has a strong growth profile in LatAm in times of crisis, led by market share gains.
On the debt side, UPL faces no redemption pressure.
Mumbai: Shares of UPL NSE 0.92 % , the producer of crop protection products, recovered on Friday after analysts said the company will not be impacted much because of the trade tensions and an outbreak of African swine fever .
Shares of agrochemical major fell 8.5 per cent on Thursday over concerns of lower exports to Latin America due to trade tensions between the US and China and events such as the spread of African swine fever, which could impact soybean demand in China. However the near-term impact of these events should be non-material, according to analysts.
“Trade tensions could cause pesticides imported from China to become expensive in the US due to higher tariffs, potentially benefiting glufosinate-based products, which would be a positive for UPL’s herbicide portfolio in US,” said Saurabh Jain, analyst, HSBC Securities. “UPL derives 35 per cent of its revenues from LatAm and we would expect the impact of lower China demand to be non-material.”
The UPL stock, which has surged 38 per cent since January 1 to a high of Rs 1,034 on June 11, declined 13 per cent in the last three trading sessions before closing at Rs 890.50 on Friday, up 2.5 per cent over the previous close.
Historically, UPL has a strong growth profile in LatAm in times of crisis, led by market share gains. Thus, lower prices could be a silver lining given farmers’ preference for high quality and low priced products, where UPL has an advantage, analysts said.
“US-China trade war concerns are overblown while African swine fever in China is expected to have limited impact on Brazil’s soybean acreages and pesticide volumes,” said Lakshminarayana Ganti, co-head of research, SBICap Securities. “UPL’s diversified business model across geographies, crops and products shields it well from exogenous shocks.”
On the debt side, UPL faces no redemption pressure. All debt has been denominated in the dollar. The $3-billion acquisition debt carries interest of L+160 bps and has a 5-year bullet repayment in January 2024. It only has a $200 million loan repayment due in FY21.
Analysts believe UPL is in a comfortable situation to easily prepay Rs 3,500-crore debt in FY20 and FY21 each, as per management guidance.
“Debt/EBITDA should come down from 4.2x in FY19 to 2.4x in FY21, within the 2.25-2.5x covenant of rating agencies and our conservative estimates of synergies of $150 million in FY20 and $225 million in FY21 should be be sufficient to repay the interest on acquisition debt,” said Ganti of SBICap Securities.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
