New Delhi — Soybean output for Argentina — world's third largest soy producer and exporter — is forecast at 54.5 million mt, up 3% on previous estimates in 2019-20 crop year (November-October), on good crop conditions across the country, a Buenos Aires Grains Exchange report said Thursday.
Of the projected planted area of 17.4 million hectares for the 2019-20, 96% of the soybean crops were in good conditions, the report said.
A higher Argentinian soybean output projection could put further pressure on global soybean prices, which are already reeling from a global economic slowdown as well as coronavirus and African swine fever outbreaks in China, world's largest soy importer, market sources said.
According to S&P Global Platts, SOYBEX FOB Santos for April loading was assessed at $347.24/mt February 21, down 1.5% month on month, while SOYBEX FOB New Orleans for April was determined at $349.80/mt February 26, down 1% month on month.
The Latin American nation is projected to export 8.2 million mt of soybeans in 2019-20, down 10% on the year, the USDA said in its latest world agricultural supply-and-demand estimates. The country's soybean meal exports are forecast at 30.85 million mt, up 10%, while soybean oil shipment are projected at 6 million mt, up 14% year on year.
But the market holds a bearish outlook toward Argentinian soybean complex exports.
The rumored hike on export tariffs for soybean and its complex in Argentina — the world's biggest seller of processed soybean meal and oil — could lead to hoardings by soy farmers and traders and negatively affect exports, sources said.
The Argentinian government, headed by President Alberto Fernández, hiked the export tariffs on the soybean complex 6 percentage points to 30% when it took charge in December. The Fernández government has been contemplating a further 3 percentage point rise in export taxes to 33%.
To put the struggling economy back on track and bring in much-needed US dollar revenue, the new government increased taxes on agricultural exports, car sales, and foreign currency purchases in December, a source said.
Argentina's farming sector earns more than 50% of the nation's export revenue and thus is the prime target for tough fiscal measures, sources said.
"The export tariffs in Argentina have always been a big issue, but their economy needs that revenue desperately," said Peter Meyer, head of oilseed and grain analytics at S&P Global Platts.
To continue reading you must login or register with us.
It’s free and easy to do. Please use the button below and we will bring you back here when complete.
