The decrease in activity is partly due to the Lunar New Year. However, since people are concerned about the food supply and pork is a large portion of the Chinese diet, the unknown outlook for the virus will probably lead to lower demand. With soybeans being a key food source for pigs this would further dampen U.S. exports even with the Phase One trade deal.
Depending on how long the virus impacts the population and how widespread travel bans are imposed, it would not surprise me to see the Chinese government say to the Trump administration that they won’t be able to make the Phase One 2020’s goals. And not just the agricultural ones but all of them.
When you add in the African Swine Flu outbreak in China leading to millions of pigs being slaughtered to try and contain it, the Wuhan coronavirus adds another horrible break on U.S. farmers.
Soybeans used to account for over half of U.S. ag exports to China
In calendar 2017 the U.S. exported $24 billion in agricultural products to China. Of that total $12.2 billion was soybeans or just over 50%. Soybean exports to China fell 75% to $3.1 billion in 2018 after President Trump started the trade war in April that year.
Chad Bown, senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, has done an analysis of the overall Phase One trade deal and the four sub-targets. His analysis of the agricultural sub-target shows that it will be extremely difficult for China to import enough to hit the increases outlined in the agreement. This is extremely critical since soybeans have been the majority of U.S. agricultural exports to China.
Agricultural exports needed for U.S. China Phase One deal
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Chad Bown
I provide independent research of technology companies and was previously one of two analysts that determined the technology holdings for Atlantic Trust (Invesco's high net worth group), a firm with $15 billion under management. Before joining Atlantic Trust I was the Internet Security Software analyst for Smith Barney (where I authored the most comprehensive industry report “Internet Security Software: The Ultimate Internet Infrastructure”) and an Enterprise Server Hardware analyst at Salomon Brothers. Prior to becoming an equity analyst, I spent 16 years at IBM in a variety of sales and manufacturing positions. I have a B.S. in Industrial Engineering from Stanford University and a Postgraduate Diploma in Economics from the University of Sussex, England.
