Expanded Product Pipeline to Nine Crops and 14 Projects Under Development, Compared to Five Crops and Six Projects Under Development One Year Ago
Management to Host Conference Call Today at 8:30 a.m. EST
ROSEVILLE, Minn.--( BUSINESS WIRE )-- Calyxt, Inc. (NASDAQ: CLXT), a plant-based technology company, has reported its financial results for the fourth quarter and full year ended December 31, 2019.
Fourth quarter revenue increased to $3.8 million driven entirely by increased sales volumes of high oleic (HO) soybean oil and soybean meal.
Net cash used in the fourth quarter was $7.9 million, reflecting savings and efficiencies over previously announced financial guidance of $3.0 million to $3.25 million per month of net cash used.
Revenue for 2019 increased to $7.3 million driven by the launch of HO soybean oil and soybean meal. As of December 31, 2019, all the HO soybean meal produced from the 18,000 acres harvested in 2018 has been sold.
Net cash used in 2019 was $35.3 million, compared to $18.4 million in 2018 excluding the benefit from our May 2018 follow-on capital raise. The commercialization of our HO soybean products, including investment in personnel and purchases of grain, drove the increase in cash used year over year.
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $58.6 million as of December 31, 2019.
Operational savings reflect a cash runway into mid-2021.
Product development efforts are focused on:
People: health and wellness benefits, including better tasting plant proteins, gluten free alternatives, heart health, higher fiber, and reduced allergens
Expanded R&D pipeline to 14 product candidates, comprised of three product candidates in Phase 2 and eleven product candidates in Phase I or Discovery.
We expect to launch at least six product candidates from now through 2024, including our hemp product candidate in 2020, our alfalfa product in 2021 through our collaboration with S&W Seed Company (NASDAQ: SANW), our high fiber wheat product candidate as early as 2022, and four additional product candidates either via our integrated business model or in collaboration with third parties.
The first product from our new hemp breeding program is set for commercial launch in the second quarter of 2020. This product leverages our plant breeding expertise as no gene editing was required to make the valued crop improvement.
Achieved several R&D improvements including:
50 percent improvement in the assembly time to make a new TALEN® construct, improving our capacity to make new types of plant edits
Cut the cycle time necessary to develop an edited plant in half, further accelerating development progress
Enhanced robust patent estate to approximately 70 patent families comprised of approximately 300 patents and over 100 patent applications. These are comprised of owned and in-licensed assets across gene editing tools, enabling technologies, product concepts, and germplasm varieties.
Received a series of purchase orders for future deliveries of our HO soybean oil to be used as a plant-based alternative to synthetic fluids. These orders, which are subject to industry-standard trading rules for soybean oil, are from a new, world-class customer that operates in all four premium oil target market segments: foodservice, food ingredients, industrial, and animal nutrition.
Added another top-tier U.S. foodservice distributor, brought on multiple restaurant chains, and expanded geographically in the Midwest and Southeast.
Expected to have 25 percent share of all HO soybean acres in the United States in 2020, nearly tripling planted acres from 2019 and exceeding goal of doubling acres annually. Market share gains are driven by expansion of distribution into Iowa, Nebraska, and Kansas, giving Calyxt access to 45 percent of the soybean acres in the United States.
Further strengthened scientific and operations teams to support commercial growth opportunities with the appointments of:
Agribusiness veteran Vince Restucci as Vice President of Agronomy Services, and effective in early February 2020, he also leads supply chain and commercial seed production
Scientific talent Bobby Williams, Ph.D. as Director of Gene Editing to further expand innovation, product pipeline, and trait discovery efforts as well as inform product advancement decisions
We established ESG guiding principles and, going forward, expect to develop and report on our ESG accomplishments as much of our innovation is focused in this area.
Built and strengthened leadership, scientific, and operations teams to support commercial growth opportunities with the appointments of:
Completed end-to-end supply chain to enable soybean crushing at scale.
“2019 was a transformative year for Calyxt, centered around four major achievements: first, we built the team to execute on our technology-focused business plan; second, we transformed our R&D team and its work systems; third, we established our soybean supply chain to support our growth trajectory and our future wheat product launch; and fourth, we were the first company to commercialize a gene edited food product focused on consumer health, right here in the United States,” said Jim Blome, Chief Executive Officer of Calyxt.
“The commercialization of our HO soybean products serves as proof of concept and sets the stage for future growth. We intend to introduce new products leveraging a capital-light business model while monetizing multiple collaboration projects. Collaboration revenues are expected to be highly accretive to our current gross margins. We also intend to begin optimizing our soybean gross margins in 2020. We have proven to the world that TALEN® technology, which powers our innovation platform, is capable of improving plants, enabling us to bring healthier and more sustainable products to market.”
“We have assembled an industry-leading team across all our major functions. We have energized the organization and revitalized our product pipeline, more than doubling the projects now under development compared to this time a year ago. We are focused on delivering high value projects to the market,” continued Blome.
“Our HO soybean oil has a robust sales funnel and is being tested by multiple customers. The oil orders we received in early 2020 are a validation of our HO soybean oil’s capability and performance. To meet the expected demand for our oil, we nearly tripled our contracted soybean acreage compared to 2019 planting and expect to have a 25 percent market share of all HO soybean acres planted in the United States in 2020.”
“All of this sets the stage for a breakthrough 2020, where we expect to power our R&D pipeline with new projects and tools, as well as enhanced processes, initiate consultations with regulatory authorities, and continue to make stage advancements in our development process. We expect to begin selling hemp plants we produced using traditional plant breeding techniques. This will be the launch of our second product, and our first of several expected innovations from Calyxt in hemp. What excites me most about this launch is that our scientific team was presented with a challenge in hemp and was able to develop a solution – including a strategy, tools, and work processes – in just a few short months, demonstrating the power of our team. Specific to our soybean products, we expect to expand our customer base across our prioritized market segments, realize synergies in our supply chain, and improve our gross margin profile. We also expect to develop metrics and report on our ESG accomplishments, as much of our innovation is focused in this area as we aggressively push our efforts to revolutionize agriculture.”
“I look forward to providing an update on our technology and R&D pipeline during our upcoming analyst day in the second quarter, and our CFO, Bill Koschak, will be sharing our story with institutional investors at the upcoming 32nd Annual ROTH Conference in Orange County, California on March 16th,” concluded Blome.
Revenue increased to $3.8 million, entirely from increased sales volumes of HO soybean oil and soybean meal. HO soybean oil revenue represented 32 percent of total revenue in the period.
Cost of goods sold increased to $5.4 million, reflecting the cost of product sold in the period.
Gross margin as reported decreased $1.7 million, reflecting the higher costs we have experienced at this early stage of commercialization of our HO soybean products. Gross margin, as adjusted, a non-GAAP measure, was negative $1.6 million, or 43 percent, as compared to negative $1.7 million, or 44 percent, as reported under GAAP. See below under the heading “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Information” for a discussion of gross margin, as adjusted, and a reconciliation to gross margin, the most comparable GAAP measure.
R&D expenses were $3.7 million, compared to $2.5 million in the fourth quarter of 2018. The increase in R&D expenses is primarily due to $1.3 million of higher non-cash stock compensation expenses, $0.3 million of additional personnel costs, and $0.2 million of incremental lab supplies and outsourcing costs. These increases were partially offset by a $1.2 million decrease in grain costs expensed as R&D in 2018.
Selling and supply chain (S&SC) expenses were $1.7 million, compared to $0.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2018. The increase in S&SC expenses was driven by $0.4 million of additional personnel costs, $0.3 million incremental allocated expenses for facilities and information technology expenses, and $0.2 million of higher non-cash stock compensation expenses, all the result of our commercialization and acreage expansion in 2019 and 2020.
General and administrative (G&A) expenses were $4.7 million, compared to $5.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2018. The decrease was driven by $0.3 million of lower non-cash stock compensation expenses and $0.3 million of lower Section 16 officer transition expenses. Other increases in personnel costs and professional services expenses were partially offset by the benefit of internalizing certain services previously provided by Cellectis, our majority stockholder.
Net cash used was $7.9 million, compared to $6.6 million in the fourth quarter of 2018, reflecting the increase in personnel year-over-year, higher non-cash stock compensation expense, and the commercialization of HO soybean products.
Net loss was $12.2 million, or $(0.37) per basic and diluted share, compared to a net loss of $8.5 million, or $(0.27) per basic and diluted share for the fourth quarter of 2018.
Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, increased to a loss of $8.7 million in the fourth quarter 2019 compared to a loss of $5.5 million in the fourth quarter of 2018 driven by increased personnel costs, as the costs of commercialization in 2019 were largely offset by reductions in grain costs expensed as R&D in 2018. See below under the heading “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Information” for a discussion of adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation to net loss, the most comparable GAAP measure.
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $58.6 million as of December 31, 2019.
Revenue increased to $7.3 million, entirely from increased sales volumes of HO soybean oil and soybean meal following the commercialization of these products in early 2019. During 2019, Calyxt generated $1.7 million of HO soybean oil revenue. We sold all our HO soybean meal production in the year, totaling $5.6 million in revenue.
Cost of goods sold increased to $9.3 million, reflecting the cost of product sold in the period and an $869,000 valuation reserve against inventories.
Gross margin as reported decreased $2.2 million, reflecting the higher costs we have experienced at this early stage of commercialization of our HO soybean products. Gross margin, as adjusted, a non-GAAP measure, was negative $4.5 million, or 61 percent, as compared to negative $2.0 million, or 27 percent, as reported under GAAP. See below under the heading “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Information” for a discussion of gross margin, as adjusted, and a reconciliation to gross margin, the most comparable GAAP measure.
R&D expenses were $12.2 million, compared to $10.4 million in 2018. The increase in R&D expenses is primarily due to $1.6 million of higher non-cash stock compensation expenses, $1.4 million of additional personnel costs, $0.7 million of incremental lab supplies and outsourcing costs, and $0.6 million from the reversal of payroll tax benefits that are no longer realizable. These increases were partially offset by a $3.3 million decrease in grain costs expensed as R&D in 2018.
S&SC expenses were $5.2 million, compared to $2.4 million in 2018. The increase in S&SC expenses was driven by $1.2 million of additional personnel costs, $0.9 million incremental allocated expenses for facilities and information technology expenses, and $0.4 million of higher non-cash stock compensation expenses, all the result of our commercialization and acreage expansion in 2019 and 2020.
G&A expenses were $19.0 million, compared to $13.4 million in 2018. The increase was driven by $2.9 million of higher non-cash stock compensation expenses, $2.6 million of additional personnel costs, and $1.0 million of incremental professional services expenses. The increases in personnel costs and professional services expenses are partially offset by the benefit of internalizing certain services previously provided by Cellectis.
Net cash used in 2019 was $35.3 million, compared to a use of $18.4 million in 2018, excluding the benefit from the May 2018 follow-on capital raise. The commercialization of HO soybean products, including investment in personnel and purchases of grain, drove the increase in cash used in the year.
Net loss was $39.6 million, or $(1.21) per basic and diluted share, compared to a net loss of $27.9 million, or $(0.91) per basic and diluted share, in 2018.
Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, increased to a loss of $29.8 million in 2019 compared to a loss of $18.9 million in 2018 driven by increased personnel costs, as the costs of commercialization in 2019 were largely offset by reductions in grain costs expensed as R&D in a prior period. See below under the heading “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Information” for a discussion of adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation to net loss, the most comparable GAAP measure.
“We maintained our cash usage trajectory throughout 2019, while building out infrastructure to support the robust growth in our soybean business,” added Bill Koschak, Chief Financial Officer of Calyxt. “With investment in our corporate infrastructure, we are set to scale operations in 2020 – both in terms of finalizing new collaborations and increased sales volumes of our soybean products. Going forward we continue to see high revenue growth and an improved margin profile as we continue to bring new products to market leveraging our proprietary gene-editing technology.”
“Looking forward into 2020, we expect to continue our cash usage rate in line with what we delivered in 2019. I expect that our cash position will be sufficient to fund operations into mid-2021,” concluded Koschak.
Calyxt, Inc. will hold a conference call today at 8:30 a.m. Eastern time to discuss its results for the fourth quarter and full year ended December 31, 2019. Chief Executive Officer Jim Blome, Chief Financial Officer Bill Koschak and Chief Science Officer Dan Voytas will host the conference call, which will be accompanied by a presentation and followed by a question and answer session.
To access the call, please use the following information:
