A Huawei retail store in Beijing. Huawei gets a breather from the Department of Commerce's so-called ... [+] entity list ahead of USTR Robert Lighthizer’s visit to China next week.
The soy-for-Huawei deal comes on the heels of another China visit by U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer, who is off to Shanghai on Monday. The X-Trackers China CSI-300, better known as the China A-shares ETF (ASHR), was up half a percent in early morning trading.
Only disastrous testimony from former Special Counsel Robert Mueller would pull stocks lower today. Mueller was called in by Democrats to explain his report on Russia and the Trump campaign.
The Lighthizer trip was expected, so another reason for the uptick in stocks today can be tied to the number of companies still beating earnings, says Dan Russo, market analyst for Chaikin Analytics. “Earnings estimates remain elevated and comments suggest that domestic demand remains strong despite a slowdown globally,” he says.
Tariffs have not pulled the rug out from under the U.S.
More soy purchases are good news for U.S. agribusiness, though this should be considered short term. A lot is riding on Washington’s position related to Huawei.
In other China-U.S. business news, tech giant Alibaba said today that U.S. businesses will be allowed to sell to Chinese buyers on their B2B e-commerce website, a plus for American brands in hot demand in mainland China.
Many Western consumer brands sell via the Alibaba’s Tmall e-commerce website, but Alibaba would be a bigger deal for companies selling big ticket items to other businesses.
“The olive branches have been extended so lets hope something can get done (on trade),” says Brendan Ahern, chief investment officer for KraneShares, an ETF company investing in China.
The U.S. China trade war is having on impact on global growth, a growth rate which the International Monetary Fund keeps lowering. It’s now at 3.2% after being 3.3%.
An investor smiles in front of the stock price monitor a Shanghai brokerage firm. China stocks rose ... [+] today on news of a Huawei-for-soy deal and pending trade talks next week.
Overall, Asian markets were generally happy about Lighthizer’s visit.
“If I was a hedge fund, I would be long China internet and short U.S. internet just on the valuation disparity,” says Ahern. He says the Department of Justice’s inquiry into tech companies could be a headwind for Japan and South Korean computer components manufacturers, adding that China tech company earnings may yet surprise to the upside due to government spending.
Premier Li Keqiang was in Shanghai yesterday visiting private companies and talking up the need for more “opening up,” the China phrase for more capitalism, less communism.
Tariff threats on all China goods remain on the table. Washington and Beijing tend to extend olive branches like this Huawei-for-soy arrangement prior to new negotiation rounds.
Still, the 3 million ton soy purchase—first reported by Bloomberg—is only a reciprocal gesture. China would have to increase that more than threefold to make up for last year. And China will only do that if Huawei is allowed to import American computer hardware.
