China open to 'partial trade deal' with US, as tensions rise – as it happened
Rolling coverage of the latest economic and financial news, as hopes of a trade war breakthrough this week grip markets
Shipping containers from China and other Asian countries being unloaded at the Port of Los Angeles.
Finally, European stock markets have shrugged off this morning’s pessimism, closing higher tonight.
The FTSE 100 has finished 23 points higher at 7,166, up 0.3%.
Fiona Cincotta of City Index says hopes of a limited trade deal lifted equities:
Traders breathed a sigh of relief that there were no more negative headlines ahead of the US – Sino trade talks, due to start tomorrow. With the Trump administration blacklisting 28 Chinese tech firms and limiting Chinese officials visa the talks had looked destined to fail even before they had begun. However, more recently this afternoon, reports are circulating that China is still interested in achieving a deal, just a much more limited deal and on the condition that no more tariffs are imposed by Trump.
This would not be the broad trade agreement that could put an end to the trade dispute; optimism for such a deal is running low. However, the markets would accept a limited deal as a significant improvement from the current situation. But let’s not forget we have been here many times before, where the markets are optimistic of progress only to be disappointed.
Here’s our news story on the rescue of Thomas Cook’s retail arm by Hays Travel, the Just Go Travel operator:
Just in: the number of vacancies across the US economy has dropped.
According to the JOLTs survey, there were 7.051 million job openings in America in August. That’s down from 7.17m in July, and weaker than the 7.19m expected.
July’s figures has been revised down from 7.21 million, which also indicates the US labour market isn’t as strong as thought.
[RTRS] - U.S. JOLTS JOB OPENINGS 7.051 MLN IN AUG (PREV 7.174 MLN) - LABOR DEPT very weak number...
Wall Street has opened higher, as investors cling onto reports that China is open to a ‘partial trade deal’.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 186 points, or around 0.7% at the open, recovering some of Tuesday’s 314-point losses.
Investors are still edgy, though, given the recent deterioration in relations between the US and China.
Vincent Mivelaz of Swissquote predicts tense negotiations when the two sides sit down in Washington tomorrow.
On the trade front, it seems that ministerial negotiations are expected to be tense following the latest announcement by the State Department to restrict visas to certain Chinese officials while prohibiting Chinese AI companies from buying products from US companies without prior approval from the US government.
European markets are also up in afternoon trading:
The oil price is rising sharply, as Turkey announces it has begun military action in Syria.
Brent crude has jumped by 1.6%, to $59.18 per barrel.
The move has been expected since Donald Trump announced he was withdrawing forces from the Turkey-Syria border, and could lead to fresh military clashes in the region.
Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has tweeted that the operation, called Spring of Peace, will target two Kurdish groups -- the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and the People’s Protection Units (YPG), along with Daesh (or ISIS).
The Turkish Armed Forces, together with the Syrian National Army, just launched #OperationPeaceSpring against PKK/YPG and Daesh terrorists in northern Syria. Our mission is to prevent the creation of a terror corridor across our southern border, and to bring peace to the area.
#OperationPeaceSpring will neutralize terror threats against Turkey and lead to the establishment of a safe zone, facilitating the return of Syrian refugees to their homes.
We will preserve Syria’s territorial integrity and liberate local communities from terrorists.
The Syrian Democratic Forces, the Kurdish-led militia, has reported that Turkey has begun air strikes on civilian areas -- here’s their head of press:
Turkish warplanes have started to carry out airstrikes on civilian areas. There is a huge panic among people of the region.
