Deere sells tractors and other equipment for farming—considered crop inputs.
Stock in tractor maker Deere is down about 4.4% year to date. What’s more, shares are up only about 7% over the past year, trailing behind comparable gains of the S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average .
Investors can blame the weather.
Deere (ticker: DE) sells crop inputs to farmers—even a tractor is a farming input—and 2019 was a strange year in the corn belt. For starters, a wet Spring delayed U.S. crop planting. And the U.S.-China trade war impacted U.S. agricultural export volumes. The federal government stepped in, offering subsidies to farmers to offset trade war impacts, but it isn’t clear whether farmers spent the aid or chose to save it for a rainy day.
Deere, despite the headwinds , improved its earnings in its 2019 fiscal year , from $9.39 in 2018 to $9.94. Deere’s financial year ends in October, about the time the U.S. harvest is in the barns.
Looking into fiscal year 2020, management issued guidance calling for about $2.9 billion in net income, down from about $3.3 billion. Fiscal year 2020 is shaping up to be a tough year. That creates a problem for investors. The company is expected to earn more than $9 a share, not bad, but people usually prefer to buy stocks when earnings are growing.
Barron’s brings retirement planning and advice to you in a weekly wrap-up of our articles about preparing for life after work.
Deere reports fiscal first-quarter earnings Friday morning before the market opens. It is a piece of Deere’s 2020 earnings puzzle. Here’s what to expect, along with some recent history.
Wall Street expects the company to earn $1.27 a share from $6.2 billion in sales.
The first quarter is seasonally light for Deere. Analysts, for instance, predict the company will generate $9.3 billion in sales during its fiscal second quarter.
Any guidance updates will be important for investors. But it is still early and there is no guarantee the $2.7 billion to $3.1 billion range in 2020 net income will be updated.
The company, in addition to full-year earnings guidance, also predicted its finance arm would earn $600 million in full-year operating profit. Investors will want to see that Deere’s finance credit metrics—such as reserves for credit losses—aren’t showing any stress. Deere credit is a sign that U.S. farmers are healthy, financially speaking.
Investors, of course, will also focus on the U.S. crop outlook. Things aren’t looking great. “The fundamentals facing U.S. farmers remain weak with corn and soybean prices down [about] 20% and [about] 8%, respectively, from recent highs,” J.P. Morgan analyst Ann Duignan wrote in a Tuesday research report. “Additionally, the U.S. dollar continues to strengthen—especially against the Real—just as Brazil’s farmers are harvesting what is expected to be a record soybean crop, making U.S. soybean exports less competitive.”
Like the U.S., Brazil is a huge exporter of agricultural products, making currency considerations relevant for Deere earnings.
Duignan, when thinking about Deere stock, appears to be focused on risks such as lower commodity prices. She rates Deere shares the equivalent of Sell and has a $140 price target, about 16% below recent trading levels.
Exports should come up on the call for another reason. Investors will be eager to hear whether the company expects a pickup in Chinese soybean buying in the aftermath of the phase 1 trade deal the U.S. signed with China in January . China is a large importer of agricultural products.
Baird analyst Mig Dobre, like Duignan, acknowledges that U.S. agricultural fundamentals look challenged, but feels better about Deer’s stock. He notes that pricing for used agricultural equipment has firmed up. Used-equipment pricing influences new-equipment pricing. Dobre rates Deere stock the equivalent of Buy and has a $188 target price for shares.
Friday’s earnings report is important, but this year’s earnings will still be heavily influenced by crop fundamentals entering the Spring. There is no escaping the weather. The company scheduled a conference call for analysts and investors beginning at 10 a.m. Eastern time.
Deere Reports Earnings on Friday. Here’s What to Expect.
Stock in tractor makerDeere is down about 4.
