Deere Reports Earnings Tomorrow. Here’s What Wall Street Is Saying.
Baird analyst Mig Dobre said in a quarterly preview report that commodity prices are a headwind for Deere stock.
Iconic American manufacturer John Deere reports earnings before the market opens for trading on Friday. As always, there will be a lot to sift through. Farming is complicated . Trade , energy policy, Covid-19 and, of course, the weather all play big roles in Deere results.
What’s more, the quarter ended in April is a big report for investors in Deere (ticker: DE). Its fiscal second quarter is when sales pick up, as farmers buy equipment needed to plant fields. And as crops get planted and weather patterns take shape, Deere usually has a better sense of yearly earnings. Last year, for instance, Deere cut full-year earnings guidance and the stock dropped almost 8% the day of the report was issued.
With a lot at stake, here’s what Wall Street is watching for, along with some recent history .
Analysts predict Deere will make a profit of $1.72 a share from $7.9 billion in sales. Earnings and sales are expected to drop year over year. Covid-19 is the reason. Despite the drop, new detail about the full year should affect stock performance more than first-quarter numbers did.
Deere had guided the Street to $2.9 billion of net income for 2020, down a little from 2019. But the company also withdrew full-year guidance in March, just as many other companies did.
Baird analyst Mig Dobre notes, in a quarterly preview report, that commodity prices are a headwind for the stock. What’s more, he says peer AGCO (ACO) experienced production challenges in Asia and Europe because of the pandemic. He rates Deere shares the equivalent of Hold and has a $150 price target for the stock.
Stifel analyst Stanley Elliott is a little more bullish than Dobre. He says that North American agricultural demand has held up better than other machinery categories. He also notes the U.S. soybean crop is a little ahead of schedule. Elliott rates Deere shares Buy and has a $184 price target for the stock.
About 80% of the U.S. corn crop is in the ground, on par with the pace of planting over the past couple of years. Soybeans typically get planted a little later. About 53% of the soybean crop has been planted, also on par with the pace of planting over the past couple of years.
BMO analyst Joel Tiss is another Deere bull, rating shares the equivalent of Buy. He has a $150 price target for shares. Tiss agrees with Elliott that demand for agricultural equipment has held up better than other categories of heavy machinery, but worries that low gasoline use—which impacts the demand for ethanol—has hurt farming fundamentals looking into 2021.
Ethanol, a gasoline additive, is made using more than one-third of the U.S. corn crop. Because Covid-19 has resulted in a drop in the number of miles driven , more corn might be available, pushing prices down.
Corn prices, along with other crop prices, are key because they determine farm income. And farm income provides the cash needed to buy Deere products. The USDA also expects farm income to fall about 9% year over year in 2020, from about $120 billion to $109 billion. Falling income isn’t great for Deere earnings, but more than $100 billion is still a good number, historically speaking.
Exclusive data, tables and charts from Barron's Market Lab.
Farmers are planting more corn and soybeans year over year. That has already put some pressure on commodity prices. Corn for delivery in September, after the coming harvest, is down about 25 cents a bushel, or roughly 7%, since the USDA planting intentions report was released around the end of March. September soybean prices have slide about 4% over the same span.
Despite headwinds, Wall Street feels pretty good about the stock. More than 50% of analysts covering the company rate shares the equivalent of Buy, in line with the average Buy-rating ratio for stocks in the Dow. The average analyst price target for Deere shares is about $163.
Deere stock is down more than 20% year to date, worse than comparable drops of the Dow Jones Industrial Average and S&P 500 .
      What’s more, shares trade for about 15 times estimated 2021 earnings, a discount to their historical trading range.
The pandemic is the reason shares are down, but the impact of Covd-19 on farming isn’t clear. Corteva (CTVA) and FMC (FMC) for instance, reported solid calendar first-quarter results. That pair supplies seeds and chemicals farmers use to grow crops. Primary food production has to keep going, no matter what the virus does.
Of course Deere, in addition to being a dominant supplier of farming technology, sells construction equipment. Caterpillar (CAT) sales fell more than expected when it reported first-quarter numbers, but the stock didn’t move. The shares were already off more than 20% year to date.
There’s a lot to watch for on Friday. That is often the case with respect to farming and to Deere.
Deere Reports Earnings Tomorrow. Here’s What Wall Street Is Saying.
Iconic American manufacturer John Deere reports earnings before the market opens for trading on Friday.
