The global Disposable Hemostatic Agents Market size will grow by US$ 520.5 million by 2024 at a CAGR of 6.5% in the given forecast period.
FYI, You will get latest updated report as per the COVID-19 Impact on this industry. Our updated reports will now feature detailed analysis that will help you make critical decisions.
The global Disposable Hemostatic Agents market report provides geographic analysis covering regions, such as North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, and Rest of the World. The Disposable Hemostatic Agents market for each region is further segmented for major countries including the U.S., Canada, Germany, the U.K., France, Italy, China, India, Japan, Brazil, South Africa, and others.
Hemostatic agents are sterile. non-absorbable hemostatic dressing intended to be used to control bleeding within minutes of application by providing an active mechanical barrier to the bleeding site. It plays a major role in preventing uncontrolled hemorrhage during surgical procedures and vascular injuries.
Growth in surgical procedures, technological advancements in surgeries such as robotic surgeries, rising geriatric population and the growing prevalence of chronic conditions along with growth in trauma cases and complex surgeries are projected to boost the global Disposable Hemostatic Agents Market.
The global Disposable Hemostatic Agents market is segregated on the basis of Type as Active Hemostats, Passive Hemostats, and Combination Hemostats. Based on Application the global Disposable Hemostatic Agents market is segmented in General Surgery, Plastic Surgery, Orthopedic Surgery, Neurosurgery, Trauma, and Cardiovascular Surgery. Based on End-User the global Disposable Hemostatic Agents market is segmented in Hospitals, Ambulatory Surgical Centers, and Tactical Combat Casualty Care Centers.
Pfizer, Advanced Medical Solutions, Integra LifeSciences, Equimedical, Vascular Solutions, Z-Medica, Baxter International, The Medicines Company, Anika Therapeutics, Ethicon, and others are among the major players in the global Disposable Hemostatic Agents market. The companies are involved in several growth and expansion strategies to gain a competitive advantage. Industry participants also follow value chain integration with business operations in multiple stages of the value chain.
The Disposable Hemostatic Agents Market has been segmented as below:
