Boris Johnson moved to allay fears of an anti-coronavirus drugs shortage today after Donald Trump bought up almost the entire global supply of remdesivir. The US...
GRAINS-Corn drops to 3-week low, soybeans sink on good…
By Karl Plume CHICAGO, June 23 - U.S. corn futures fell for a second straight session on Tuesday and touched a three-week low after U.S....
BRITNEY Spears showed off her back tattoo as she danced in a sports bra and short shorts to an "inspired" Otis Redding song. The singer...
With rockets bursting in air, New York to lower the…
By Peter Szekely NEW YORK, June 23 - After weeks of bone-shaking explosions and fired-up night skies, New York officials on Tuesday vowed to lower...
Competitive cricket made a welcome return at Emirates Old Trafford as the touring West Indies squad ramped up preparations for next month’s Test series against...
GRAINS-Corn drops to 3-week low, soybeans sink on good…
By Brinkwire on July 2, 2020
CHICAGO, June 23 – U.S. corn futures fell for a second straight session on Tuesday and touched a three-week low after U.S. Department of Agriculture data unexpectedly showed an improvement in U.S. crop conditions.
Soybean prices also eased, despite a decline in the USDA’s weekly crop rating for the oilseed, as the weather outlook remained broadly favorable for U.S. Midwest soy and corn crops after a recent dry spell.
Wheat was mixed on short-covering after prices touched multi-month lows late last week, although improving prospects for northern hemisphere harvests continued to hang over the market.
Chicago Board of Trade July corn futures fell 3-1/4 cents to $3.25 a bushel by 12:33 p.m. CDT (1733 GMT), after earlier dropping to its weakest since June 3. July soybeans were down 1-3/4 cents at $8.74-1/2 a bushel and CBOT July wheat was up 1/2 cent at $4.85-1/2 a bushel.
Selling in corn and soybeans was fueled by recent U.S. crop-boosting rains and expectations that a high-pressure ridge forecast to bring crop-stressing heat next week could be short-lived.
“The weather forecast for the next couple of weeks looks fairly favorable,” said Terry Reilly, senior commodities analyst with Futures International.
The USDA rated 72% of the U.S. corn crop in good to excellent condition in its weekly crop progress report, up 1 percentage point from a week ago. Analysts polled by Reuters had expected a slight decline.
Soybean traders were assessing developments in China after a recent flurry of soybean purchases and news that some Chinese buyers are asking exporters to guarantee shipments are free of the novel coronavirus.
(Additional reporting by Gus Trompiz in Paris and Naveen Thukral in Singapore; editing by Uttaresh.V, Mark Potter and Dan Grebler)
