Essentially, if more people want to buy soybeans than sell them, the price will rise because they are more sought-after (the 'demand' outstrips the 'supply'). On the other hand, if supply is greater than demand, their price will fall.
The US is the biggest producer and exporter of soybeans, with 4.6 billion bushels of soybeans being harvested in 2017-2018.1 As a result, supply shocks such as adverse weather conditions, including hurricanes or drought in key American soybean-producing states, can impact production and thus limit the amount of soybeans available to the global market.
Similar to many other commodities, soybean prices are quoted in US dollars. This means that soybean producers receive lower pay-outs (nominally) for their produce when the US dollar is strong, and more money when the dollar is weak.
Emerging market economies such as India and South Africa need to import increasingly larger amounts of soybeans to satisfy the demands of their already large or growing populations. This increased demand may cause the price of soybean products to rise if supply remains the same in the coming years.
Soybean oil has to compete with a lot of other popular oils on the market including rapeseed, linseed and cottonseed. Demand for these other oils can have an effect on the price and demand for soybean oil.
In order to boost ethanol production, the US government subsidises corn farmers. If the subsidies for corn were to end, more farmers might choose to grow soybeans which would increase supply, and this could bring the price of soybeans down.
The most common way that traders take a position in soybean markets is with a futures contract . Futures contracts enable traders to agree to the delivery of a certain amount of soybeans, soybean oil or soybean meal at a set date in the future for an agreed upon price. However, with a futures contract a trader may have to eventually take delivery of the soybeans. Unless they have adequate storage facilities, this could be problematic.
With IG, you can speculate on the price of a futures contract – without taking ownership of the underlying asset – with a CFD trading account.
Aside from futures, traders can use options to speculate on the price of soybeans. There are two types of options, puts and calls , and both give traders the right but not the obligation to buy or sell an underlying asset before a certain expiry date.
CFDs enable you to make predictions on the price movements of soybean markets without taking ownership of the physical assets themselves. CFDs can act as an effective hedge for your other active positions as they enable you to go short or long to benefit from market declines as well as increases.
When you trade CFDs on soybean markets with IG, you can decide whether to speculate on a spot price, which has no fixed expiry, or a futures contract. This gives you the flexibility to take a short or long-term view of your chosen market and to hedge your other active positions.
