India and the bloc are discussing ways to enhance scope of this agreement.
India's bilateral trade with MERCOSUR was $10 billion in 2015-16 as compared to $14.24 billion in 2014-15.
New Delhi: India on Monday notified imports of 30,000 tonne of crude soya oil from Paraguay at concessional customs duty rate of 10 per cent under a trade agreement.
"TRQ (tariff rate quota) quota for import of 30,000 tonne of crude soya oil from Paraguay under India-Mercosur trade agreement is notified," the Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) said in a notice.
TRQ is a quota for specified volume of exports that enter India at relatively low import duty. After the quota is reached, a higher tariff applies on additional imports.
India has a preferential trade agreement with MERCOSUR, a six-country trade bloc, including Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay. The pact came into existence from June 2009.
India's bilateral trade with MERCOSUR was $10 billion in 2015-16 as compared to $14.24 billion in 2014-15.
Under the pact, both the sides have reduced or eliminated customs duties on certain number of goods traded between them.
India and the bloc are discussing ways to enhance scope of this agreement to further boost trade ties.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
