Recent report on “Aquafeed Market Size by Application, By Types, By Regional Outlook – Global Industry Analysis, Share, Growth, Opportunity, Latest Trends, and Forecast to 2025”.
The report presents a highly comprehensive and accurate research study on the global Aquafeed market. It offers PESTLE analysis, qualitative and quantitative analysis, Porter’s Five Forces analysis, and absolute dollar opportunity analysis to help players improve their business strategies. It also sheds light on critical Aquafeed Market dynamics such as trends and opportunities, drivers, restraints, and challenges to help market participants stay informed and cement a strong position in the industry. With competitive landscape analysis, the authors of the report have made a brilliant attempt to help readers understand important business tactics that leading companies use to maintain Aquafeed market sustainability.
Download Premium Sample Copy Of This Report: Download FREE Sample PDF!
Global Aquafeed market to reach USD 202.7 billion by 2025.
The aqua feed market is anticipated to grow with a CAGR of 9.9% during the forecasted period of 2016-2023.The constant rise in consumption of seafood & rising aquaculture industry is significantly resulting in market growth considering aqua feed across the globe. Aqua feed is mainly utilized to feed omnivorous animals fish like tilapia, common carp, catfish & milkfish and carnivorous fish such as salmon, eel, trout, sea bream and tuna along with crustacean species which includes freshwater prawns, crabs, lobsters and brackish-water shrimps. The Aqua feeds are compounded meals that are prepared from the aquatic animals through mixing various raw materials & additives. These blends are mainly prepared according to the specific requirements of the various species & age of the animal. Aqua feed is on the up surging trend and has become pivotal to aquaculture industry owing to its nutritional, growth promoting properties and immune resistant qualities. The Fishes & crustaceans have been surfaced as the major end users of aqua feed across the globe. In the present scenario, with the escalating need for protein-rich healthy food items, the consumption of fish has enhanced significantly, which in turn consecutively, is compelling aqua culturists to provide them with high-quality aqua feed. The utility of modern feed management techniques along with high awareness levels are the key factors responsible for the high consumption of feed amino acids considering the growing markets such as Asia-Pacific and Europe. Soybean is a significant source of protein for aquafeed& is rich and highly digestible xanthophylls and amino acids. Owing to this they are extensively utilized as key source of protein in the production of aquafeed. On the basis of end user, the fish segment of the aqua feed market accounted for the largest market on the global scenario in the year 2016. The fish is the cheapest &most easily accessible and digestible animal proteins. The rise in fish farming activities along with aquaculture has significantly led to enhancement in demand for fish feed which is further augmenting the growth of aquafeed market in the country.
