BOSTON--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Indigo Ag, Inc., a company dedicated to harnessing nature to help 
      farmers sustainably feed the planet, publicizes recent directional 
      2018/2019 season across the Americas. With the application of machine 
      learning and artificial intelligence to satellite imagery, Indigo 
      for various objectives throughout the season.
Due to the United States government shutdown, most operations within the 
      United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) have been put on hold, 
      and key market reports have been delayed indefinitely. The executive 
      Supply and Demand Estimates (WASDE) report, a comprehensive forecast of 
      crop and livestock supply and demand. Insights from this report are 
      fundamental to informing the global agricultural market, which guides 
In the absence of this information, Indigo is sharing agricultural 
      market data for the Americas gathered by its GeoInnovation unit, whose 
      the United States in mid-season, compared to much lower numbers from the 
      company’s initial estimates late in the winter.
      profitability,” said David Perry, Indigo’s CEO. “With access to the 
      right data, a grower decides which inputs to buy, crops to plant, dates 
      season. As a company that wants to support growers’ independence, Indigo 
      is providing this access to streamlined insights, especially since they 
      decreased by 6.3% and 5.1%, or 7.3 MMT and 4.9MMT, respectively, since 
      downward trend to unevenly distributed dry conditions in the country, 
      resulting from below-average rainfall. In some states, soybeans were 
      disrupted the plants during the crucial pod-filling phase. Indigo’s Crop 
      November and early December, but it is now below ten-year norms for this 
      stage in the season.
      significantly changed since the date of the December USDA report, while 
      season in the country. Of note, Indigo’s models suggest popular sources 
      slightly behind its normal progress over the past decade, but by a 
For soybean and corn yields in the United States, Indigo anticipates 
      final yields below the December 11, 2018 USDA estimates of 52.1 bu/ac 
      for soybeans and 178.9 bu/ac for corn. Indigo’s models have been below 
      both the USDA and market consensus all year, and the company predicts 
      they ultimately close out the season after the government shutdown. 
      Research Partners. “Even better, this data is virtually real-time, 
      rather than the weeks old data in government reports. It can accurately 
      reflect a quickly evolving situation in Brazil, which appears to be 
      experiencing a shrinking crop in recent dry weather. Here in the US, 
David Potere, Head of GeoInnovation at Indigo, said, “The data we are 
      we generate daily. With our living map of the world’s food supply, we 
      the USDA. Democratizing data at critical junctures, such as the 
      Geoffrey von Maltzahn, Indigo’s Co-Founder and Chief Innovation Officer. 
      clarify decisions at planting, harvest, and sale of grain and fiber.”
To learn more about Indigo’s GeoInnovation platform, click here .
      these harvests to market. Working across the supply chain, Indigo is 
      feed the planet. The company is headquartered in Boston, MA, with 
      additional offices in Memphis, TN; Research Triangle Park, NC; Sydney, 
      information on Indigo Agriculture, please visit www.indigoag.com and follow the company on Twitter , Facebook , 
      is given by Indigo as to the accuracy, completeness, currency or fitness 
      for any purpose of the above forecasts. As such, this document does not 
      constitute the giving of investment advice, nor a part of any advice on 
      forecasts in whole or in part.
      the last area harvested estimate from the USDA.
