A National Mask Mandate Could Save The U.S. Economy $1 Trillion, Goldman Sachs Says
Soybeans do not seem to be subject to any quota limits.
For soy, China would have to at least return to pre-trade war volume, and in a hurry, otherwise a Trump re-election would likely mean an immediate return to tariffs as a tool to go after China. Trump agreed to a cease fire yet again in late November. That decision put an end to tariffs scheduled to rise on December 15. Those tariffs would have targeted consumer goods.
The import tariff quota for corn in 2020 is 7.20 million tons, and those of wheat and rice are 9.636 and 5.32 million tons respectively, according to a document released by the National Development and Reform Commission, the country’s top economic planning agency, in September.
President Donald Trump agreed to lower tariffs on China for a few shifts in China policy, including ... [+] things like tech transfers in joint venture deals. It also included a promise to nearly double U.S. agriculture exports. It looks highly unlikely.
“This is a global quota. We will not adjust it for a specific single country,” Han Jun, vice-minister of agriculture and rural affairs was quoted saying by the Caixin news service on Tuesday.
Any refusal to lift the quota on crops the U.S. could sell more of in order to reach the targeted $40 billion makes that target harder to hit. The farther from the target, the harder it is to see the trade truce as anything more than a walk back for Trump.
China got a relaxing of tariffs. The U.S. at the very least has to get a return, and then some, to its agriculture market.
There will be a great deal of scrutiny of the details of the phase one trade deal that are supposed to be released at some point on Wednesday.
Concerns around China’s ability to meet agricultural and energy purchase agreements will be the biggest deal breakers, if not next week, then down the road in 2020.
Han Jun, Vice Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs has put the quota system in question. ... [+] Whatever the number is, it's not just for the U.S. market. (AP Photo/Ng Han Guan)
“If they fail to meet quotas, then tariffs could be raised,” says Brendan Ahern, chief investment officer for KraneShares, a China-centric exchange traded fund.
“This uncertainty could be problematic for investors as the question is not only whether China can buy the goods, but also whether the U.S. can supply such high amounts,” Ahern says, fresh back from a trip to China. There, Ahern said investors were thinking China wouldn’t raise its agricultural purchases, meaning the best to hope for is a return to pre-trade war volumes.
“Chinese (investors) that I spoke to seemed less concerned about the trade war than their U.S. counterparts,” says Ahern. “They think the mainland investors have moved on.”
China stocks settled higher on Tuesday with both the MSCI China and the CSI-300 Index both beating the S&P 500.
