ELLETTSVILLE — Outside Jeff Deck’s window, down the long gravel driveway, a road leads to one of Deck Family Farms’ many fields.
Just months ago, the gravel was under 5 feet of water. A yellow “Road May Flood” sign poked out of the murk as it gushed like a river.
“Still raining,” Deck would say each morning to his wife, June. Raindrops pinged into the water covering the field, water that slowly rose each day.
Now it was October, and the driveway was dry and dusty, sometimes forcing June Deck to bring her clothes in off the line when cars drove by too quickly.
Jeff Deck was 60, had farmed this land his entire life, and had never seen a season so bad.
“It keeps getting hotter and wetter,” he said, gazing over the 33 acres next to his home. After the flooding, he never replanted them. The flood warning sign now taunted him in the dry heat.
Deck blames the changing climate. Each year, more crops die. This year, 400 acres of corn and soybeans drowned. Corn washed away. Soybean tendrils “broke their necks” under drenched soil.
Deck Family Farms depends on corn and soybeans, as does the rest of Indiana. The Indiana State Department of Agriculture says together they total $6 billion-plus in annual sales, which makes them the most valuable farm products in the state.
However, since Deck began farming, rainfall on the wettest days of the year has increased by a third, according to the Environmental Protection Agency. And the hotter summers are crippling yields of soybeans and corn.
Deck is the fourth generation to farm here. But he has to wonder if it stops with him, and when. He doesn’t need a climate study to know that what he grew up with cannot be sustained.
“Something’s changing in the weather,” he said. “After years of looking after it, you get to know it; the seasons are changing.”
In the barn is a tractor, similar to the one he used to take his wife on picnics with after they met at the 4-H Fair. They would lay a blanket over the hood and take a break from plowing, wiping the dust off the paper sacks and digging into sandwiches.
Deck has lived on a farm since he was born. He learned to drive a tractor before he learned to shave.
His grandparents were born in the house he and his wife live in, which has been in the family since 1895.
When he cranks the combine out of his driveway, he passes the barn he grew up working in. Splintered wood and fragments of tin roof protrude from its skeleton.
As a young man he would birth calves when the cow was too weak, reaching inside to his elbow and looping stainless steel chains around the calves’ slippery ankles. He would pull with his entire, 6-foot-5 inch frame until the calves flopped out onto the hay.
When his father died at 56, his mother took over the milking. She milked for 14 years, and then she died, too.
Things felt colorless after that. Homemade apple pie never tasted the same.
Now Deck eyes the dilapidated barn.
On this farm, Deck and his wife have endured five miscarriages. They adopted Daniel, now 33, the day he was born. Two years later, they had their daughter, Cassie.
“We could have lived our lives with nieces and nephews, and we would have been fine,” Deck said. “But the farm – it ain’t like heritage, like handing it over to your own blood.”
Deck cusses and doesn’t go to church, so he considers himself an outsider in the farming community. When it comes to the farm, his wife and son are the only ones he relies on.
Earlier this year, his mother-in-law, Betty, was cleaning a grain cart on her farm. Her foot slipped and she fell. She broke five ribs and punctured a lung.
Farming is not easy, June Deck says, but they have to keep going. “We’re farmers,” she says. “That’s what we are for life.”
Daniel Deck helps with the heavy labor now, stopping by when he can. But at 33, and married with young children, it's not clear whether farming will become his livelihood, like it is his dad’s.
None of them can predict the future of farming, but they know people need their work.
“Concrete don’t raise good crop,” Jeff Deck says. “People will wonder where they are going to get something to eat.”
Deck has been disheartened by the farm for many years, but this year kept getting worse. Even his wife's small vegetable garden flowered less than usual, offering only a few tomatoes and green beans.
Across a shallow creek bed lies an open field of weeds. Instead of soybeans, the field is a graveyard of crawdads, their burrows cracking in the heat.
Deck pointed at wild cucumber, water hemp and foxtail — all weeds.
He dropped a screw into one of the crawdad holes and heard a plop when it reached water at the bottom.
His diabetes is getting worse. He barely gets any sleep. Farming is getting more strenuous each year, Deck said. And now, this.
He’s not the only one who has noticed.
“If you go by a lot of the literature, this topic is climate change,” said Trevor Laureys of the state department of agriculture. “Temperatures have risen, and we get more precipitation each year.”
Thawing and freezing patterns in the spring left farmers with a smaller window for planting. Crops had less time to sprout. Heavy spring rains made the ground soggy, bogging down the tractors.
If things continue, farmers like Deck might have to consider different crops, Laureys said. Something more heat-tolerant; maybe fruits.
Deck detests the idea of changing crops or switching to livestock. The smell reminds him of his days of milking cows.
Small farms are dying: This plow-free plan could help save them.
Earlier this year, as the rain poured and the heat blistered, grain prices skyrocketed due to trade disputes. With flooding comes replanting, which is expensive.
Insurance covers grain prices for replanting, Deck says, but doesn’t account for labor and equipment. Farmers typically operate each year on debt, borrowing what they need for the season and hoping to harvest enough to repay it with some left over. The whipsaw of weather and market forces make for long seasons of uncertainty.
Nationwide, farm debt is projected to be a record-high $416 billion this year, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Across the Midwest, farm bankruptcies are up 13% over last year, largely atrributed to the general state of the farm economy and two straight years of difficult planting seasons.
The Decks break even with farming and live off of June Deck’s nursing paycheck.
Still, Deck says he’ll farm until he dies.
There are only six people he needs to keep happy in his life, he says, and that’s enough to carry his casket. His wife corrects him and says eight, because he’s a big guy.
Deck forges ahead, the morning’s agenda to check on the soybeans.
He arrives at the field and gazes out over a golden ocean. This particular field of 86 acres of soybeans was one of the best of the year, which was why he decided to harvest it first.
Deck climbs into his combine, which is guided by a 30-foot-wide header that constantly revolves to cut and collect soybeans, sending them through a complicated sorter that he doesn’t understand but whose hard work he appreciates. The beans then spout into a large grain tank, piling against the back window and dimming the cabin from the sun.
The combine's cabin sits 10 feet up, with a windshield that wraps around for a clear view of the beans being jerked from the ground.
Despite the windshield’s protection, Deck always manages to return home after a long day of combining coated in dust so thick it clogs the shower drain.
Today, as the combine takes its first bite, he looks pleased.
This is one of the finest soybean fields he’s seen in years. Earlier this year, when the rain wouldn’t stop, he nearly lost hope.
Still, this one field can’t make up for the losses in the others. Deck's face falls as he recounts their expenses, which reached $400,000 this year. Replanting was costly, and several tractors had to be repaired.
It feels like he might make a dollar an hour sometimes, Deck says.
He turns the combine again. The field is so thick that even three hours of back and forth barely touches more than a fraction of it.
Tiny mice sprint in between the plow lines, scampering away from the combine’s jaw.
Back and forth, back and forth. Deck turns the combine and heads for another line.
Autumn Schoolman is a student journalist in the Media School at Indiana University.
