Check out this story on thenewsstar.com: https://www.thenewsstar.com/story/news/2020/06/16/louisiana-farm-brothers-carve-out-trump-tribute-soybean-field/3200109001/
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Welcome to our new and improved comments, which are for subscribers only.
                                            This is a test to see whether we can improve the experience for you.
                                            You do not need a Facebook profile to participate.
You will need to register before adding a comment.
                                            Typed comments will be lost if you are not logged in.
                                            It's OK to disagree with someone's ideas, but personal attacks, insults, threats, hate speech, advocating violence and other violations can result in a ban.
                                            If you see comments in violation of our community guidelines , please report them.
Greg Hilburn , Monroe News-Star Published 2:09 p.m. CT June 16, 2020 | Updated 2:18 p.m. CT June 16, 2020
Brothers Darrell and Donnie Vandeven designed a Trump 2020 sign in one of their Tensas Parish soybean fields.
Louisiana farmers Darrell and Donnie Vandeven have designed a giant Trump 2020 sign in one of their Tensas Parish soybean fields.
The brothers' banner may not be a beacon for the International Space Station, but at 1,000 feet wide and with letters 200 feet deep it could easily be seen from Air Force One if President Trump did a fly by.
"It's kind of neat to think the president might see it himself," said Darrell, noting the image has been tweeted at the president.
Darrell and Donnie are second-generation Louisiana farmers, taking over for their father when he retired in 2001.
They farm about 6,000 acres of cotton, corn, soybeans and rice near St. Joseph. Darrell said they sacrificed about 3 acres of soybeans for the banner.
The latest agriculture technology allows farmers to plant precision crops, but also allows them to have some fun if they choose.
"We were joking around last winter and the next thing you knew we decided on Trump 2020," Darrell said.
The brothers had help programming the design from a Goldman Equipment technician.
"Basically, we programmed it not to plant inside the lettering we wanted," Darrell said.
Darrell and Donnie are fans of Trump even though his trade war with China has been hard on American agriculture.
"The China situation has hurt us in the short run, but at the same time it's long overdue," Darrell said. "They've been taking advantage of us for decades, so hopefully in the long run this is going to be good for agriculture.
Greg Hilburn covers state politics for the USA TODAY Network of Louisiana. Follow him on Twitter @GregHilburn1.
