During coronavirus outbreak, soybean prices have dropped the least.
As March gets under way, there are currently three fundamentals important to the markets: 1) coronavirus, 2) coronavirus, and 3) coronavirus.
This week, at least, that is the only fundamental important to the market – not just stocks but also commodities. What has been interesting is that while the stock market dropped 15% in seven days of trading, the commodity markets dropped only 1% to 3%.
And of the commodities, soybean prices have dropped the least. Also interestingly, USDA projected a 25% decline in soybean ending stocks for 2020-21 in the Feb. Ag Outlook, but only a 5¢ increase in price from last year. Very interesting.
The coronavirus now has infected 91,313 worldwide (+2,116 Tuesday 3/3), 3,117 died (+79), and 48,124 have recovered (+2944). New infections are still less than those recovering, but while China is doing a great job containing the virus using more drastic measures, the rest of the world (especially South Korea, Italy, and Iran) is doing a poor job. Also, infections are spreading into other countries in small numbers due to free travel – an option that perhaps the world population shouldn’t be exercising now.
READ MORE: FDA: Coronavirus disrupts supply chain for U.S. animal drugs
The U.S. stock market, after its biggest one-week drop in history, yesterday had its biggest one-day gain in history, rallying 1,294 points by the close. Actually, the day was much wilder than that as we had an 1,860-point trading range, trading at one point nearly 600 points lower and rallying from that level. It was an impressive rally to say the least, and a rapidly declining dollar will make it easier for commodities to rally as well.
The media is giving credit to a stimulus plan by world central bankers, but in reality we probably dropped too far out of fear of a bad cold (coronavirus) affecting people. The U.S. particularly looks foolish when we allowed the virus into an elderly care facility in Washington, where it has now already killed five people. This after we strongly criticized China for their difficulties resulting in drastic measures used in dealing with this bad cold virus.
In reality, credit for the market rally shouldn’t go to governments/central bankers, but to the smart investors who are piling money into the stock market due to the 15% discount applied over the past week. Savvy investors recognize a bargain when they see one, and you can bet that when a 15% discount for stock is offered, players like Warren Buffett don’t care what CNN or CNBC says, as the media is almost always wrong! Giving credit to government central bankers for the rebound is definitely a stretch.
Argentina weather remains hot/dry as they end the growing season for corn and soybeans, with very warm temps and no rain forecast the next week, which will stress crops and result in premature ripening. The adverse weather is also hitting western and southern Brazil, with below-normal precip as well. Temps remain cool in Brazil, but hot in Argentina.
There will be reductions in South America’s production estimates yet this year.
Pro Ag is turning more bullish at support areas of soybeans, as we are unlikely to continue to push soybeans lower with China opening up to tariff-free imports this month (to last for a year).
However, with improving U.S. weather for spring planting, it’s possible the friendly situation for soybeans might not translate into a friendly corn outlook. With drier and warmer-than-normal weather most of February and extending into March, snowmelt and planting may occur earlier than normal if it continues much longer.
This has been a slow developing trend in the U.S. Corn Belt the past month, going from an extremely wet pattern to a pattern of very little precip – and well above-normal temperatures. Temperatures 2°F. to 8°F. above normal have melted down a lot of snow in February (Iowa is completely snow-free), and the continued warm forecast into March will likely mean early snowmelt across the U.S.  Will that translate into an early spring?  It certainly appears that the prevent plant risk is diminishing as we head into March.
While the world watches with interest the stock market response to the coronavirus this week, agriculture is bracing for another year. Crop insurance prices were determined last month, with corn at $3.88, soybeans $9.17, and HRS wheat at $5.56 – the lowest in years. So right now, the outlook for 2020 looks bleak. But perhaps it’s always darkest at dawn?
Ray is President of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc., a top Ranked marketing firm in the country.
This material has been prepared by a sales or trading employee or agent of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc. and is, or is in the nature of, a solicitation. This material is not a research report prepared by Progressive Ag Marketing's Research Department. By accepting this communication, you agree that you are an experienced user of the futures markets, capable of making independent trading decisions, and agree that you are not, and will not, rely solely on this communication in making trading decisions.
DISTRIBUTION IN SOME JURISDICTIONS MAY BE PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED BY LAW. PERSONS IN POSSESSION OF THIS COMMUNICATION INDIRECTLY SHOULD INFORM THEMSELVES ABOUT AND OBSERVE ANY SUCH PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTIONS. TO THE EXTENT THAT YOU HAVE RECEIVED THIS COMMUNICATION INDIRECTLY AND SOLICITATIONS ARE PROHIBITED IN YOUR JURISDICTION WITHOUT REGISTRATION, THE MARKET COMMENTARY IN THIS COMMUNICATION SHOULD NOT BE CONSIDERED A SOLICITATION.
The risk of loss in trading futures and/or options is substantial and each investor and/or trader must consider whether this is a suitable investment. Past performance, whether actual or indicated by simulated historical tests of strategies, is not indicative of future results. Trading advice is based on information taken from trades and
statistical services and other sources that Progressive Ag Marketing believes are reliable. We do not guarantee that such information is accurate or complete and it should not be relied upon as such. Trading advice reflects our good faith judgment at a specific time and is subject to change without notice. There is no guarantee that advice we give will result in profitable trades.
