The organic soybean complex is in danger of experiencing upside momentum, which could significantly buoy organic soybean prices. Organic soybean prices are elevated, but activity is light because there is not a lot of product available. Organic soybean imports in March were light as expected. April should be similar, according to The Jacobsen.
A question for traders is how quickly India will be able to rebound from port closures. The “shelter in place” order sent workers from other countries home until it was safe to return and work was available. Indian exporters are saying that flood of Egyptian workers has left the country. Getting the engine that creates the organic soybean export machine up and running could take some time. For the 2019/2020 season, Jacobsen expects imports to use to hover above 70%. This means that 70% of the organic soybeans consumed in the US are imported.
For US consumers, unfortunately, there are no sellers according to merchandisers. This includes both organic soybean and organic soybean meal. This could create panic buying sending prices temporarily higher. The Q3 is likely a target period after the pipeline from India goes dry for most of the Q2.
Organic soybean imports were robust in February the last official month reported by the US Customs Department. There was small growth for the month, year over year. The Jacobsen forecast that March organic soybean imports were no-existent. Less than 1,000 metric tons likely arrived.
The Jacobsen sees organic soybean and organic soybean meal imports remaining well below the historical norm for the Q2, and then potentially rebounding significantly in the Q3 due to pent up demand. this could push organic soybean prices mid-west up to $23 per bushel. It could also push organic soybean meal prices above $850 per short-ton. The Jacobsen full forecast along with our organic soybean balance sheet can be found in The Jacobsen organic market intelligence report .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
