Palm oil falls after 3 days of gains on lower crude, soybean oil
Palm oil is affected by price movements in related oils as they compete for a share in the global vegetable oils market.
Palm oil may drop into a zone of 2,014-2,043 ringgit per tonne, as suggested by its wave pattern and a projection analysis, Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao said.
KUALA LUMPUR: Malaysian palm oil futures fell on Monday after three straight sessions of gains, dragged by weaker crude and CBOT soybean oil prices amid concerns over slowing demand due to the coronavirus outbreak.
The benchmark palm oil contract for July delivery on the Bursa Malaysia Derivatives Exchange slid 32 ringgit, or 1.53%, to 2,056 ringgit ($473.73) per tonne by 0249 GMT.
Palm oil prices fell 13% last month due to a historic rout in crude oil and as coronavirus-led lockdowns around the globe curbed demand.
US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo added to worries with fresh efforts to pin blame for the pandemic on China, where the new coronavirus outbreak is believed to have originated.
Oil prices fell in early trade on worries the global oil glut may persist as US-China trade tension could hold back an economic recovery even as coronavirus lockdowns start to ease.
Weaker crude oil futures make palm a less attractive option for biodiesel feedstock.
Soyoil prices on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) were down 1.13%. The Dalian was closed for trading.
Palm oil is affected by price movements in related oils as they compete for a share in the global vegetable oils market.
Palm oil may drop into a zone of 2,014-2,043 ringgit per tonne, as suggested by its wave pattern and a projection analysis, Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao said.
The dollar inched higher, stock markets struggled for traction and oil fell as a US-China spat over the origin of the coronavirus put the brakes on optimism about an economic re-start as countries around the world ease restrictions.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
