Palm oil extends gains on higher crude, soybean oil
The contract has declined 1.6% so far this week after two consecutive weekly drop.
Palm oil is affected by price movements in related oils as they compete for a share in the global vegetable oils market.
KUALA LUMPUR: Malaysian palm oil futures rose on Wednesday, tracking stronger crude and soybean oil prices and supported by bargain-hunting, although concerns over weakening global demand due to coronavirus-driven lockdowns capped the gains.
The benchmark palm oil contract for July delivery on the Bursa Malaysia Derivatives Exchange climbed 21 ringgit, or 1.04%, to 2,041 ringgit ($468.33) per tonne by 0239 GMT, heading for a second straight day of gains.
The contract has declined 1.6% so far this week after two consecutive weekly drop.
Oil prices climbed, trimming some of this week's steep losses after U.S. stockpiles rose less than expected and hopes grew for demand to pick up as some European countries and U.S. cities moved to ease coronavirus lockdowns.
Stronger crude oil futures make palm a more attractive option for biodiesel feedstock.
Palm oil is affected by price movements in related oils as they compete for a share in the global vegetable oils market.
A bearish target of 1,916 ringgit per tonne has been aborted for palm oil, and a bullish target zone of 2,072-2,107 ringgit has been established, Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao said.
Asian shares were cautiously higher as investors paused ahead of the U.S. Federal Reserve's policy decision while oil prices jumped on hopes demand will pick up as many countries lift some of the coronavirus-related restrictions.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
