Palm firms on higher crude, soybean oil prices
The benchmark palm oil contract for September delivery on the Bursa Malaysia Derivatives Exchange gained 19 ringgit, or 0.84%, to 2,415 ringgit ($564.91) a tonne during 0243 GMT.
Palm may retest a resistance at 2,479 ringgit per tonne, as it could have completed a correction triggered by this barrier, Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao said.
KUALA LUMPUR: Malaysian palm oil futures rose on Friday, tracking higher crude and soybean oil prices, but the contract was still on track to snap its sixth straight week of gains.
The benchmark palm oil contract for September delivery on the Bursa Malaysia Derivatives Exchange gained 19 ringgit, or 0.84%, to 2,415 ringgit ($564.91) a tonne during 0243 GMT.
Palm is poised to clock a 2.3% weekly fall following concerns that a second wave of coronavirus will slow demand.
Malaysia's palm oil exports from June 1 to 25 rose between 35.5% and 37.2% from the previous month, cargo surveyors said. That was lower than a 50% to 57% monthly surge in exports during June 1 to 20.
Oil prices extended gains from the previous day on optimism about recovering fuel demand worldwide. Stronger crude oil futures make palm a more attractive option for biodiesel feedstock.
Soyoil prices on the Chicago Board of Trade gained 0.67%. The Dalian Commodity Exchange was closed for a public holiday.
Palm oil is affected by price movements in related oils as they compete for a share in the global vegetable oils market.
Palm may retest a resistance at 2,479 ringgit per tonne, as it could have completed a correction triggered by this barrier, Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao said.
Asian stocks were set to gain on Friday, as global sentiment remained doggedly upbeat despite increased volatility and rising new coronavirus infections, with Wall Street pushed higher by a loosening in bank regulations.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
