On the MCX, crude palm oil touched Rs 568 per 10 kg, up 1.12 per cent on Monday for September delivery.
The duty on crude palm oil from Malaysia, Indonesia and other Asean nations is 40 per cent.
New Delhi: Refined soya oil futures edged higher on reports that the government might increase cess on edible oil NSE 2.10 % imports by about 5 per cent. The weakening of the Indian rupee against the US dollar further led to the increase in import cost. An NCDEX refined soya oil September contract increased 0.50 per cent to Rs 760 per 10 kg from last week’s closing of Rs 756.8 per 10 kg. On the MCX, crude palm oil touched Rs 568 per 10 kg, up 1.12 per cent on Monday for September delivery.
“An edible oil cess is a good thing in the long term for the sector but currently it has ensured that the oilseed prices remain firm,” said Sandeep Bajoria, chief executive of oil consultancy firm Sunvin Group. “A weak rupee, lower production of palm oil in Malaysia and Indonesia and China entering the market to buy oilseeds have further led to a hike in prices.”
Bajoria said that futures and spot prices were moving in tandem. “Soya oil prices in wholesale have increased 4 per cent in the past one month to Rs 760 per 10 kg while palm oil has increased 10 per cent to Rs 567 per 10 kg in the same period,” he said.
According to Navneet Damani of Motilal Oswal, the rupee can reach 72.50 to a US dollar in the next few weeks and then start to appreciate to around 71. “In the next few months, rupee will remain volatile which will ensure that edible oil market remains firm,” he said “On the NCDEX, refined soya oil September prices are trading near the resistance zone of the consolidation area,” said Damani. “Going ahead, Rs 768 per 10 kg level is likely to provide strong resistance to the prices in the short term. Selling on rise is thus advised, targeting support of Rs 725 per 10 kg level.”
For crude palm oil, Damani said that bias remains bullish for the short term and buying on dip would be the right strategy, targeting resistance level of Rs 575 per 10 kg.
An importer said that concerns of lower production of soya bean crop due to poor rains in June and July were also keeping soya oil and soya bean meal prices firm.
The government is considering a cess on cooking oil imports to fund a national mission that aims to reduce its massive imports, which have crossed Rs 70,000 crore in recent years. The aim is to help farmers and local industry, apart from reducing the current account deficit.
The duty on crude palm oil from Malaysia, Indonesia and other Asean nations is 40 per cent. The duty on refined palm oil is 45 per cent for imports from Malaysia and 50 per cent if bought from Indonesia or other Asean states.
