There are some big numbers to look at in Tuesday’s USDA report, but once we get past those numbers, the focus goes back to closely watching the weather forecast.
Some fairly high planted acreages could be seen in the report.
"We are being undercut on our corn bids for now by South America coming online and we made new contract lows in December corn on Thursday," noted Wayne Nelson of L&M Commodities.
The report will also provide quarterly stocks and provide information on how much feed has actually been used. For corn, the average guess at quarterly stocks is 4.95 billion bushels. The average guess is 95.2 million acres with many thinking that should be closer to 94 million.
"A million acres can make quite the difference when it comes to the ending stocks," Nelson adds. "Unfortunately, we would sort of need the weather not cooperate to help our prices."
As for fields in Livingston-McLean region, many area fields look good so far, even with adverse conditions to start the season.
The early planted soybeans which experienced frost came out of it with reduced stands but could still have good yields come fall. The crop is maximized for the conditions we have, according to Bryan Lessen with Rob-See-Co.
"Some fields had three plantings — the original planting and two replants," Lessen said. "That’s never the goal but with the recent rain we caught in areas, we’ve got excellent stalk diameter."
We may not know the exact yield potential for the growing crops but there is a good outlook for what we have dealt with this season.
Rob-See-Co offers the Enlist soybean technology which Lessen considers simpler than the Xtend technology. It could also be more important moving forward and the yield is there.
"We’ve got a full lineup and are excited to talk with guys about it," added Lessen.
Lessen says the three pillars of simplicity, relationships and technology make Rob-See-Co different, as they don’t have programs or purchasing volumes to obtain a better deal.
"It’s just a price of corn, a price of soybeans and a pre-pay. We want the customers to purchase what they feel is right for their farm."
The company often talks to growers about things important to them such as fertility programs, tillage practices and the products that fit.
Rob-See-Co works through farmer dealers and is looking for distributorships. Anyone interested in this, such as an existing dealer or someone trying to get home to farm, should contact the company to see if they are a fit. Visit the Rob-See-Co website for more information.
Choose the plan that's right for you.
Digital access or digital and print delivery.
