The research highlights that, unlike soy, fava beans can be grown locally, minimising environmental impacts, and can be readily absorbed as a nutritious protein powder.
Soy-based proteins are often used when experimenting with vegetarian cooking, but new research from the University of Copenhagen’s Department of Food Science has suggested that fava beans hold great promise as a non-soy source of plant protein, with more favourable environmental and nutritional considerations.
“Many consumers are crying out for alternatives to soy, a crop that places great strain on the environment. This prompted us to find a method of processing fava beans in such a way that allows us to produce a concentrated protein powder. One of the advantages of fava beans is that they can be grown here, locally in Denmark. This is excellent news for the climate,” explained Iben Lykke Petersen, an Assistant Professor at the University of Copenhagen’s Department of Food Science, and one of the researchers behind the new study.
Fava beans are said to be better suited for climate considerations because they can be cultivated locally, unlike soybeans, which are primarily grown in the United States and South America – and then exported to Denmark.
There is increasing  global demand to establish the authenticity of food products by demonstrating an unbroken supply chain from the source through to the final consumers. Assuring authenticity and integrity of wines protects the brand of a wine manufacturer or distributor, along with  reputations of wine regions or appellations for wine growers and associations.
In this webinar, Gordon Burns, President of ETS Laboratories, begins by introducing the application of Proton NMR, a direct and highly reproducible technique for wine analysis.
Moreover, numerous farms in Brazil and Paraguay have cleared large tracts of forest to create space for soybean fields, causing consequences for wildlife, biodiversity and CO2 emissions.
“Another important factor is that, unlike fava beans, lots of soy is genetically modified to be able to tolerate Roundup, a herbicide. Within this context, many consumers are critical of soy’s environmental consequences,” Petersen said.
To find an alternative to environmentally taxing soybean, the study’s researchers tested various crops, looking for those with the greatest potential as a protein powder, while also being able to be grown locally. Fava beans reportedly outperformed lentils, amaranth, buckwheat and quinoa.
Using a method known as ‘wet fractionation’, the researchers succeeded in concentrating fava bean protein and removing substances that would otherwise inhibit the digestion of the protein. This allows nutritious fava bean proteins to be more readily absorbed when consumed.
“Wet fractionation is accomplished by milling beans into a flour, and then adding water and blending the mixture into a soup. Thereafter, it becomes easier for us to sort out the less beneficial substances and produce an optimised product,” Petersen continued.
“Our results demonstrate that this method significantly increases protein content. Furthermore, through our tests, we can see that this protein is nearly as readily digested as when we break down protein from animal products, such meat and eggs.”
Petersen explained that when fava beans are processed correctly, their proteins retain their naturally bright colour, along with a neutral taste and good texture.
“Manufacturers prefer a product that is tasteless, has a neutral colour and a firm texture. Fava beans check each these boxes, unlike peas, which often have a very bitter aftertaste,” she said.
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed .
New Food is published by:
This website uses cookies to enable, optimise and analyse site operations, as well as to provide personalised content and allow you to connect to social media. By clicking "I agree" you consent to the use of cookies for non-essential functions and the related processing of personal data. You can adjust your cookie and associated data processing preferences at any time via our "Cookie Settings". Please view our Cookie Policy to learn more about the use of cookies on our website.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as "Necessary" are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functional...
Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.
This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Analytics".
This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".
This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Performance".
This cookie is native to PHP applications. The cookie is used to store and identify a users' unique session ID for the purpose of managing user session on the website. The cookie is a session cookies and is deleted when all the browser windows are closed.
The cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data.
This session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls whether you are able to see content which is only available to logged in users.
The cookie is set by CloudFare. The cookie is used to identify individual clients behind a shared IP address and apply security settings on a per-client basis. It does not correspond to any user ID in the web application and does not store any personally identifiable information.
Performance cookies are includes cookies that deliver enhanced functionalities of the website, such as caching. These cookies do not store any personal information.
This cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and, in conjunction with the cookie 'cf_use_ob', is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.
This cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.
This session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls which types of content you are able to access.
This cookie is set by Litespeed Server and allows the server to store settings to help improve performance of the site.
This cookie is set by OneSignal push notifications and is used for storing user preferences in connection with their notification permission status.
Analytics cookies collect information about your use of the content, and in combination with previously collected information, are used to measure, understand, and report on your usage of this website.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn. The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.
We embed videos from our official Vimeo channel. When you press play, Vimeo will drop third party cookies to enable the video to play and to see how long a viewer has watched the video. This cookie does not track individuals.
This cookie is set by Spotler and tracks an anonymous visitor ID.
This cookie is set by Spotler and enables it to track the Load Balance Session Queue.
This cookie is set by Spotler to track the Internet Information Services (IIS) session state.
This cookie is set by Spotler and stores the UTM values for the session. UTM values are specific text strings that are appended to URLs that allow Communigator to track the URLs and the UTM values when they get clicked on.
This cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. It stores information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors.
This cookies is set by Google Universal Analytics to throttle the request rate to limit the collection of data on high traffic sites.
This cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visited in an anonymous form.
