REGIONAL—The Iowa State University Northwest Research and Demonstration Farms near Calumet and Doon are not immune to the coronavirus pandemic.
The O’Brien County research site — the larger of the two farms at more than 270 acres — has not seen quite as many visitors this year as it has in the past and its annual summer field day in July has been canceled.
“During the summer, we always have other trainings and meetings here, which have been curtailed quite a bit due to the pandemic,” said Terry Tuttle, the superintendent of the two research farms.
Tuttle noted one of his two agricultural specialists had been exposed to COVID-19, but he ultimately tested negative for the coronavirus.
“He’s back to work and no side effects, so that’s good,” Tuttle said.
The research farms have not hosted any virtual events, but are considering scheduling in-person activities for area certified crop advisers and farmers.
“We’re planning on trying to have a few small events at the farm here coming up probably within the next month,” Tuttle said.
If the in-person events end up being held at the O’Brien County research site, people would have to preregister for them so the crowd sizes could be controlled.
“We’re still trying to just go through details on what we need to do to do it safely and within Iowa State’s parameters on social distancing,” Tuttle said.
He noted the research farms otherwise have been “running like normal” during the COVID-19 outbreak.
“We put in our crops, put in our plots,” Tuttle said. “We’ve been an essential business being part of agriculture. We’ve been here through the whole thing. During the spring, it’s pretty easy to social distance here.”
As far as what projects are going on at the research farms this year, there are plots that have been planted with cover crops interseeding into standing corn.
“Normally, cover crops have been sewn after the crops have been taken out, like behind soybeans or sometimes behind corn, but it gets late in the season, so sometimes you don’t get much growth from the cover crops being seeded that late,” Tuttle said.
“We’re trying to just find ways to move that application of the cover crops up and get a better result from that,” he said.
He explained the benefits of cover crops, such as cereal rye and cowpeas.
“It’ll help protect the ground and help use additional excess nitrogen that happens to be there instead of letting it get into the water system,” Tuttle said.
The research farms also have been looking into the soybean gall midge, an insect that belongs to a family of flies and was described as a new species in 2018.
“We’ve had issues with that insect for the last few years,” Tuttle said. “The adult comes out in the spring, lays eggs in soybeans, which then create larvae. Those larvae disrupt the flow of nutrients and water in the plant. They’ll kill the soybean plant.”
The O’Brien County research site has had plots of soybeans planted the past couple of years to allow Tuttle and his agricultural specialists to look into different ways to help control the soybean gall midge.
“We’ve had emergence traps out,” Tuttle said. “It’s a box with a screen on it. It’s put on the ground so when these insects emerge in the spring, they’re confined. It funnels them up into a jar and they can take them out and see what they’ve got.”
He noted when the emergence traps contain adult soybean gall midges, their larvae are not too far behind.
Adults and larvae recently have been found in soybean plants at the O’Brien County research site.
“Normally, you see it more on field edges, but with each generation, then it migrates a little farther into the fields,” Tuttle said. “Normally, the worst damage is on field edges.
“We’ve got plots out here where they’ve applied different treatments when they planted,” he said. “We’ve also applied foliar applications of insecticides to different plots.”
Those plots will be watched throughout the rest of the summer and into the fall.
“They’ll be looking at those as we go through the season and into harvest to see if any of them have a good, sound effect,” Tuttle said.
“When they lay the eggs, basically they’re in the plant, so once they’re in the plant, it’s harder to get the insecticide to them,” he said.
A bioreactor was installed last summer at the Iowa State University Northwest Research and Demonstration Farm located at 6320 500th St. about two miles southeast of Calumet.
“We’re sampling water going in and out of the bioreactor to see what kind of an effect it has on the water,” said farm superintendent Terry Tuttle. “We’ve got a tile system up through the middle of the farm basically that drains into the bioreactor.”
He noted the bioreactor reduces the amount of nitrates in the water and improves water quality.
“It’s a wood-chip bioreactor,” Tuttle said. “It’s a pit basically. This one’s 100 feet long, 20 feet wide, 4 feet deep, and filled with wood chips. It’s covered with soil.
“You divert your tile water into one end and then let it kind of percolate through the wood chips and then it comes out the other end,” he said.
He noted there is a bio-organism that lives in the wood chips and frees up nitrogen as the water flows through the bioreactor.
“It comes off as a gas and permeates up through the top and then reduces the amount of nitrates in the water that comes out,” Tuttle said.
