By Author JBS Umanadh | Published: 3rd Jul 2020 12:42 amUpdated: 3rd Jul 2020 12:45 am
A farmer ploughs his land in Warangal. With monsoon turning active across the State, sowing is progressing at a brisk pace and soybean, cotton are the popular choices.— Photo: Gotte Venkat
Hyderabad Farmers in Telangana have proved that they are progressive by nature and willing to adapt to the new regulated farming system advised by Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao, by taking up cultivation of market-driven crops in 51 lakh acres, almost half of the 1.23 crore acres envisaged for this Vaanakalam. With encouraging rains spread across the State compared to last year, the sowing process in the remaining area is progressing at a brisk pace.
Interestingly, Soybean seems to have caught the farmers imagination, with 70 per cent of the area (4.8 lakh acres) earmarked for its cultivation already covered in the State. Similarly, cotton which is being encouraged by the State government in place of paddy also registered 85 per cent sowing out of the envisaged 65 lakh acres. While cotton is profitable because of availability of high yield hybrids that have a 28-33 ginning percentage in Telangana, scientists at the Prof Jayashankar Telangana State Agriculture University (PJTSAU) advise farmers to be ready to tackle pests such as bollworm and sucking pests.
As far as paddy is concerned, 1.6 lakh acres of nurseries have been prepared for 40 lakh acres stipulated by the State government. The farmers have been asked to take up fine varieties in 20 lakh acres and coarse varieties in 20 lakh acres.
“Telangana Sona, the fine variety recommended by the State government, has been a big success as seed sufficient for 10 lakh acres have been produced and is available in the market,” Vice-Chancellor PJTSAU, Dr Praveen Rao Velchala, told Telangana Today. The Vice-Chancellor, however, suggested that farmers must be on guard against Bacterial Leaf Blight (BLB) leaf blast and Brown Plant Hopper (BPH) attacks particularly in districts such as Nizamabad, Warangal and Karimnagar.
“During 2014-2020, ayacut of one crore acres has been stabilised and 33 major and medium irrigation projects have been completed. Today, farmers can produce 2.3 crore tons of paddy, but we require only 1 crore tons for our consumption, which is why the Chief Minister came up with the concept of regulated farming,” he said.
Similarly, farmers have stayed away from sowing Maize as they have just completed marketing their “Yasangi” yield. Only 3 per cent of the total acreage has been sown this Vaanakalam so far. 70 per cent of sowing of red gram out of 12 lakh acres was also completed.
Now you can get handpicked stories from Telangana Today on Telegram everyday. Click the link to subscribe.
