The collaborative research project is said to be the first to determine seeding rates in different environments with low, medium or high productivity.
Seeding rate – the number of seeds planted per acre – can have an impact on crop yield and growing efficiency, and the best seeding rate for soybean fields is said to be one of the most debated topics for those involved in agriculture.
Researchers have long tried to help farmers find an answer, and, in a bid to help growers, a recent study by soybean scientists at Corteva Agriscience and universities across the US set out to determine the optimal seeding rate.
“The optimal soybean seeding rate is a commonly discussed topic with many opinions, based on individual experience and regional experiments,” said Adam Gaspar of Corteva Agriscience. “Our study is the largest soybean seeding rate study ever conducted. We hope to provide help to soybean growers based on where they are farming to help reduce risk and optimise yield potential.
Food and beverage manufacturers need to take a fresh approach to how they do business.
Why? Increasing consumer demand for greater product innovation and transparency, ever-increasing quality and compliance pressures, tighter profit margins, new channel opportunities, and a dynamic workforce are just some of the factors that are shifting market dynamics.
“Farm margins are very tight,” Gaspar explained. “Growers are looking for ways to most efficiently use resources and control associated expenses, while not unnecessarily increasing their risk. Their seed purchase is a large investment, and one that has big implications. If they don’t get it right, they are putting profitable returns at risk.”
The project determined seeding rates in different environments, with the knowledge that productivity was influenced by various factors like soil type, topography and climate, they explained.
The researchers gathered data on the effects of seeding rate on soybean yield in 12 states plus Ontario, Canada from 2005 to 2007 and 2012 through 2017. The seeding rates, productivity and yield were analysed.
Overall, the results showed that farmers should increase seeding rates in areas of lower productivity and reduce them in areas of higher productivity and that these areas may vary in different parts of the farm. The productivity can even vary within different areas of each field, they explained.
“These findings will ultimately help growers use the optimal seeding rate between and within each field to optimise production, while limiting their risk of adverse yields due to seeding rates that are too high or too low,” Gaspar said. “Also, it will emphasise the importance of establishing and maintaining an adequate plant stand until harvest. This is especially true in fields or areas of a field with low to medium productivity.”
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed .
New Food is published by:
This website uses cookies to enable, optimise and analyse site operations, as well as to provide personalised content and allow you to connect to social media. By clicking "I agree" you consent to the use of cookies for non-essential functions and the related processing of personal data. You can adjust your cookie and associated data processing preferences at any time via our "Cookie Settings". Please view our Cookie Policy to learn more about the use of cookies on our website.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as "Necessary" are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functional...
Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.
This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Analytics".
This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".
This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Performance".
This cookie is native to PHP applications. The cookie is used to store and identify a users' unique session ID for the purpose of managing user session on the website. The cookie is a session cookies and is deleted when all the browser windows are closed.
The cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data.
This session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls whether you are able to see content which is only available to logged in users.
The cookie is set by CloudFare. The cookie is used to identify individual clients behind a shared IP address and apply security settings on a per-client basis. It does not correspond to any user ID in the web application and does not store any personally identifiable information.
Performance cookies are includes cookies that deliver enhanced functionalities of the website, such as caching. These cookies do not store any personal information.
This cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and, in conjunction with the cookie 'cf_use_ob', is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.
This cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.
This session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls which types of content you are able to access.
This cookie is set by Litespeed Server and allows the server to store settings to help improve performance of the site.
This cookie is set by OneSignal push notifications and is used for storing user preferences in connection with their notification permission status.
Analytics cookies collect information about your use of the content, and in combination with previously collected information, are used to measure, understand, and report on your usage of this website.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn. The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.
We embed videos from our official Vimeo channel. When you press play, Vimeo will drop third party cookies to enable the video to play and to see how long a viewer has watched the video. This cookie does not track individuals.
This cookie is set by Spotler and tracks an anonymous visitor ID.
This cookie is set by Spotler and enables it to track the Load Balance Session Queue.
This cookie is set by Spotler to track the Internet Information Services (IIS) session state.
This cookie is set by Spotler and stores the UTM values for the session. UTM values are specific text strings that are appended to URLs that allow Communigator to track the URLs and the UTM values when they get clicked on.
This cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. It stores information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors.
This cookies is set by Google Universal Analytics to throttle the request rate to limit the collection of data on high traffic sites.
This cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visited in an anonymous form.
