Over the years, farmers from the southern part of Brazil ventured northward seeking cheaper land that needed to be developed. As a result, the average size of a farm in the north became much larger than in the south. Successful Farming visited with Brazilian farmers from the midwest, western, and southern parts of the country. These farmers share a bit of history of their farming background and their perspectives on farming in Brazil in 2019.
SF: What are the main characteristics of your property, regarding size, crops planted, rotation practices, and your soil nutrition methods?
Utida: My property has a total of 6,300 hectares (nearly 15,567 acres). I grow this total area with soybeans in the summer and rotate with corn and cotton in the winter. Nearly 2,000 hectares (4,942 acres) are planted with cotton and 3,000 hectares (7,413 acres) with corn. I use no-tillage and regular fertilizers. We also raise some cattle.
SF: How do you see Brazilian agriculture in general?
Utida: One of the big challenges that I see is family succession. That always will be a big thing. A lot of farms don't have a sucession plan, and that is a critical issue. Another thing I see that is very critical is that Brazilian farmers are very good and advanced a lot at production, but not very good in commercialization.
SF: You talked about farm succession. How was that in your case? Have you always lived and worked on the farm and then assumed the family farm?
According to the American Soybean Association, the U.S. has more than 300,000 soybean growers.
Utida: No. In my case, my family was already in the business, but I was not into this since the beginning. I studied law outside of Mato Grosso, but later I got interested in the field. In our case, we were luckier than other people. I manage the farm with my two brothers.
SF: You also mentioned grain marketing as a big issue. What's your marketing strategy?
Utida: At the beginning of the year we set a range of goals. These goals are based on an expected productivity and revenue. At the beginning of the year, you have always 10% of profitability as a goal and 10% of loss as something expected to happen. And you always have more and more competition.
SF: Do you set price projections?
Utida: I get help from a lot of market consultants and use their projections. They are very reliable.
SF: And how do you compare Brazilian agriculture with other countries like the United States or Argentina? Is it hard to compete?
Utida: I think that our disadvantage, especially in our case of Mato Grosso, is that our infrastructure is poor. We do not have a lot of profitability because of our logistical bottlenecks. In the case of Argentinians, their problem is high taxes. In the United States, the issue is the rental hikes [most Brazilian farmers are landowners], and now they have the trade war with China that is currently benefiting us.
In the case of Brazil, we have to deal constantly with an unstable economic culture with the currency going up and down all the time, some tax coming out of nowhere, or new regulations regarding the environment.
SF: What can you tell about healthcare in the field of agriculture?
Utida: We have advanced a lot in terms of the protection of workers who work with agrochemicals. We do have some workers in our property. They are safe. Once you have insurance, you are safe. And I believe that we are healthier in the field than the city people.
SF: What size of a farm do you operate and what is your crop rotation?
Perin: The property that I work has 200 hectares (494 acres). I plant soybeans on it.
SF: Do you own all of the land that you farm?
Perin: Nearly 70% of the land is mine and the rest is rented.
SF: What do you grow in the winter months?
Perin: I like planting soybeans because they are more profitable. In the winter, I like to plant white oats along with Sorghum sudanense. That helps my soil the most.
Perin: It has been more than five years since I planted wheat. It is a really hard crop in terms of plagues, and I don’t like the prices. It is really risky to plant corn considering the prices.
SF: What are your agronomic practices with soybeans? Do you start by having a good variety?
Perin: I get seeds generated by my own property and buy some seeds from neighbors. I use nearly 10 different varieties, but I like the ones I get from Pioneer the most. The highest yield I’ve achieved was 66.9 bushels per acre. I start planting in early November and harvest by early March.
SF: What are your average yields and other agronomic practices?
Perin: Well, one of the best things I did was to start using 330 pounds of calcium sulphate per hectare and zero aluminum. Prior to that, there was sulphur deficiency in my soil. The roots grow deeper. That boosted my yields by 8.9 bushels per acre. I use fertilizers a lot and no-till.
Perin: I have an average cost of 31.22 bushels per acre. Of course, all inputs are increasing. Seeds, fertilizers, and diesel are the worst.
Perin: You don’t really need to change your tractor often. I have a combine harvester with rotor and a planter that gave me very good distribution of plants. Every 10 years you have to change it. It is the time you have to pay for them [meaning the payment deadline]. The precision agriculture maps I used for the last 10 years have been very useful. The sprayer is what you need to change more often, every five years.
SF: What’s your marketing approach? Do you sell right after harvest?
Perin: Yes, most of the time I sell right after harvest to a nearby cooperative. The price has to be really bad for me to wait. I don’t have on-farm storage.
SF: How do you see agriculture in Brazil for now and the future?
Agriculture has become better each year. I’m really optimistic. Soybeans pay better every year.
SF: Is it easier than when you started farming with the use of a plow?
Perin: Absolutely! I started farming in the times when the plow was moved with the ox. We had a lot more work at those times. Now everything is much, much easier. I started farming as a very young kid, perhaps 8 years old.
SF: Who helps you farm? And how do you see your succession?
Perin: I have a 22-year-old son who studies business administration that is already helping me and probably will succeed me leading the business. He likes the farming work. We have to respect one’s will. My other son is 15, and I’m not sure if he has the will and the vocation.
SF: Can you share the size of your operation, crops planted, rotation practices, etc.?
Peixoto: My total area is 2,400 hectares. I use 2,400 hectares (5,930 acres) of soybeans in the summer, followed by the safrinha with about 800 hectares (1,976 acres) of corn and 800 hectares (1,976 acres) of sunflower. In parts of it, there is some rice and some wheat and kidney beans that are not significant in amount. Soil fertilization is one of my most important investments. I add a lot of sulphur and nitrogen, though I cannot tell you the exact numbers. We use no-till and integrated pest management with biological control. We rely on the work of approximately 30 people here.
SF: What are your average yields?
Peixoto: I cannot be precise about the numbers with you. I get about 66.9 bushels per acre and believe that my neighbors have a lot of envy. Again, these numbers are just an idea. I would not tell my numbers precisely to any newspaper.
SF: Would you do more rotation?
Peixoto: The government should pay you more like they do in the U.S. and you would do more rotation. But here everything is a big crap. My cost gets over 44.6 bushels per acre because of the terrible roads we have here and all the agrochemicals. We should have climate insurance and price insurance fully sponsored by the government in all crops.
SF: How was farming when you started and how is it now?
Peixoto: I came here from Parana in 1982, after my family had left Rio Grande do Sul. I purchased this land with the small piece of land that I sold in Parana, plus a refrigerator. After a few years, I knew why it was so cheap. You see, the gas station is as far as 200 miles or more away. Since thousands of farmers came in and invested millions, I thought that roads would be better. We, from the private sector, even put a foundation here to assist with agronomics, and the government does not put in a single dime.
SF: The government does help with the subsidized credit for machinery and price support for corn. What kind of machinery do you use?
Pexito: I have about 30 New Holland combines, but do the math. I pay in tax about half of those combines, plus my income tax and many other taxes that nobody uses. Price support programs should be given to all crops. Don’t make me laugh.
