CHESTERFIELD, Mo. — The stay-at-home environment didn’t thwart interest in the U.S. Soybean Export Council’s two-day conference as 2,000 global customers from nearly 100 countries joined in digitally.
The U.S. Soy Connection: Global Digital Conference and Situation Report “showcased that despite the global impact of the novel COVID-19 virus, the U.S. soy industry is open for business,” Jim Sutter, USSEC CEO, said to open a media teleconference April 15.
“USSEC has swiftly adapted to the current circumstances and evolved our focus to connect with customers virtually and demonstrate that our entire supply chain is working to ensure a sustainable, safe and reliable supply of soy for global customers.
“As we continue to navigate these unprecedented times, it’s more important than ever that we demonstrate to current and potential international customers the strength of our farmers and the benefits of buying U.S. soy.”
Homeland Security deemed agriculture as critical infrastructure amid the pandemic, and Sutter noted that farmers take their job very seriously to globally provide food, feed, fuel and fiber, along with the whole export supply chain that USSEC also represents.
“Collectively, the farmers and the exporters create a wonderful opportunity to be able to supply the global industry, and that’s what we’ve been talking to them about on these two days of conferences that we’ve been conducting,” Sutter said.
Monte Peterson, USSEC chairman and Valley City, North Dakota, farmer, said it is business as usual for farmers as they moved toward planting season.
“I’m just so thankful that we have this opportunity with the technology that we have in place to engage with our customers and our trading partners all around the world,” Peterson said.
“What has lent to the success for U.S. soy has been our ability to engage and put together relationships with our trading partners around the world, and at a time like this I can’t think of anything more important than trying to stay engaged with our customers, our trading partners around the world and communicate because it is an uncertain time.
“Obviously, agriculture has been under some uncertainty probably for the last few years, but this is something completely new, and we’re just thankful for the opportunity to put this conference together to reengage with customer and also to seek our relationships with new customers.”
Brent Babb, USSEC regional director, Greater Europe and Middle East/North Africa, and Roz Leeck, USSEC senior director, market access and regional director North Asia Region, provided insight into those soybean markets.
“The overall demand situation in Japan and South Korea is largely unchanged from last year. We haven’t seen any significant demand destruction, and Japan is right on target year-over-year,” Leeck said.
“South Korea is down a little bit, and that is largely a result of very inexpensive Brazilian soybeans that are competing with us a little bit more. However, we expect that as we get to the end of the marketing year that we will see a similar type market share demand as in previous years.”
The soybean oil sector in Japan and South Korea is struggling due to reduced use in the hotel, restaurant and industrial use sectors. Leeck estimates a 5% to 10% decline in use in both countries as a result of COVID-19.
However, Japan and South Korea are significant soy food markets, and the United States has over 70% market share with those nations combined.
“That’s been actually a very bright spot because particularly in Japan and Korea they perceive soy foods as having a lot of health benefits,” Leeck added.
“There have been some opportunities that we continue to see emerge and the resilience of the marketplace, as well as the resilience of the human condition is really quite impressive during this time.”
Consumers in Babb’s trade region are turning more toward poultry, pork and eggs for their diets. That’s also good for soybean demand.
“The supply chain is working. Of course, there’s some anxiety about ports and supplies maintaining good working order, but so far they have with minor exceptions here and there,” Babb said.
“It’s been a very busy time for the feed industry. Supplies have been OK. The feed industry has actually increased from earlier in the year, especially in animal agriculture as poultry, eggs and pork in Europe have continued to increase the production and consumption of those products. Higher priced red meat, beef and lamb products have decreased.
“It’s very similar in the Middle East/North Africa region. Food security is a big issue there, as well, and supplies have increased both in the homes and for the feed and animal producers.
“In general, there are some minor anxieties about the supply chain, but they know and have been in touch with us on the supply availability from the U.S. and continue to buy.”
Sutter turned to the “Phase 1” agreement between the United States and China that was unveiled in mid-January, noting that Thomas Mielke, Oil World editor and CEO, and Emily French, ConsiliAgra managing director, addressed the situation during the conference and both were reasonably optimistic that China would meet their obligations.
“When the ‘Phase 1’ agreement was made in mid-January, I think there was a great expectation that all of a sudden purchases will start happening. Well, there were several more things that needed to happen, and fortunately those additional steps have been taking place,” Sutter said.
An important first step is removing the tariff on U.S. soybeans.
“The purchases that China is making these days are coming from Brazil because that’s the market that is really trying to push out their crop. I think it was the opinion of the experts that we had at our conference that by the middle of this year, and we got varying dates depending on the expert, but sometime between May and August is when we should see the Chinese move to the U.S. and start sourcing soybeans here,” Sutter said.
There are reports from USSEC’s boots on the ground in China that the African swine fever situation is improving, maybe even improving faster than anticipated.
Soybean meal feedings and the incorporation into rations have increased. China also drew down its soybean stocks.
“We are still optimistic that China will live up to the ‘Phase 1’ agreements. It will be heavily done in the last half of this calendar year because it was a calendar-year shipment period. Whereas, the U.S. oftentimes look at our marketing year, which ends the end of August for soybeans, so we won’t fulfill the ‘Phase 1’ quantity in this marketing year, but in this calendar year is what we need to look at,” Sutter said.
There’s been talk about shipping container availability due to the pandemic.
During a panel discussion at the conference, a representative of an Illinois grain company said it hasn’t had a problem getting containers.
“We have heard about worries about container supplies from people. I don’t know how severe the actual constraint is on our ability to ship with containers,” Sutter said.
“Clearly, we need to get the containers flowing around the world, and I think first we had the tariff situation, which maybe caused some surges to take place as people wanted to ship things at certain times to beat a tariff going into effect, and then clearly the COVID-19 situation has probably limited some container movement, as well.
“I’m not really sure how dramatically it is affecting shipments. I know it’s a big worry for people.”
“Certainly, there have been some delays, but nothing that has truly caused a major supply issue for our importers,” Leeck added.
