Soy protein is a protein that is isolated from soybean. It is made from soybean meal that has been dehulled and defatted. Dehulled and defatted soybeans are processed into different kinds of high protein commercial products: soy flour, concentrates, isolates and soy flour.
The industry is highly fragmented in terms of products, end uses and suppliers, but its markets can broadly be categorized as food industry and feed industry. Processed meat product, dairy replacement, and confectionery are important applications in food & beverage applications. Until 2016, China overall was the dominant producer and exporter of soy protein concentrate, but USA and Europe remained their stable position in global market. Leading players in soy protein industry are ADM, Cargill, CHS, DuPont, Yuwang Group, Gushen Biological Technology Group, Sojaprotein etc.
In the report, our data covered Soy Protein Concentrate, Soy Protein Isolate, Textured Soy Protein and Soy Flour. In the four products, Soy Flour occupies the largest market share due to the cheap price and simple production process. Soy Protein Isolate has a high price. In the TSP market, ADM, DuPont, Sojaprotein and Shandong Yuxin Bio-Tech are the main participants. In the Soy Flour market, ADM, Cargill and CHS hold an absolute market share. In the SPC market, ADM, DuPont, Gushen Group, Tiancheng Group and Yuwang Group are market leaders. In the SPI market, ADM and CHS are market leaders.
A key variable in the performance of soy protein producers is raw material costs, specifically the speed at which any increase can be passed through to customers. The materials of soy protein include soybean, alcohol and hydrochloric acid. This injects short-term volatility into margins and stock prices.
According to this study, over the next five years the Soy Protein market will register a 7.0% CAGR in terms of revenue, the global market size will reach US$ 10700 million by 2024, from US$ 7140 million in 2019. In particular, this report presents the global market share (sales and revenue) of key companies in Soy Protein business, shared in Chapter 3.
This report presents a comprehensive overview, market shares, and growth opportunities of Soy Protein market by product type, application, key manufacturers and key regions and countries.
This study considers the Soy Protein value and volume generated from the sales of the following segments:
Segmentation by product type: breakdown data from 2014 to 2019, in Section 2.3; and forecast to 2024 in section 11.7.
Segmentation by application: breakdown data from 2014 to 2019, in Section 2.4; and forecast to 2024 in section 11.8.
