High prices will hurt export of soyabean meal that is used in livestock and poultry feed industry.
In major mandis of Madhya Pradesh, prices were between Rs 4000-4100 a quintal, while in Maharashtra it was in the range of Rs 3900-4100 a quintal.
Soybean prices have jumped 15 percent in the past two months on expectation of lower crop expected this year and higher demand.
Traders and analyst expect prices to remain bullish until the arrival of the new oil seed crop of mustard in March, which will then ease prices of the overall edible oil segment including soybean.
Millers said investors, traders and stockists had taken positions in the commodity in anticipation of high prices.
“There is hoarding of stock which is unwarranted. The prices are not viable for mills, who are buying only for 15-30 days requirement,” said Davish Jain , chairman of the Soybean Processors Association of India, adding that he did not these prices to sustain at higher level.
High prices will also hurt export of soyabean meal used as feed in livestock and poultry industry, said Jain.
“It’s unviable for us to export soyabean meal this year. Compared to Brazil, Argentina and US, we are 25 % costlier,” said Jain. In 2019-20, India exported 2.2 mllion tonnes of soyabean meal and this year it targets 1 million tonne.
In major mandis of Madhya Pradesh, prices ruled between Rs 4000-4100 a quintal, while in Maharashtra it was in the range of Rs 3900- 4100 a quintal, said Ravi Chandra, COO, Transgraph Consulting.
He said industry expects soyabean output to be 8-8.5 million tonnes, much lower than the official estimate of 13.5 million tonnes because untimely rain damaged the crop.
Dinesh Kumar Mangal, owner of Hari Om Traders in the Indore mandi, said prices had risen sharply.
“Last year, at this time, the prices were at Rs 3400-3500 a quintal. Large companies have already signed contracts for future deliveries, while small mills are buying for 1-15 days requirement. Some companies like ITC Limited, Dhanuka Oil Mill, Prestige Feed mills continue to buy good quality crop,” he said.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
