This week, members of ISA’s board and staff participated in the National Biodiesel Board (NBB) Membership Meeting. The virtual meeting, which took place on June 22-24, featured a range of interactive webinars covering important topics, such as fuel quality research, carbon neutrality and the value of brand marketing. If you were unable to join, you can visit here to get links to the content covered and recaps from the event.
On Friday, June 19, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit chose to support the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) legal authority and deny a petition that sought to invalidate EPA’s Cancellation and Existing Stocks Order issued June 8. The American Soybean Association (ASA) applauded the decision, stating that “immediately banning use of existing stocks of Xtendimax, Engenia, and FeXapan would have financially devastating consequences on America’s soybean growers,” adding that “American growers and the public are fortunate that a proper administrative and judicial-review framework exists.” Read ASA’s full response and more about the court’s ruling here .
The American Soybean Association (ASA) is celebrating its “First Soy Century” as it recognizes 100 years throughout 2020. Your family can be part of the history by submitting a photo for ASA’s photo montage. To be part of the montage, just submit a photo of your family on your farm by July 6. The photo must be in one of the following file types: JPEG, PNG or GIF. If you have any questions or to submit your photo, email asaphotos@indianasoybean.com .
The United Soybean Board (USB) released the 2019 Soybean Meal Demand Study , which breaks down the amount of soybean meal fed into animal agriculture over the 2017-2018 soybean market years. The study dives into how soybean meal stacks up against other competitor substitutes and takes a closer look at the feed industry. Read the full study here .
This #PESTweek ILSoyAdvisor focuses on eight common Illinois soybean pests . Kelly Estes, Illinois Pest Survey Program, explains what to look for when scouting insects this summer. Read Estes’s article and get the latest in-season, actionable advice at ILSoyAdvisor.com .
Chicago residents heading to parks this summer will enjoy cleaner air, thanks to a pilot project using B100 to fuel Chicago Park District refuse haulers. The project is a partnership between the park district, ISA and the American Lung Association. New technology allows the vehicles to start on diesel fuel and switch automatically to 100 percent biodiesel after warming up. The results? Unprecedented reductions in carbon emissions and additional market opportunities for soybeans. Read more here .
We’re reading about five lock and dam sites on the Illinois Waterway that will be closed for repairs this summer. Closures will take place simultaneously to lessen impact to commercial navigation. All lock and dam facilities on the Illinois Waterway have a single lock chamber for passing vessels, and during the scheduled closures, no vessels will be able to pass through the affected locks. The rest of the navigation on the river between locks will not be impacted by the closures. Read the full schedule and get more information here .
The weed that represents the biggest threat to Midwestern corn and soybean production is waterhemp because it has outsmarted almost every kind of herbicide on the market today. However, University of Illinois scientists are working to reveal waterhemp’s tricks. In two recent studies, Illinois researchers looked to explain their resistance and the results found that a multi-pronged approach might be the best way to control the weed. Read more about their research here .
During the International Grains Conference last week, U.S. Soybean Export Council (USSEC) CEO Jim Sutter stressed the importance of sustainability for U.S. soy farmers to maintain and meet the needs of a growing population. Sutter delivered this message to over 370 international attendees of this virtual conference, as a response to the current demand from customers for sustainably sourced soy. Read more about the conference and Sutter’s keynote address here .
Reminder that the three-part webinar series from the Illinois Sustainable Ag Partnership (ISAP) is underway! The first recording is already available here . Today’s webinar (June 25) will cover soil health management with LaSalle County farmer Carl Zimmerman. The final session on July 2 will explore how companies across the ag supply chain are responding to consumer and market demand for sustainably produced products. Sign up here .
On Thursday, July 9, the Illinois Livestock Development Group (ILDG) and the Illinois Pork Producers Association (IPPA) are holding an Open House to celebrate the new pig barn near Tamaroa, IL for the Joshua and Desiree, and Paul and Christina Kuberski families. The event will take place from 4:30 – 7:30 p.m. at 7044 Swan Road, Tamaroa, IL 62888. To ensure health and safety of visitors, the event will take place outside under a tent to allow for social distancing. Tours can be taken of the barn with limited quantities of guests at a time. For more information about the event contact Jenny Jackson 217-529-3100.
The Center for Food Integrity (CFI) is hosting a webcast, titled “CFI Now: COVID-19 Pivot from Panic to Progress” on Tuesday, July 14 from 11 a.m. – 2 p.m. CT. The webcast will feature three different sessions on consumer insights and the future of food and agriculture. While the webcast is free, CFI has requested donations to Feeding American and the Restaurant Association Employee Relief Fund (RERF) be considered. Register for one, two or all three session and find the full agenda here .
Learn how progressive farmers manage their crops using plant growth regulators (PGRs) in the July 14 ILSoyAdvisor webinar. Presenters Dale Hanke and Ryan Miller from Stoller will discuss the yield-limiting effects of stress on soybeans and how proper nutrition and PGRs timed at critical crop stages can help farmers break through yield barriers. Learn more and register for the July 14 webinar online.
Let’s talk taxes. We all must address this issue on a yearly basis, so the July 15 AMP webinar session will aim to take the frustration and fear out of the equation. Presenters Jessie Shoopman and Emily Carls, Illinois Farm Business Farm Management, will explain what is new, different and unique about taxes in 2019 and 2020, and the pros and cons of using entity structures to change tax situations. Attend this third session in ISA’s Agribusiness Management Program (AMP) summer webinar series at 10 a.m. on July 15 to learn more. Register for this session and the entire series at ILSoyAdvisor.com .
One week to take control of pesticide resistance. Follow us for pest management and stewardship resources during #PESTweek — brought to you by @TakeActionWeeds. https://iwilltakeaction.com
See more tweets from @ILSoyAdvisor and “follow” along on Twitter.
