A National Mask Mandate Could Save The U.S. Economy $1 Trillion, Goldman Sachs Says
Before Trump’s trade war with China started in April 2018 soybeans sold for over $10 per bushel. In just three months its price fell under $9 per bushel and stayed there for most of the rest of the year. There were a series of rebounds and dips during 2019 but essentially they traded around $9 per bushel for the year.
While the agreement’s agricultural goal should drive soybean prices higher, they actually fell on Wednesday as shown in the far right graph below. The markets may be waiting to see actual Chinese soybean purchases, but since markets are forward looking this isn’t a good initial indicator for prices.
In calendar 2017 the U.S. exported $24 billion in agricultural products to China. Of that total $12.2 billion was soybeans or just over 50%. Soybean exports to China fell 75% to $3.1 billion in 2018 after President Trump started the trade war in April that year. This was just 24% of 2018’s total.
This led to a drop in the number of acres planted for soybeans and a huge percentage decline for China exports.
And a large decrease in farmers’ net income.
Chad Bown, senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, has done an analysis of the overall Phase One trade deal and the four sub-targets. His analysis of the agricultural sub-target shows that it will be extremely difficult for China to import enough to hit the increases outlined in the agreement. This is extremely critical since soybeans had been the majority of ag exports to China.
The deal commits China to a $19.5 billion increase in agricultural trade from 2017 to 2021.
Achieving the goal is compounded by an outbreak of African Swine Fever, which has forced farmers to cull millions of pigs and therefore reduce their need for soybeans to feed them.
For a detailed breakdown of all four trade sub-targets and the growth required to hit their targets check out Bown’s analysis . It also includes an overview on how the U.S. will determine if China has hit the targets and how the U.S. could retaliate if it hasn’t.
American Farm Bureau Federation President Zippy Duvall said , “China was once the largest market for U.S. agricultural products but has dropped to fifth largest since retaliatory tariffs were introduced. This agreement will help turn around two years of declining agricultural exports. The potential of tens of billions more in exports is welcome news for farmers who are eager to compete on a more level playing field.”
Duvall is right if China can come through on the numbers outlined in Phase One. However, as Bown’s analysis for agricultural products shows and my article on the overall increases needed to hit the total target , this is highly unlikely.
The Farm Bureau provided these facts.
In 2014, U.S. agricultural exports to China exceeded $24 billion.
From 2017 to 2018, U.S. agricultural exports to China fell more than 50 percent, dropping to $9.1 billion.
National Farmers Union President Roger Johnson said , “After so many months of uncertainty and escalating tensions, it is a good sign that our two countries appear to have found common ground.” He added, ““But given the numerous deals that have been reached and then breached in the past two years, we are also skeptical. And without more concrete details, we are deeply concerned that all of this pain may not have been worth it. Not only has this trade war cost farmers billions of dollars worth of sales to China, but it has also bruised our reputation, making other trading partners reluctant to work with us.”
Johnson’s statement about trading partners becoming reluctant to work with the U.S. will be compounded by China taking the initiative to become less dependent on U.S. goods in future years.
Farmers were the first to realize that they lost a lot of Chinese market share to other countries or that China will start to grow more of the crops they have been importing. It has taken two decades to grow the Chinese market but a significant amount may be permanently lost even with the Phase One deal.
