Soybean output may decline by over 17% as rains, water-logging damage crops
Last Updated at October 11, 2019 22:36 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
The country’s soybean output may decline by over 17 per cent this year on the back of heavy crop damage in major growing regions owing to flood-ravaged water logging.
Data by the Soybean Processors Association (SOPA) shows the overall soybean output at 9 million tonnes (mt) for the current harvesting season, as against the revised downward output estimate of 10.9 mt for the previous year. SOPA had earlier estimated the overall soybean output at 11.48 mt for the kharif harvesting season 2018. “Farmers carried out soybean sowing aggressively in these states between June ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
