This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
The U.S. stock market had been Teflon-like to an array of geopolitical developments, including escalation with China on multiple fronts. But Reuters and Bloomberg on Monday reported that China asked its state-owned companies to halt its purchases of U.S. soybeans and pork . That is the type of move analysts have said could derail the trade deal—a risk that will rattle markets.
Citing sources, the agencies reported that China was moving to cease buying U.S. soybeans, pork, and other agricultural products in response to the U.S. saying it would revoke special privileges for Hong Kong after Beijing imposed a new security law that erodes the territory’s autonomy. China had significantly increased its purchases since Phase 1 of the trade deal was signed in January, when the nation committed to buying an additional $200 billion of U.S. goods, including $50 billion in agricultural products.
Analysts have warned that any signs the trade deal could be at risk would get the market’s attention. Neither economy can take more tariffs at the moment, as both the U.S. and China grapple with the fallout from the pandemic—but Hong Kong is one area policy-watchers have cautioned that China won’t back down.
“The move from China is a political warning shot. Soybeans were the poster boy of [President Donald] Trump’s trade deal victory. By threatening the big win for [U.S.] farmers, Beijing is pressuring what Trump views as a pillar of his re-election campaign,” says Rory Green, an economist at independent research firm TS Lombard. Analysts had been skeptical about the purchase commitments in the phase one pact even before Covid-19, but Green says the outbreak has wrecked the market for energy commodities and Boeing planes that comprised the bulk of China’s nonagricultural purchases in the deal.
“I don’t think China wants to openly walk from the deal. They can, but [they] probably want to put the onus on the U.S.,” Scott Kennedy, a senior adviser in Chinese Business and Economics at the Center for Strategic and International Studies said on a video call about China. “If Trump walks fully from deal, it helps him keep tough-guy bonafides, but it definitely means it’s harder for American farmers, who are counting on growth of these exports to help them in middle of deepest recession in long time and now domestic civil unrest. So this would be a third punch to the gut for some Americans.”
The S&P 500 has rebounded 36% off its late March lows, largely unfazed by the tensions with China. However, stocks were lower Monday morning.
Some strategists are warning clients to be cautious. Strategists at BCA Research on Monday recommended a tactically defensive stance for clients. “The rally faces significant near-term risks because of the potential for tumultuous political and geopolitical events throughout the summer,” they wrote in a client note.
In the note, the strategists write that the “phase one trade deal was never going to bring durable comfort to markets about US-China cooperation.” U.S.-China relations are breaking down, as the team warned in early March as the U.S. reacted to the Covid-19 outbreak. “The higher the market goes, the more willing President Trump will be to expend some ammunition on China and other political targets. But if you play with sticks, somebody always gets hurt,” they write, adding that investors should stay defensive tactically with reflation indicators not yet confirming the market’s recent rally and geopolitical risks intensifying.
Gavekal Research’s Anatole Kaletsky also offers four reasons investors should be cautious, even though he admits he was wrong when he told clients two months ago that it was too early to buy. “After spending the past 10 years explaining why the global economic expansion would continue and that investors should buy on dips, I believe the risks of equity investment far outweigh potential rewards, at least for the next few months,” Kaletsky says.
Much of the rally has been fueled by better news about Covid-19 drugs and infections—headline-driven developments that Kaletsky says favors retail investors and AI-trained algorithms. But ultimately stock prices won’t be about health statistics and vaccines but rather economic conditions and corporate profits.
And while everyone is watching for what happens in the weeks after lockdowns are eased and when life returns to “normal,” Kaletsky warns this will be a lot less telling in terms of how unemployment or business investment will respond to widespread bankruptcies and weak demand in previously hot growth sectors like travel and hospitality. In other words, early post-lockdown data points may not be as indicative as market may think.
With shares of Apple (AAPL), Tesla (TSLA) and even Walmart (WMT) at higher prices than pre-Covid, Kaletsky says that the market is “looking ahead” to a post-Covid world. But, he says, given the unprecedented nature of this recession, “this faith in forward-looking market pricing is another fallacy in my view.”
While equity prices normally start to rebound before recessions end, that is not always the case—take 2001 when markets fell another 30% in the 10 months following the official end of the recession in November—and the bear market this time has been far briefer and shallower than others. Plus, the market isn’t at rock-bottom valuations in a way that investors could be pleasantly surprised if the recovery is stronger than they expect.
Though Kaletsky says the one- to three-year outlook for equities could be “very bullish,” the next one to three quarters could be bumpier, with a retest of the March lows “almost inevitable.” If the past week is any indicator, there will be plenty of bumps along the way.
