From August 1, DGFT has stopped accepting MEIS applications for soybean meal and deactivated the relevant link for online filing of claims.
The Soybean Processors Association of India (SOPA) has urged the commerce and industry minister Piyush Goyal to immediately issue necessary instructions to DGFT to release the MEIS scrips at 7per cent for all exports of soybean meal and save the exporters. .
From August 1, DGFT has stopped accepting MEIS applications for soybean meal and deactivated the relevant link for online filing of claims. When approached, DGFT office has given the following reply: The MEIS benefit was given in the Foreign Trade Policy 2015-2020 and notified through a public notice from time to time. The last public notice No. 44/2015-20 dated 5th December, 2017 in this regard notified MEIS benefit of 7 per cent on soybean meal (HS Code 2304) with effect from 1.11.2017, without an end date, making the benefit valid till the end of the current Exim Policy 2015-20, unless withdrawn earlier.
The exporters of soybean meal have factored in the 7 per cent MEIS benefit while quoting their rates and a denial of the benefit to them at this time and retrospectively would be wholly unjustified, as it would put therm to irreparable financial losses.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
