This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Soybeans may not be on your mind the next time you buy chicken or pork in the grocery store. But soybean meal is now the predominant feedstock for poultry and other livestock. And the prospect of stiff new tariffs on exports of U.S. soy to China —announced yesterday—is causing consternation for farmers and food producers.
Soy exports to China have risen steadily for years and now top $12 billion annually, up from $1 billion in 2001, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. In theory, if China goes forth with its proposed 25% tariffs on U.S. agricultural goods, it could ramp up domestic soy supplies. That could lower feedstock prices, benefiting U.S. meat processors such as Hormel Foods (HRL) and Tyson Foods (TSN).
But investors don’t appear to be sold on that argument, and nor should they be. Shares of both companies are trading lower today, following China’s announcement of the proposed tariffs. According to a note this morning from Credit Suisse, it’s “way too early” to assume that the Chinese tariffs on U.S. soy will cause domestic supplies to ramp up, lowering feedstock costs for livestock producers and processors.
Freight and labor costs, both of which have been rising, are likely to have a much bigger financial impact on meat producers, Credit Suisse says. Moreover, China’s proposed tariffs could put a damper on exports—more than offsetting gains from lower feedstock costs. Tyson’s stock fell 6.2% on Monday—the biggest single-day decline in about 17 months—on concerns that Chinese tariffs would whack the firm’s exports.
If there’s a winner in the U.S.-China war over soybeans, it may be countries such as Brazil , along with firms that store and transport the product from South America. If U.S. soy exports to China dry up, exports from Brazil may fill in the gap—a trend that’s already happening. U.S. soy exports to China in the fourth quarter of 2017 were down 26% from a year ago, while Brazilian shipments more than tripled, according to the USDA.
If the trend continues, it could be a boon for grain-trading and transport firm Bunge (BG). The firm operates South American ports and grain elevators that would become more valuable to customers in a U.S.-China trade war over soybeans, Credit Suisse says. Those assets could also become more profitable for Bunge if China decides that it would rather buy soy and other agricultural goods from Brazil than the U.S.
Sign up to Review & Preview, a new daily email from Barron’s. Every evening we’ll review the news that moved markets during the day and look ahead to what it means for your portfolio in the morning.
Soybeans may not be on your mind the next time you buy chicken or pork in the grocery store.
