Harvest contract soybean futures, which were pushing toward $10 per bushel in early January, are now bouncing off a bottom that is $1.50 less per bushel.  The price chart resembles an Olympic ski slope that would challenge the abilities of Lindsey Vonn.
Most of the price erosion has occurred since the U.S. and China signed the highly touted Phase 1 trade agreement to break a stalemate over tariffs on trade.
What has happened to create such an economic loss for soybean growers? The prime reason is that China has been buying all its needed soybeans from Brazil. Brazil's January to April 2020 exports to China were 906 million bushels. For reference, that's more than all U.S. soybean exports to China since February 2019.
And the reason for Chinese business going almost totally to Brazil is the fact the Brazilian currency continues to erode in value and the Chinese yuan can buy many more bushels of Brazilian beans than it can buy U.S. soybeans. The Chinese are not dumb, trade agreement or not. And the lack of demand has resulted in a 15% decline in soybean prices over the past two months.
Interestingly, China would have purchased more soybeans from Brazil than it has. But domestic demand for soybean meal in China is down because its hog herd is only 40% of what it was about 18 months ago. Millions of hogs fell victim to mortality resulting from African swine fever. That 900 million bushels of soybeans China purchased from Brazil this year might have been about 1.5 billion bushels, with a normal Chinese swine herd.
Meanwhile, U.S. farmers have bins full of soybeans, some of them going out of condition because they were stored at too high of moisture and there was no demand for U.S. beans earlier this year that pushed up prices. Soybean values remain in the doldrums at levels disappointing to farmers who reveled over the signing of the Phase 1 trade agreement..
So far in 2020, China has purchased $3.1 billion in U.S agricultural commodities of the $12.5 billion expected. President Trump has frequently said China has been buying “a lot” of farm commodities, although ag economists disagree with that relative volume. He says he will report “in a week or two” whether China is living up to its obligations under the Phase 1 trade agreement, said he was “watching closely” whether China would meet its commitments to increase U.S. goods purchases under the trade deal.
With the White House anger over the Chinese origin of the coronavirus, the public opinion of both countries about each other has shifted significantly according to observers. Iowa State University ag economist Dr. Wendong Zhang says, “One of the things even since the trade war is the Chinese political and business leadership relationship are expecting a bumpy relationship between the two countries regardless of who goes to the White House next year.”
It sounds like U.S. soybean farmers may need another market with more stability.
1990: Farm Progress Show host family Lisa, Ida Kay, Richard and Craig Boggs size up this year's show in Amana, Iowa.
1978: An FS Services representative explained to viewers just how these micromini tractors were modified to compete in pulls at the Farm Progress Show.
JIM BOWLING, HERALD & REVIEW Central Progress Avenue is pictured from a helicopter tour vantage point during the second day of the Farm Progress Show Wednesday.
JIM BOWLING, HERALD & REVIEW Progress City is pictured from a helicopter tour vantage point during the second day of the Farm Progress Show Wednesday.
Taron Freeman wears promotional bags around his neck while visiting the Farm Progress Show with fellow Stevenson School sixth graders during a field trip in August. The Howard G. Buffett Foundation provided funds to allow all Decatur Public School sixth-grade classes to experience the event. On Monday, Decatur school officials announced that Buffett would provide $1.6 million to fund a new agriculture academy.
Brandt Group of Companies shows off its agricultural augers at the 2017 Farm Progress Show in Decatur.
JIM BOWLING, HERALD & REVIEW Ray Ainsworth conducts a horse training session.
U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue, middle right, chats with attendees in the Archer Daniels Midland Co. tent.
CLAY JACKSON, HERALD & REVIEW Larry Ring checks out a 1932 Ford that was on display at the O'Reilly Booth Wednesday during the 2017 Farm Progress Show site at Progress City USA in Decatur. Ring is from Effingham.
CLAY JACKSON, HERALD & REVIEW The crowd listens to country singer Easton Corbin Wednesday during the 2017 Farm Progress Show site at Progress City USA in Decatur. The concert is sponsored by Ram Trucks and was free to the public.
Exhibitors and attendees talk in the DuPont Pioneer tent during the second day of the Farm Progress Show Aug. 30 in Decatur.
Attendees walk on West Progress Avenue at Progress City, as viewed from the top of the grain bin at the Chief Agri Industrial Division exhibit, during the 2013 Farm Progress Show in Decatur.
Stu Ellis is an observer of the Central Illinois agriculture scene. In addition to his weekly column, you can view his “From The Farm” and “Harvest Heritage” reports on WCIA 3 News.
