Several UK supermarkets say they cannot guarantee their supply chains do not include soya from deforested areas.
Tesco, M&S and several other UK supermarkets admit that they cannot guarantee that soya from deforested areas is not in their supply chain despite commitments to phase out its use, the Guardian has found.
An investigation has revealed that Tesco, Asda, Morrisons and M&S all buy products from UK farmers using animal feed that includes soya from Argentina . About 14% of Argentina’s planted soya is in the north of the country, where deforestation has laid waste to huge areas of the Gran Chaco forest.
Argentinian officials have confirmed to the Guardian that there is no traceability system for soya from deforested areas, which appears to be mixed with soya from other parts of the country before being sold on to the UK and other parts of the world. Pablo Cortese, from Senasa, Argentina’s equivalent of the US Food and Drug Administration, said there was no demand from buyers for traceability: “If the big grain traders demanded it, the same way that citrus fruit buyers demand it, Argentina would have no choice but to comply. It’s the buyer who imposes traceability always.”
The Guardian visited the Gran Chaco and saw bulldozers at work. Huge soya plantations stretched between small leftover islands of forest. A zoning system put in place by the Argentinian government a few years ago does not appear to have slowed the rapid deforestation, as seen in the satellite images produced by Global Forest Watch .
Rise of the 'wonder bean': from deforestation to your plate | Bibi van der Zee, Anna Gross, Uki Goñi
The local grain wholesalers buy soy from different farmers and regions and mix it in the same silos before they sell it to the larger grain trading companies. “It’s too difficult to trace soya in Argentina,” Cortese told the Guardian. “So it’s impossible to say, ‘This particular grain of soya came from this particular farm.’” The soy is then shipped out of private grain-exporting terminals in Argentina’s Rosario and San Lorenzo ports, with a significant amount coming to the UK. UK farms using feed that includes this soya supply a number of supermarkets, including Tesco, M&S, Asda and Morrisons.
Other producers and retailers are also likely to find Argentinian soya in their supply chain. The figures vary, because soya is traded under different classifications (soybeans, soymeal, oilcake) but according to MIT’s data about 55% of the UK’s soybean meal comes from Argentina.
The Gran Chaco is over-shadowed by the Amazon rainforest.
UK retailers agree that there is a problem with soya traceability. Tesco said it has a detailed plan to eliminate deforested soya from its supply chain by 2025. Marks & Spencer agreed that Argentinian soya is in the company’s supply chain: it is working towards a 2020 goal of zero deforestation, and refers to the work of the Retailers’ Soy Group and the UK Roundtable on Sustainable Soya.
Asda is working towards sustainable soya sourcing by 2020 for its own-brand meat, fish and dairy products. It is also looking into its entire supply chain, with the aim of sourcing 100% responsible soya by 2025 for its primary protein range, including fresh meat, fish and milk. Morrisons did not respond to Guardian queries. ( Full statements can be found here .)
But the problem is so extensive that many scientists and campaigners question whether voluntary initiatives will solve the problem. Soya is one of the global commodities most closely associated with deforestation, along with palm oil, beef, timber and paper, and it is the second largest driver of deforestation, according to WWF.
