A National Mask Mandate Could Save The U.S. Economy $1 Trillion, Goldman Sachs Says
When Trump declared that a Phase One deal had been struck with China in October he said that China would be buying $40 to $50 billion in U.S. agricultural products. However, no time frame has been given (is this over multiple years?) and the details for Phase One are still being hammered out.
If China has stepped up its soybean purchases or if the market believes that it will there should have been a rebound in its price. Unfortunately, it seemed to peak right after Phase One was announced and has recently gone on a skid to under $9 per bushel.
It is important to know how important soybeans are to American farmers. In 2018 the value of corn was $51.5 billion, with soybeans coming in second at $39 billion. The next largest crop was hay, a distant third at $17 billion. For comparison the value of apples grown in the U.S. was about $4 billion and oranges was $2 billion.
China had been buying 30-35 million tons of soybeans per year , which was 22% to 25% of total U.S. production.
China buying 30-35 million tons:
·     Is 22% to 25% of the total U.S. production
·     $8.5 to $10 billion in revenue from China to U.S. farmers
However, soybean exports to China fell by 53% in the 2018-2019 marketing year or by 546 million bushels. Assuming an average price of $9 per bushel this created $4.9 billion in lost income.
While there was a pickup in exports to other countries, the net impact was just under 100 million bushels or $900 million. Overall soybean farmer’s income took about a $4 billion hit from the export market. While subsidies from the federal government help , they aren’t necessarily distributed evenly to make up for everyone’s losses.
Farmers are probably the first to realize that they will have lost a lot of Chinese market share to other countries or that China will start to grow more of the crops they have been importing themselves. It has taken two decades to grow the Chinese market but a significant amount will be lost in just a few years due to Trump’s tariffs and China’s retaliation.
President Trump can’t be wholly blamed for the stagnation in farmland prices, but his trade policies are not helping. Starting in the second half of 2014 farmland prices have fallen year over year for 10 quarters and only risen in 4 of them. Farmland prices are important since they are a critical asset farmers use to borrow money.
I provide independent research of technology companies and was previously one of two analysts that determined the technology holdings for Atlantic Trust (Invesco's high net worth group), a firm with $15 billion under management. Before joining Atlantic Trust I was the Internet Security Software analyst for Smith Barney (where I authored the most comprehensive industry report “Internet Security Software: The Ultimate Internet Infrastructure”) and an Enterprise Server Hardware analyst at Salomon Brothers. Prior to becoming an equity analyst, I spent 16 years at IBM in a variety of sales and manufacturing positions. I have a B.S. in Industrial Engineering from Stanford University and a Postgraduate Diploma in Economics from the University of Sussex, England.
