Organic soybean prices remail elevated along with organic soybean meal prices , as shipments from India remain below average. News from India, the largest shipper of organic soybean meal to the United States, describes a situation where shipments are behind and will likely take approximately 60-days to catch up according to Merchandisers.
COVID infections are accelerating, now that the country has loosened restrictions and allowed states and local governments to make their own decisions about movements. India is the fourth worst-hit country in the world according to Johns Hopkins University data. The number of cases has spiked in recent days and the cumulative numbers are now over 332,000. While this is not a certainty, there could be another lockdown if the cases in India continue to spiral out of control. With nearly 70% of the organic soybeans/meal import coming from India, prices could remain elevated and climb higher.
US retail sales surged higher in May rising nearly 18%, with most of the gains in the auto sector. There were also very strong gains in the grocery store sector, which should help continue to buoy organic animal protein retail sales (eggs, chicken, turkey, dairy). Grocery store sales rose a robust 14.3% year over year in May. With restaurants still having a difficult time opening, this sector should continue to remain buoyed.
Restaurants face a cash crunch. Not only are restaurants in need of cash for their reopenings they need to deal with overdue bills. Food suppliers are also in a bind as most of their supply chain was crushed by the stay at home orders. Restaurants, with their high failure rate even in good times, have trouble getting financing from banks, and the situation is worse now. This could further put upward pressure on grocery store retail sales further buoying organic grain prices.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
