CHICAGO, Oct. 5 (Xinhua) -- Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) agricultural futures settled higher for the trading week which ended on Oct. 4, with soybean futures rising over 3 percent as private U.S. traders reported new export sales to China.
The most active corn contract for December delivery was up 13.25 cents, or 3.57 percent week on week, to close at 3.8475 dollars per bushel on Friday. November soybeans were up 33.25 cent, or 3.77 percent, to settle at 9.1625 dollars per bushel. December wheat was up 3.25 cents, or 0.67 percent, to close at 4.905 dollars per bushel.
CBOT agricultural futures closed higher on Monday, with corn and wheat futures rising as U.S. governmental crop report showed smaller than expected stockpiles.
In its quarterly grain stocks report released Monday, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) pegged the U.S. corn supply, as of Sept. 1, at 2.11 billion bushels. Insiders expected the USDA to print stocks at 2.428 billion bushels.
For soybeans, stocks were pegged at 913 million bushels vs. the average trade estimate of 982 million bushels.
USDA placed Sept. 1 wheat stocks at 2.38 billion bushels vs. the average trade estimate at 2.318 billion.
Soybeans also rose on smaller than expected stockpile. Concerns about excessive rains in the U.S. Midwest and dry weather in some South American crop areas also supported the prices.
CBOT agricultural futures ended higher on Tuesday, with soybean futures rising over 1 percent on investors' technical buying and smaller than expected stockpiles.
Corn futures went up on technical buying after hitting a seven-week high on Monday as U.S. governmental crop report showed smaller than expected stockpiles.
Soybean futures were higher on technical buying after Monday's smaller than expected USDA quarterly stocks estimate and fresh purchases from China.
Slower than normal harvest progress also underpinned prices. The USDA said 7 percent of U.S. soybeans were harvested as of Sunday, compared with 20 percent on average.
CBOT agricultural futures ended lower on Wednesday, as investors turned to technical selling after the markets rallied in the previous session.
Corn futures went down on technical selling after December contract rose over 1 percent on Tuesday. Ample supplies and lackluster U.S. export demand also weighed on prices.
Losses were pared by concerns about a slow start to the U.S. harvest, with rains delaying some fieldwork this week.
Wheat futures were lower on technical selling after hitting a seven-week high early in the week. Ample global wheat stocks and stiff competition for U.S. exports added pressure.
Soybean futures' decline was limited by continuing support from the USDA quarterly stocks report on Monday that showed domestic soybean supplies were tighter than expected.
CBOT agricultural futures settled mixed on Thursday, with soybean futures falling slightly despite fresh crop export sales to top soy buyer China.
Soybean futures retreated from early gains on technical selling after failing to take out the 10-week high hit on Tuesday.
Traders shrugged off signs of strong export demand for U.S. soybeans.
The USDA reported export sales of U.S. soybeans in the week ending Sept. 26 at 2.076 million metric tons, above trade insiders' expectations for 900,000 to 1.4 million metric tons.
The USDA on Thursday confirmed private sales of 252,000 metric tons of U.S. soybeans to China for shipment in the 2019/20 marketing year.
Wheat futures eased on profit-taking following an early-week rally to seven-week highs and concerns about ample global supplies and limited demand for U.S. exports.
The USDA reported export sales of U.S. wheat in the week to Sept. 26 at 328,500 metric tons, within trade insiders' expectations for 200,000 to 600,000 metric tons.
CBOT agricultural futures settled mixed on Friday, with soybean futures rising on technical buying and lower than expected yields.
Soybean futures rose to their two-month high on Friday, with the market underpinned by concerns domestic production will fall below expectations.
Analysts said early harvest reports from farmers were showing soybean yields below expectations, and they were expected to dip even further when farmers begin combining in fields that were planted later in the spring.
Wheat futures closed higher on a round of late short covering after trading in negative territory for much of the session, traders said.
