U.S. soy trade mission to China reveals relief, uncertainty after trade war detente
CHICAGO, Jan 21 (Reuters) - As dozens of U.S. and Chinese
trade agreement signing, a much smaller group of U.S. soy
Yangon International Airport before departing for Shanghai.
The pact signed by U.S. President Donald Trump and China's
Chief Executive Jim Sutter and U.S. farmers, visited China for
held ahead of the country's Lunar New Year celebrations. They
visited Myanmar on another market development mission.
The trip was more cordial than any of the handful of U.S.
trade war began in 2018, Sutter said in an interview. The trade
But despite the trade deal, which included a vow by Beijing
trade war. But in terms of how this is going to work, there are
still lots of questions," he said.
been ordered by the government to prioritize U.S. soy purchases
or been offered any economic incentive to do so. None indicated
trade war as Beijing slapped steep tariffs on U.S. shipments and
importers relied heavily on South American soy.
Beijing has, at times, offered tariff waivers to importers,
but has not lifted its 25% retaliatory duties.
baseline level of $24 billion next year.
If the mix of products were to remain similar, China's U.S.
need to exceed 43 million tonnes at today's prices, according to
tonnes exported to China in 2016.
Whether that is achievable is unclear, particularly because
soybeans are currently cheaper in rival supplier Brazil, where
farmers are preparing to harvest a likely record-large crop.
"If you want to see a lot of U.S. purchases in the short
run, this isn't the best timing for this new agreement. We're on
the cusp of the South American season," Sutter said, adding that
exportable supplies in South American dwindle.
as African swine fever has decimated its hog herd, the world's
figure out how they do that," Sutter said.
"There's a lot of good will. There's a lot of optimism that
(Reporting by Karl Plume in Chicago; Editing by Caroline
© Copyright Thomson Reuters 2020. Click For Restrictions - http://about.reuters.com/fulllegal.asp
