Our interactive GLP global map explains the status of each country’s regulations for human and agricultural gene editing and gene drives.
This GLP project maps contributions by foundations to anti-biotech activists and compares it to pro-GMO industry spending.
This article or excerpt is included in the GLP’s daily curated selection of ideologically diverse news, opinion and analysis of biotechnology innovation.
Calyxt’s new HOLL soybean, developed using the company’s proprietary gene-editing technology TALEN, is expected to launch as early as 2022 – a welcome addition to the company’s growing portfolio of commercial products, which includes hemp in 2020 and improved digestibility alfalfa in 2021.
“USDA confirmation that Calyxt’s high oleic low linolenic soybean is not a regulated article is an important next step in bringing this product to the market,” said Jim Blome, CEO of Calyxt. “We are excited to reach this milestone as we move toward commercializing our second-generation product that we expect will provide numerous product development benefits to our customers.”
Related article: Viewpoint: Environmental gene editing shows promise, but requires 'careful oversight'
The next generation heart healthy oil is expected to deliver formulation advantages, including improved stability, thereby helping broaden applications for use so that food manufacturers and chefs alike can offer healthier alternatives to consumers looking for value-added solutions.
Calyxt’s HOLL soybean is currently in the development process and is now part of a total of eight Calyxt products that have been deemed non-regulated articles by the USDA …. including high fiber wheat, high oleic soybean, improved quality alfalfa, cold storable potato, and reduced browning potato.
It is easier than ever for advocacy groups to spread disinformation on pressing science issues, such as the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. No, vaccines are not harmful. Yes, the use of biotechnology, GMOs or gene editing to develop antigens for treatments including vaccines are part of the solution. To inform the public about what’s really going on, we present the facts and challenge those who don't. We can’t do this work without your help. Please support us – a donation of as little as $10 a month helps support our vital myth-busting efforts.
