Editor's Note: This edition of Morning Agriculture is published weekdays at 10 a.m. POLITICO Pro Agriculture subscribers hold exclusive early access to the newsletter each morning at 6 a.m. Learn more about POLITICO Pro's comprehensive policy intelligence coverage, policy tools and services at www.politicopro.com .
— Soybean stocks are up more than 100 percent from last year as sales to China have slumped amid President Donald Trump’s trade war. But the Agriculture Department’s latest grain storage estimates offered some positive signs for commodity markets.
— Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is hoping for speedy action on two trade fronts: The Kentucky Republican said it’s time for House Speaker Nancy Pelosi to pass USMCA and for Trump to reach a resolution in trade talks with China.
— Biodiesel industry groups say Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross refused to meet with them ahead of a critical decision that could lead to lower duties on more than $1 billion in biodiesel imports from Argentina.
Get the free POLITICO news app for the critical updates you need. Breaking news, analysis, videos, and podcasts, right at your fingertips. Download for iOS and Android .
HAPPY TUESDAY, OCT. 1! Welcome to Morning Ag, where we want to see some Northern Lights photos this year from MA readers up north. Send tips and hot takes to [email protected] and @ryanmccrimmon , and follow us @Morning_Ag .
USDA DELIVERS SURPRISE DATA ON CORN, SOYBEAN STOCKS: The department on Monday released its quarterly report on grain stocks , showing a shrinking corn supply and soybean stocks that were smaller than expected — but still a record-high. Both forecasts were seen as positive news by ag commodity traders, boosting corn and soybean prices.
By the numbers: Soybean stocks as of Sept. 1 were 913 million bushels — a 108 percent increase compared with 2018. Still, the total supply was smaller than the market estimate of 982 million bushels.
— Illinois and Iowa accounted for 346 million bushels, combined. On-farm soybean stocks in particular were up 162 percent this year to 265 million bushels.
USDA pegged the corn supply at 2.11 billion bushels, a 1 percent drop from Sept. 1, 2018, and lower than trade expectations around 2.43 billion bushels. Scott Irwin, an ag economist at the University of Illinois, called the surprise number “a shocker from any historical perspective” in a Twitter thread. Corn and soybean prices reached their highest levels in weeks from the news.
MCCONNELL READY FOR TRADE WAR TO WRAP UP: The Senate GOP leader on Monday urged Trump to finalize a trade agreement with Beijing after more than a year of tension that’s hit farmers and ranchers especially hard, reports Pro Trade’s Doug Palmer.
“I’d sure like for it to reach some resolution soon,” McConnell said on CNBC. “It has been very tough on American agriculture. As you know, my party is very deeply based in rural America and small-town America. I hope the president can get a good outcome here.”
U.S. farm exports to China have fallen by billions of dollars this year, robbing producers of one of their most important customers. The Trump administration has struggled to fill the export gap through smaller deals with other trade partners around the globe.
“I admire what he’s trying to do, but I hope we can get a conclusion to this sometime soon, because rural America really needs it,” McConnell added.
He made a similar case for Pelosi ratifying the new NAFTA deal in the House, indicating that it’s a priority for U.S. businesses and farmers — and one of the (few) major legislative items that both parties have an interest in passing. Democratic negotiators recently said they’re making progress in talks with Trump’s trade chief on potential changes to USMCA.
“I think it is going to be pretty hard for her not to take it up, even though voting for a Trump trade deal, I gather, is a bitter pill for them,” McConnell said.
BECOME A CHINA WATCHER: Get unique insight and expert analysis of the latest decisions being made in Washington and Beijing. Keep up with the nuances of this critical relationship that will shape the world for decades to come, and the power players driving the conversation. Become a China Watcher to see where these world superpowers are headed before anyone else. Subscribe Today .
BIODIESEL BACKERS RAMP UP PRESSURE ON WILBUR ROSS: The Commerce chief is poised to announce a decision any day now on whether current countervailing duties on Argentine biodiesel are still warranted. That determination has relatively high stakes for U.S. biodiesel producers and soybean growers, who complained that Ross isn’t taking a meeting with them at this point. (He previously met with biodiesel groups in June.)
The American Soybean Association and National Biodiesel Board sent a letter to Ross on Monday arguing that farmers are already suffering from lost sales to China due to Trump’s trade war, Doug reports. “The farm economy does not need Commerce to rush a decision to benefit Argentina’s farmers and biodiesel industry,” the groups wrote.
How we got here: The Commerce Department last year issued anti-dumping and countervailing duties on biodiesel from Argentina, worth about $1.2 billion in 2016. But the department made a preliminary decision in July that the countervailing duty was no longer needed — causing alarm for the U.S. industry.
Ross was expected to issue a final decision by Sept. 17, so an announcement could come anytime. The ASA and NBB wrote that they look forward to meeting with the secretary before he signs off on any final decision.
INDIAN MINISTER URGES PATIENCE IN TRADE TALKS: Washington and New Delhi are still working toward a trade agreement, with staff-level discussions expected to continue this week and Trump touting the possibility of a deal “very soon.” But Indian External Affairs Minister Subrahmanyam Jaishankar said those hoping for a deal should be “a little patient,” report POLITICO’s Adam Behsudi and Nahal Toosi.
At an event in D.C. on Monday, Jaishankar suggested negotiators might need to separate “more immediate issues” and “longer issues.” The Trump administration booted India from the Generalized System of Preferences — a U.S. program that cuts tariffs on a wide range of imports from developing countries — over concerns that New Delhi was blocking imports of American dairy products, among other complaints.
— The largest U.S. egg producer says it’s struggling with an “extreme drop in market prices” due to an egg glut. Shares of Cal-Maine Foods Inc. fell more than 10 percent on Monday. The Wall Street Journal has more.
— The FDA rolled out a “Food Safety Dashboard” in an effort to track implementation of new rules under the Food Safety Modernization Act and new metrics for inspections and recalls. Here’s the announcement.
— Fourteen percent of school districts in the U.S. offered vegan lunches for students in 2017, up from 11.5 percent the previous year, according to the School Nutrition Association. But local efforts to expand plant-based options in schools have run into opposition from meat industry groups. Stateline has the story.
— A federal judge ruled that a class-action lawsuit against PFAS manufacturers can proceed. The court rejected a motion to dismiss, filed by companies named in the suit, including DuPont, Chemours and 3M, Pro Energy’s Annie Snider reports.
— Farm bankruptcies and loan delinquency rates are on the rise as trade headwinds and low commodity prices persist. Local farm groups are increasingly holding seminars to help producers understand their bankruptcy options. UPI has more from Evansville, Ind.
— Anne DeCesaro joined USDA’s office of the undersecretary for food, nutrition and consumer services. DeCesaro was previously the Republican staff director for the House Ways and Means Worker and Family Support Subcommittee ( h/t POLITICO Playbook ).
WINNERS PLAY THE LONG GAME: With so much going on in the present, it is more important than ever to look ahead to how society will thrive in the future. "The Long Game" is a newsletter designed for executives, investors and policymakers leading that conversation. Engage with the sharpest minds on our biggest challenges, from pandemics to environmental justice, climate change to renewable energy, inequality and the future of work. Subscribe today for a nuanced look at these issues and possible solutions. Subscribe today .
