The Australian sharemarket is set for more coronavirus pain this morning as fears grow of a global economic downturn.  Futures are pointing to a 40 point, or 0.7 per cent, drop at the open, but that doesn’t take into account the latest negative coronavirus news, nor the record-low Chinese economic data, received over the weekend.
1. Markets preparing for the worst: Global markets are now preparing for the worst. Signs that the coronavirus is spreading rapidly across the globe has traders pricing-in that the virus will soon become classified as a global pandemic – and more pertinently to market participants, that it will bring about a world-wide global economic downturn.
Wall Street has suffered seven straight days of falls.
Stock markets registered their worst performance since the Global Financial Crisis last week, while the price action in broader financial markets is flashing bright-red signals that a major global economic slowdown is imminent.
2. Weekend’s news to fuel the flames: The news flow over the weekend will pour fuel on the panic. Italy, Iran and South Korea reported another spike in coronavirus cases, with several countries announcing an expanding travel-black list.
The first death from the disease was reported in the United States, and in Australia. And in what’s probably the most impactful news from a markets perspective, China released its latest PMI surveys, with the data showing business activity in the Chinese economy fell to an all-time low last month.
3. Stocks tumble, bond yields hit record lows: The S&P500 dropped by nearly 12 per cent over the course of the last week, and broader European stocks tumbled just shy of 10 per cent, as implied volatility climbed to levels not registered in over 2 years.
Bond yields swooned, with the yield on the 10 Year Treasury bond falling to an all-time low of 1.16 per cent, as traders priced in a world of materially low growth, and very likely interest rate cuts from global central banks.
4. Markets betting on central bank support: A press release flagging the US Fed’s willingness to “act as a appropriate” to support the US economy, along with a bit of end of month rebalancing, aided a late run for US stock on Friday night. Markets are betting big that central banks will be cutting interest rates in a coordinated fashion to buffet the global economy from the effects of the coronavirus. As it presently stands, markets are pricing the following from some of the world’s most economically important central banks:
US Fed: a 50/50 chance of a 50-point cut this month; almost 4 cuts priced-in by year end
RBA: an 87.5 per cent chance of a cut tomorrow; 2 cuts by October
Bank of England: a 50/50 chance of a cut in March; nearly 2 cuts priced in by December
European Central Bank: a 50/50 chance of a 10-basis point cut this month; 2-and-a-half cuts priced in for 2020
Bank of Japan: a 40 per cent chance of a cut in March; 1-and-a-third cuts priced in for 2020
5. Markets pricing-in an RBA cut tomorrow: Leading into the close of US trade, it became considered close to a certainty that the RBA will cut rates on Tuesday. The move was dramatic, with the implied odds of a rate cut from the RBA only 7 per cent two days earlier.
That drove the Australian Dollar to fresh lows on Friday night. The AUD/USD temporarily traded at 0.6440 in US trade, as markets, at the margins, forecast the RBA will cutting rates to its effect lower bound by year end.
6. ASX set to tumble: The ASX200 is set up for steep losses this morning. SPI Futures are pointing to a 40-point drop at the open, but that doesn’t take into account the new coronavirus news, nor the Chinese economic data, received over the weekend.
It was a rough week, last week, for Australian stocks. The ASX200 ended the week 9.77 per cent lower, to have now fallen nearly 11 per cent from its recent highs, taking the market into technical correction territory.
7. Gold’s unconventional sell-off: A curious for many in the market is what’s happening in the gold market. Prices tumbled 4 per cent last week, despite market participants piling into safe-havens. It appears the gold price is falling victim to internal market dynamics.
Portfolio managers are selling the gold positions to the margin calls on their equity holdings. It’s quite a familiar phenomenon in times of market distress, and often marks a temporary dip in the gold price, before a reasonably considerable rip.
This column was produced in commercial partnership between The Sydney Morning Herald, The Age and IG
Information is of a general nature only.
