The Japanese index Nikkei 225 began this year with the worst performance since August 2019, falling 3.19%. The recovery of the Japanese stock market developed in February drives the Nikkei to accumulate an advance of 0.26% YTD.
The Nikkei 225, in its log-scale weekly chart, shows the price running in its fifth wave of Primary degree labeled in black, belonging to the bullish cycle started in early March 2009.
The big picture of the Japanese index illustrates the bullish movement that began when the price found buyers at 6,945.7 pts. The long-term sequence reveals that currently, Nikkei runs in the fifth wave of Primary degree labeled in black.
The Elliott wave perspective shows the structure in progress is incomplete. In the internal path of the Japanese index presented in the 2-day chart, we distinguish the advance in a triangle structure in development.
From the last figure, Nikkei 225 advances in the fourth wave of Intermediate degree labeled in blue, which still also is incomplete. At the same time, looking inside of the triangle in progress, we observe the Elliott wave triangle running in the wave D of Minor degree labeled in green.
The next chart shows to Nikkei in its 12-hour timeframe. From the figure, we observe the wave D of Minor degree in progress. This wave looks like a Flat pattern, which follows a 3- 3-5 internal sequence.
The Elliott wave pattern began in the Santa Claus rally in lately 2018 when the price found fresh buyers at 18,982.1 pts. Currently, the price action runs in the second bullish leg of the structure subdivided by 3-3-5 internal waves.
Watching inside of the wave c of Minute degree labeled in black in progress, we observe that the structure moves in the fourth wave of Minuette degree identified in blue developing a triangle pattern. At the same time, the triangular formation in progress, that follows a 3-3- 3-3-3 internal sequence, looks growing a wave e in Subminuette degree labeled in green.
Summarizing, the big-picture of Nikkei reveals that price still moves in a bullish sequence, which could see fresh highs. In the near-term, the Japanese index structure looks like an incomplete upward cycle, which should reach a new top. Nikkei is likely to visit the 25,000 pts soon.
In conclusion, Nikkei, in the long-term perspective, once completed the wave D of Minor degree, it should start a corrective movement of a wave E, which, according to the Elliott wave principle, should give way the fifth wave of Primary degree. The completion of this bearish move would bring us an exciting opportunity to join in the next Nikkei's rally.
Finally, our bias for Nikkei remains on the long side while the price remains above 21,169.7 pts.
Try Secure Leveraged Trading with EagleFX!
Risk Warning: CFD and Spot Forex trading both come with a high degree of risk. You must be prepared to sustain a total loss of any funds deposited with us, as well as any additional losses, charges, or other costs we incur in recovering any payment from you. Given the possibility of losing more than your entire investment, speculation in certain investments should only be conducted with risk capital funds that if lost will not significantly affect your personal or institution’s financial well-being. Before deciding to trade the products offered by us, you should carefully consider your objectives, financial situation, needs and level of experience. You should also be aware of all the risks associated with trading on margin.
