, both off by at least 6%, as investors fear that people won’t make rent or utility payments.
The small-capitalization Russell 2000 index RUT,
, saw even more severe losses, finishing the session off 81.11 points, or 7%, to end at 1,071.99.
Stocks also ended lower on Tuesday, capping a quarter that saw stocks tumble from February records into a bear market at record speed. The Dow logged a 23.2% quarterly fall, its biggest first-quarter drop on record and biggest quarterly decline since 1987. The S&P 500 fell 20% for its biggest quarterly selloff since the final three months of 2008. The Nasdaq Composite fell 14.2% for the quarter.
The uncertainty about when the U.S. can return to usual business has unnerved investors struggling to ascertain the ultimate economic impact of social curbs put in place amid the COVID-19 outbreak. Without a clear view on the timeline of a U.S. recovery, volatility was likely to remain heightened in the coming weeks, said market participants.
“Everything hinges on how long we are in this shutdown,” said Anwiti Bahuguna, head of multiasset strategy at Columbia Threadneedle Investments, in an interview. “We don’t know how long the shutdown may last, so it’s hard to predict what U.S. growth will look like.”
Also unsettling investors was President Donald Trump’s warning late Tuesday that a “very, very painful” two weeks lies ahead for the country. The White House released new projections for 100,000 to 240,000 deaths in the U.S. from the coronavirus pandemic even if current social distancing guidelines are maintained.
The number of COVID-19 cases world-wide rose to 922,00 on Wednesday, while the number of deaths rose to at least 46,000, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. The U.S. has the most number of cases world-wide, at 203,608, and 4,476 deaths.
In economic reports, the U.S. labor market saw growing cracks as businesses curtailed hiring and shed workers. Automatic Data Processing reported the U.S. economy lost 27,000 private-sector jobs in March , though the data is expected to be of little use in predicting the official unemployment numbers due on Friday due to distortions created by the pandemic.
In other U.S. data published Wednesday, the IHS Markit final U.S. March manufacturing PMI fell to 48.5 from initial 49.2. A reading of the index below 50 indicates contraction in activity.
The Institute for Supply Management’s March U.S. manufacturing index fell to 49.1 from 50.1 in February, a less severe drop than economist forecasts.
Meanwhile, expectations are growing for another round of fiscal stimulus following the passage on Friday of a $2 trillion relief package.
As Washington considers other steps for responding to the coronavirus pandemic and the resulting economic damage, Trump and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi both have suggested a “Phase 4” package could include spending on infrastructure.
Which companies were in focus?
