(June 18): Asian stocks were poised for a muted open after gains fizzled in U.S. equities and Treasuries and the dollar ended flat, with investors continuing to weigh an increase in coronavirus cases against optimism about stimulus measures.
Futures in Japan were little changed, while contracts ticked lower in Hong Kong and Australia. S&P 500 Index futures opened modestly lower after the index swung between gains and losses for most of Wednesday on light volume before turning red late, with the energy, real estate and financial sectors leading the declines. Apple and Microsoft helped the Nasdaq Composite close positive. Infections increased from China to Brazil and Iran warned it may need a new lockdown. Texas reported a surge in hospitalizations.
“The market is searching for a new catalyst,” said Sameer Samana, senior global market strategist at Wells Fargo Investment Institute. “The narrative around policy stimulus and better economic data seems to be losing its sway.”
Investor optimism toward risk assets had been reflected in bets that new virus outbreaks won’t lead governments to pull back from gradually reopening businesses. Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell urged Congress not to pull back too quickly on federal relief to households and small businesses put in place because of the pandemic.
Meantime, Texas reported an 11% surge in virus hospitalizations, the biggest 24-hour increase since June 4. Brazil registered a record 34,918 new infections, while China is escalating containment measures in Beijing including canceling flights.
The thin volume in U.S. equities on Wednesday exacerbated swings, including a drop that began around the time newspapers published summaries of John Bolton’s critical book about President Donald Trump.
Elsewhere, crude oil futures declined after two sessions of gains.
These are some key events coming up:
Policy decisions from the Bank of England and the Swiss National Bank are due on Thursday.
These are some of the main moves in markets:
Futures on the S&P 500 retreated 0.2% as of 7:07 a.m. in Tokyo. The index fell 0.4% Wednesday.
Futures on Japan’s Nikkei 225 were little changed.
The yen was at 107.01 per dollar.
The offshore yuan held at 7.0777 per dollar.
West Texas Intermediate crude oil retreated 0.8% to $37.66 a barrel.
Gold was at $1,727.07 an ounce.
