Economic Times | 23 Jun, 2020 | 06.19PM IST
Trade setup: Nifty likely to see tepid start, could even halt ongoing march
The domestic stock market remained less volatile than expected and moved in a narrower range at the start of a new week. Nifty saw a better and positive start to the day and stayed positive throughout the session. After opening on a modestly positive note, the index surged higher, but oscillated in a 120-point range.
Fitch revises outlook on Bharti Airtel to negative; affirms at 'BBB-'
Fitch Ratings on Monday revised the outlook on telecom major Bharti Airtel’s long-term foreign-currency (FC) issuer default rating (IDR) to negative from stable, and affirmed the IDR at 'BBB-'. The ratings agency said the negative outlook follows its revision of the outlook on India's long-term foreign- and local-currency IDRs to negative from stable on June 18.
Microfinance company Satin Creditcare Network said on Monday its board has approved raising of Rs 120 crore through a rights issue. Last week, the company had reported a 77 per cent decline in its net profit to Rs 13 crore in the quarter ended March. The company had said its profits and return ratios were impacted due to higher provisions in the wake of Covid-19 and other external factors during the last quarter of 2019-20.
Here’s who bought and sold what in some of the key bulk and block deals of the day. Government of Singapore bought 215,00,000 shares of ICICI Prudential Life Insurance Co at Rs 391.60 per share from ICICI Bank. HSBC Pooled Asian Equity Fund sold 18,79,542 shares of Glenmark Pharmaceuticals at Rs 527.77 per share. Edelweiss Mutual Fund bought 2,265,000 shares of Indostar Capital Finance at Rs 285 per share from Mission Street PTE.
Nifty extended its gains into the third consecutive session on Monday, but witnessed profit booking in the last hour of trade. Analysts said the index has immediate support near the 10,250-10,160 zone and key resistance at 10,400 and 10,500 levels.
UTI Asset Management Company (AMC) has received markets regulator Sebi's go ahead to raise a little over Rs 3,000 crore through its initial public offering (IPO). The IPO of the country's largest asset management company in terms of total assets under management (AUM) comprises sale of 3,89,87,081 equity shares by existing shareholders, according to the draft red herring prospectus (DRHP).
US stocks opened sightly lower on Monday as concerns of a resurgence in coronavirus infections fueled worries of another setback to business activity. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 6.38 points, or 0.02 per cent, at the open to 25,865.08.
YES Bank will default its interest payment on its 10.25% upper Tier II bonds which is due on June 29, after Reserve Bank of India (RBI) declines permission for payment of interest because its capital position was below the reuqired limit. In a notice to the stock exchanges the bank said that the accumulated interest due to its investors would be paid at a later date.
Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey said on Monday that the central bank should start to reverse its quantitative easing asset purchases before raising interest rates on a sustained basis, a reversal of long-standing BoE policy. The BoE increased its bond purchase target to 745 billion pounds ($922 billion) last week, and in March it cut its main interest rate to a record low 0.1%. But Bailey said this level of central bank asset purchases "shouldn't always be taken for granted".
Dhanlaxmi Bank on Monday reported 90.5 per cent decline in net profit at Rs 2.60 crore for March quarter 2019-20 due to higher provisions for bad loans and contingencies. The bank had posted a profit of Rs 27.61 crore in January-March period of the preceding financial year. Income during the quarter under review rose to Rs 280.98 crore from Rs 268.97 crore in the year-ago same period, the bank said in a regulatory filing.
It’s a ‘buy on dip’ market now; Nifty range shifts to 10,000-10,500
Nifty opened positive on Monday and extended its move towards the 10,400 level by surpassing its previous swing high of 10,328 level. However, it failed to hold at higher levels and corrected around 100 points in the last hour of trade. The index continued to formation of higher lows for the sixth consecutive session, but formed a Doji candle as it closed near its opening zone.
Traders should limit their leveraged positions: Ajit Mishra
"Markets have been showing resilience despite mixed local cues and it may extend further if the buoyancy on the global front continues. Meanwhile, investors would continue to keep a watch on the India-China standoff and COVID-19 situation. At the same time, earnings announcements and upcoming derivatives expiry would keep the volatility high. Traders should limit their leveraged positions and continue their focus on stock selection." said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking
Market breadth inclined strongly on the advancing side: Ajit Mishra
"Markets managed to gain over half a percent amid volatility, in continuation of prevailing up move. Initially, firm global cues led a gap start but profit-taking at the higher levels capped the upside as the session progressed. However, the buying was widespread on the sectoral front wherein banking, auto and financials topped the gainers' list.  Besides, the market breadth was also inclined strongly on the advancing side." said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking
NIfty well placed above its 100-day SMA: Rajesh Palviya
"NIFTY opened on a positive note and remained volatile during the session in the range of 10400-10270 levels.The daily price action has formed a "Doji" candlestick pattern representing indecisiveness amongst the traders. For coming session. 10400  and 10270 remains an important level to watch for and any either side breakout will signal further direction. As the overall trend remains bullish any corrections towards 10250-10200 levels will remain as a buying opportunity. Since the past couple of sessions NIfty is well placed above its 100 day SMA which signals bullish sentiments ahead" said Rajesh Palviya, Axis Securities
“The index continued to form higher lows for the sixth consecutive session, but formed a Doji candle as it closed near to its opening mark. The outlook is positive as the index has been moving in a Rising Channel, with buying interest in many heavyweight counters. But the RSI indicator has made a negative crossover on the hourly scale, which suggests a pause in the positive momentum," said Chandan Taparia of Motilal Oswal Financial Services.
CLOSING BELL: Private banks, Bajaj Group stocks lift Sensex 180 pts higher in see-saw trade; Nifty tops 10,300; Glenmark leaps 27%
S&P BSE POWER biggest sectoral gainer, up 2.77%
S&P BSE Information Technology biggest sectoral loser, down 0.35%
