This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Updated June 9, 2020 8:07 am ET / Original June 9, 2020 6:22 am ET
The recent rally has caught investors, and traders, wrong-footed . In fact, Google searches for the term “ hated rally ” spiked last week. No one quite understands how the stock market’s most beaten-up names have raced higher at an amazing clip despite pandemic and civil unrest .
The situation has left many with a bad case of FOMO, or fear of missing out. Just as portfolio conservatism seemed to be warranted, stock markets spiked .
Buying recent winners, such as airline stocks, feels hard to do. What’s more, it might not be the best way to get back in the game. Instead, investors can look for what’s next—sectors that will catch a bid if post-Covid economic data continues to improve .
Three industries stood out to Barron’s when we scanned for groups that looked like they had room to run and were still trading at a substantial discount to recent highs. Energy drillers , apparel companies as well as steel made the cut.
Barron’s could make the acronym SADE of that trio, if we take liberties with letter arranging, the author whose name gave us the word sadistic. Investors have been punished for holding on to names in these sectors year to date. The S&P 500 Oil & Gas Drilling index, for instance, are down nearly 60% in 2020. Apparel components of the S&P 500 along with a basket of large U.S. steel producers remain down about 50% on average.
No one will mistake SADE for FAANG . Tech’s most popular names, after all, fueled the stock market rally early in April. The Nasdaq Composite went back into positive territory for the year in early May. The speed and size of the rally might have been difficult to swallow, but it wasn’t hard to understand. Many tech firms saw a business bump from work from home trends.
Tech’s rise isn’t what made the recent rally hated. It’s what happened next.
All of a sudden, the most beaten stocks started rallying—significantly. American Airlines (ticker: AAL) shares rose 77% this past week. Another commercial aviation stock, Boeing (BA), tacked on 44%. In fact, Boeing’s rise propelled the Dow Jones Industrial Average up almost 7%. Cruise stocks rose 37%. Casino operators rose 16%. And travel is supposed to be one industry permanently damaged by Covid-19.
Wall Street, however, likes to focus on the rate of change. In the case of trave, a few more people are getting on planes in June compared with May. July should be a little better too.
Looking ahead, oil prices can keep going up and if they do so can beaten-up parts of the oil value chain can, Energy drilling stocks, for instance, remain down about 100% off 52-week highs.
The move has already begun. Nabors Industries (NBR) stock gained more than 20% Monday after gaining 42% this past week. But Nabors stock is still down more than 100% from recent highs. The company has a lot of debt, relatively speaking, making the stock more volatile and risky.
Oil equipment distributor NOW (DNOW), on the other hand, has no net debt. Its stock is still trading below its 200-day moving average and remains down about 70% from recent highs.
The 200-day moving average is an important level for traders that can signal where a rally might run out of steam. Of course, rising above the moving average be a bullish sign to traders as well.
Picking through the badly beaten energy sector can be difficult. The Energy Select Sector SPDR (XLE) is another way to gain instant, diversified access to energy stocks. It won’t trade like Nabors, which is up 460-plus percent over the past month, but the ETF is also trading below its 200-day moving average and remains down about 35% from recent highs.
Apparel is another sector looking ripe for a bounce. Ralph Lauren (RL), VF (VFC) and Tapestry (TPR) are three stocks down about 40%, 50% and 80% from recent highs, respectively. Things might not look great with unemployment still high. But as regions, such as New York City, reopen sales trends will start to compare favorably with prior months.
In the case of apparel, however, there is no good ETF for instant diversification. The Consumer Discretionary Select Sector SPDR (XLY), for instance, is already at old highs and includes stocks such as Amazon.com (AMZN).
Steel stocks could also catch a bid as investors look for what’s next. Construction sentiment could make a travel-like comeback too as workers return to job sites. Allegheny Technologies (ATI) stock is one option. Its shares remain down about 120% from recent highs. The company makes stainless steel, but it also supplies advanced alloys for the aerospace and defense industry. Allegheny also benefits from any recovery in commercial air travel.
Buying the most beaten-up stocks blindly doesn’t sound like a recipe for investing success. It isn’t. How to buy, however, is as important as what to buy.
Investors don’t have to swing entire portfolios one way or another. They can shift portions of their positions, adding a couple of new ideas to research on the fly.
The recent rally has caught investors, and traders, wrong-footed.
