A weak yuan will help strengthen China’s coronavirus-battered economy, but only for now, reports the South China Morning Post. "China’s economy is enjoying a big break from the weak renminbi – no bad thing when the nation’s struggling export industries need every bit of help they can get before global recovery finally gets going again."
The renminbi’s competitive advantage is unlikely to last long.
The renminbi’s weakness is simply the corollary of a strong dollar, inflated by safe-haven and flight-to-quality flows.
The worry for Beijing is whether the dollar’s two-year rally against the renminbi is any reliable guide to the future.
The dollar is clearly overvalued right now and looks due for a significant correction.
The election, on November 3, could be the trigger for major currency volatility.
President Donald Trump, who has been badgering the Federal Reserve to move US interest rates into negative territory, is one of the dollar’s biggest liabilities.
Negative interest rates can’t be ruled out at some stage and could prove fatal for the dollar’s rally. A 10 to 15 per cent dollar retracement could be on the cards over the medium term.
A stronger renminbi could even be good news for China.
A more hands-off, freely floating currency could defuse tensions with Washington if it leads to a more level playing field for international trade.
Beijing would be extremely dismayed to see a return to dollar/renminbi lows around the 6.25 mark, last seen two years ago.
Chinese Policymakers have been choosing currency stability over export competitiveness. Official Chinese data indicated that the economic damage from the virus was heavily concentrated in January and February, followed by a sharp rebound in March. Should activity continue to pick up, this should be beneficial for AUD as the USD falls away.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
