New vaping, tobacco restrictions go into effect: New York state’s ban on flavored e-cigarettes went into effect on Monday, and the state also ended the sale of all tobacco products in pharmacies .
THE CONDEMNED PODCAST, COMING JUNE 1: “The Condemned” true-crime podcast will tell the stories of five men, each sent down “the last mile” to be executed in a machine that was invented in Upstate New York. If you’re interested in checking out “The Condemned,” you can listen to the trailer and subscribe on our Acast page . Our podcasts are also available on all the popular platforms including iTunes , Spotify and Google .
My first Syracuse game: Fans tell their stories: We asked for your stories from the first sporting event you attended in Syracuse and boy, did you deliver. The email box lit up with stories from the Carrier Dome, Archbold Stadium, MacArthur Stadium, Manley Field House and more. Check out the great memories and great moments .
Josh Allen ... Seattle Seahawks QB? The Buffalo Bills will host the Seattle Seahawks in Week 9 this season. Under center for Seattle will be Russell Wilson, one of the NFL’s best quarterbacks. If a rumored trade had gone through before the 2018 Draft, however, it’s very possible that Buffalo would be hosting a Seahawks team led by Josh Allen in 2020 .
Julissa Mago stands in front of her mom's casket May 6 in Brookyln.
ONE FINAL PROMISE: A PLACE TO REST: Julissa Mago buried her mother, Lourdes Mago, on May 6 in an unmarked patch of dirt at a New Jersey cemetery. The spare service culminated weeks of panic after Lourdes died of Covid-19 in New York City. As a Catholic woman from the Dominican Republic, Lourdes made it clear to her daughter: She, upon her death, wanted to be buried. From Syracuse, Julissa had battled funeral homes, cemeteries and hospitals. She slept in her car and wept behind a mask. Like thousands of other grieving people suddenly making funeral arrangements in New York City, Julissa had little help . (Provided photo)
Our reporters at syracuse.com | The Post-Standard are working around the clock to make sure Central New Yorkers have the news they need to stay informed on this public health crisis. Please consider helping support this important work with a subscription .
Sign up for our free text alerts about coronavirus in Central New York and get direct access to the latest developments, brought to you by syracuse.com ’s unparalleled team of reporters, visual journalists, editors and more, delivered right to your phone .
