As CNY coronavirus lockdown loosens, 98% of us could still get sick
A delivery worker handles an order on Fayette St. on Tuesday, May 5, 2020, in Syracuse, N.Y.
Syracuse, N.Y. — Cars are being sold in-person again, and minor surgeries could resume today as Central New York begins a slow reawakening of the economy halted by the novel coronavirus .
The region gets to take the first baby steps to normalcy because our adherence to strict social distancing measures has confined the infection to about 2% of the population.
But that success also means that as we emerge from lockdown, 98% of us could still get sick. Growing lax on things like washing our hands and avoiding gatherings could unleash an outbreak of the virus that we’ve so far avoided.
“It’s kind of good news, bad news,” said Dr. Kathryn Anderson, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Upstate Medical University. “We’ve slowed the spread, which is exactly what we needed to do, but we remain as vulnerable as we were when this started weeks ago. It means we need to move forward cautiously because we are at risk for an increase in cases if we do this without great care.”
This was the plan from the beginning, after all: Keep people away from each other to block the new virus’s path across a population with zero immunity. The lockdown was swift, the measures increasingly draconian: no sports, no church, no retail shopping, no Easter brunches.
It worked. Antibody tests conducted by the state health department and Family Care Medical Group, a large local practice, show just under 2% of Central New Yorkers have had the virus. It’s not clear yet if those people will be immune to the virus, called SARS-CoV-2, or for how long. There’s reason to think they might for at least a while: People infected with this virus’s close relative, the original SARS, were immune for up to four years.
Hundreds of thousands of residents remain vulnerable to the virus, but the low infection rate also means few infected people to spread the virus, said Dr. Stephen Thomas, chief of the Infectious Disease Unit at Upstate Medical University.
“Overall there is a lower likelihood that you will be infected because it takes an infected person to infect another person,” Thomas said.
If we get complacent about social distancing, hand washing and mask-wearing, the virus could erupt and undo all the progress we’ve made since March, scientists say. We’re like tinder on a forest floor that can ignite a big blaze, Thomas said.
“It can start with multiple little fires that can be controlled and managed,” he said, “but if they’re not managed, they all coalesce into a huge fire and you’re in trouble.”
That 2% of people who tested positive for antibodies had active infections at least several weeks ago, so it’s not clear how many people are walking around with the virus today. Onondaga County this week confirmed 302 new cases, which County Executive Ryan McMahon says is largely the result of expanded testing .
Despite that rise, the county’s rate of hospitalizations and deaths from COVID-19, the illness caused by the virus, are low enough to meet Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s thresholds for reopening.
That has given state and local officials confidence to unroll the first phases of the restart. Onondaga County car dealers this week began in-person sales, and Crouse Hospital plans to resume outpatient elective surgeries today. County libraries will start loaning books again on May 26 via curbside service.
At the same time, Upstate’s latest model projections show the virus is still spreading faster than Cuomo’s reopening threshold. The rate of the spread, called Rt, is the number of people infected by each infected person.
Cuomo says the rate must be below 1.1, and state officials say Central New York is hovering just below 1. The Upstate model, however, shows a rate of 1.1 to 1.2, Anderson said. That means the number of infected people is slowly outpacing those who have recovered, and the virus is still spreading.
Thomas said the virus isn’t going away, and residents should understand they’re still vulnerable to getting and spreading it.
“We’re going to have to be taking some enhanced precautions for a while,” he said. “Hopefully people are going to be cognizant of not coming to work when sick, washing their hands constantly, covering their mouths when they cough or sneeze, and insuring in areas where there are lot of people that there is frequent cleaning of surfaces.”
Anderson said she worries that our successful dampening of the virus could give people a false sense of confidence that the virus is gone. The warmer weather, she thinks, will increase that confidence.
“I do thinks as it gets nicer out, we’re going to have a hard time. We’ll make more nonessential visits: trips to Home Depot for things to plant, running errands, running into people and not staying 6 feet apart,” she said. “There’s lots of ways I think encounters are going to increase as the weather gets nicer, and I think that’s a problem.”
