But foreign currency analysts at Deutsche Bank said that concern over outflows had diminished.
“Based on our recent trip to Beijing, we feel policymakers will be more agreeable to CNY depreciation now,” Deutsche bank said in a note to clients.
“Concerns over the ‘externalities’ to currency weakness - hot money outflows and corporate stress seem more limited this time,” the bank said. “Regulators appear more confident that years of regulatory measures will keep hot money outflows manageable. Corporates are now better hedged against (foreign exchange) weakness, and industrial profitability has been stronger, reducing concerns about the corporate balance sheet impact from a weaker (renminbi).”
The note said that the rise in tariffs to 25% was consistent with an exchange rate of 7.10 renminbi to the U.S. currency and added that if Trump goes ahead with plans to add tariffs to another $325 billion in Chinese exports, it could take the exchange rate to 7.40 to the dollar.
Similarly, Dutch bank Rabobank also said that as the trade war escalates , the Chinese central bank can either sell down foreign exchange reserves or raise interest rates or both, but that could have serious economic consequences at home. As the Chinese response to the U.S. gets more and more aggressive, “the likelier that move through 7 is.”
Another indication that the Chinese are getting prepared for a long conflict with the U.S. were comments over the weekend by Chinese President Xi Jinping , in which he said in Jiangxi: “We are now embarking on a new Long March, and we must start all over again.”
The quote was a reference to the defeated Red Army’s military retreat between 1934 to 1936 to evade Kuomintang troops during the Chinese civil war.
I have been a financial journalist for many years, specializing in global economic questions for a variety of publications. I have lived in Asia, Africa and Europe.…
I have been a financial journalist for many years, specializing in global economic questions for a variety of publications. I have lived in Asia, Africa and Europe. Foreign trade and its consequences on jobs is a particular interest. I am the winner of the Business Journalist of the Year Award.
