Australian shares are set to rise at the open after Wall Street extended its new year rally, underpinned overnight by Morgan Stanley which reported better than expected results and set its sights still higher.
ASX futures were up 36 points or 0.5% to 7025 near 8.45am AEDT. The local currency was flat. Rio Tinto reported quarterly production results ahead of the local open; BHP will release its report on January 21.
Rio's Australian iron ore exports have fallen slightly short of analyst expectations, despite the company's flagship division saving its best performance of 2019 for last.
Rio shipped 86.8 million tonnes of iron ore from WA in the final three months of 2019, just short of the 87.3 million tonnes expected by UBS.
The result means Rio hit the higher end of its revised export target for the year.
Also in focus later today will be a raft of China economic data including fourth quarter GDP and December reports on retail sales, industrial production and fixed assets.
Here's what Pantheon Macroeconomics expects, on GDP: "Officially, the authorities are likely to publish a steady GDP growth print of 6.0% y/y for Q4. In reality, though, we reckon growth weakened further from Q3, due to adverse base effects. Q/q growth probably bounced marginally. Consensus: 6.0%."
As for retail sales, Pantheon says: "Sales values growth probably was unchanged at 8.0% y/y in November. A post-Singles' Day pullback in sales likely will be offset by a firmer increase in consumer prices. Consensus: 7.9%."
Industrial production growth is forecast to have been 5.9% last month, easing somewhat from November's 6.2% pace, Pantheon said.
US stocks were higher, with Morgan Stanley surging near 8% during the session after it released quarterly results and reset its financial targets; it closed up 6.6%.
Tech stocks also were higher with Alphabet rising 0.8% on the day to top $US1 trillion in valuation.
Cisco leapt 2.2% to pace the Dow. Microsoft, Intel and Apple each were at least 1.2% higher on the day.
Tesla slipped for a second session after surging higher to start the year. It was 1% lower in New York.
As for Morgan Stanley, CEO James Gorman drew plaudits for the latest results and also for now aiming to produce ROE of 13-15 per cent through 2022, and 15-17 per cent after that. Its 11.7 per cent ROE last year was within Gorman's prior targeted range of 10-13 per cent.
While the signing of the phase one trade deal between the US and China eased some tension between the two economic powerhouses, analysts were wary of looking too far ahead.
"Given that it has taken nearly two years to pick off the low hanging fruit of a Phase 1 deal, it does stand to reason that (any) Phase 2 is likely to take much longer," CMC Markets analyst Michael Hewson said.
"In any case, the tail risk for markets in the short term isn't in the form of further de-escalation, but in the form of the deal falling down and tariffs getting increased again."
Local: Manufacturing activity in New Zealand fell back into contraction in December, a survey showed on Friday.
The Bank of New Zealand-Business NZ's seasonally adjusted Performance of Manufacturing Index (PMI) fell to 49.3 from 51.2 in the previous month.
Overseas data: China December retail sales, property investment, industrial production and fixed assets, and fourth quarter GDP; Euro zone currrent account November; UK retail sales December; US December building permits and housing starts
10-year US/Australia yield gap near 8.15am AEDT: 63 basis points
'Dangerous path' as low rates push ASX to 7000 : Record low-interest rates are the main reason the share market closed over 7000 points and that has many leading investors worried.
The missing ingredient in the ASX rally : Expanding price-earnings multiples have driven the ASX's record-breaking run with investors paying up for growth and dividends as earnings growth faltered, writes Robert Guy.
The billionaire behind the $10b Caltex bid : If the Caltex bid is successful, it will mark a multi-decade period of expansion by the company founded by billionaire Alain Bouchard.
Morgan Stanley shares soar after Gorman boosts performance target :  "We have meaningfully and with intent transformed this business into what it is today," CEO James Gorman said.
Bank of America says US stocks may have risen a bit too fast: "The S&P 500 is running on fumes: the 4.5% gain since November was driven by a higher forward P/E (+3.5%), and the current P/E of 18.4x represents an 18 year high.
"The PE to Growth ratio sits at 1.8x, a record high in our time series back to 1986, driven by a drop in the growth outlook for Energy stocks and for AMZN.
"Our 2020 year-end target of 3300 on the S&P 500 (less than 1% upside from the current levels) suggests that we have pulled forward some of the gains from later this year, and could see some multiple compression given our 2020 EPS growth forecast of 8%."
The pan-European STOXX 600 index closed up 0.2%, with London's main index lagging its continental peers. Education company Pearson sank to the bottom of the STOXX 600 with a near 9% fall on a profit warning.
Market players will be shifting focus next week to the quarterly reporting season as it kicks into high gear across Europe.
European utility stocks touched their highest levels since late-2008 on strength in power generator RWE AG.
Shares of the company rose amid reports that the German government plans to compensate RWE with around €2.6 billion for costs related to the country's planned exit from coal.
Defensive plays including utilities, healthcare and food & beverage sectors have been pulled back into the spotlight.
German shares were flat after closing lower a day earlier on dismal GDP data.
Capital Economics on Chinese stocks: "Optimism about a Phase One deal has driven the rally in Chinese equities and the renminbi since late 2019. But now that the deal has been signed, this ought to be fully discounted in the markets. And with a Phase Two deal unlikely anytime soon, if at all, and China’s economy likely to slow further, we doubt that China’s equities and currency will perform especially well this year."
"Our end-2020 forecasts for the Hang Seng and the Shanghai Composite are 28,250 and 3200, respectively, which compare with 28,880 and 3075 today. Both forecasts assume there is no renewed escalation in trade tensions with the US.
"Slower growth and looser monetary policy in China are also likely to weigh on the renminbi this year. While we expect the Fed to stand pat, we think that the PBOC will cut rates further to ensure that the ongoing slowdown in economic activity remains gradual. If we are right, the renminbi is likely to end 2020 lower than it is now. Our end-year forecast is 7.20 against the US dollar, from 6.90 today."
The dollar index erased earlier losses overnight after multiple data releases painted a positive US economic picture, but remained slightly lower on the day after the US and China deal to de-escalate their trade war.
The Commerce Department said on Thursday retail sales increased 0.3% last month. Data for November was also revised upward to show retail sales gaining 0.3% instead of rising 0.2%, as previously reported.
A gauge of manufacturing activity in the US Mid-Atlantic region also rebounded in January to its highest level in eight months, and the outlook is the brightest in more than a year and a half, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia said.
Other data showed that the number of Americans filing for unemployment benefits fell more than expected last week.
“The data flurry was positive, particularly the Philly Fed number,” said Greg Anderson, global head of foreign exchange strategy at BMO Capital Markets in New York. It “reduces the probability for a recession, which was low already.”
The dollar index was last 97.220, after falling to 97.085 overnight, which was the lowest since January 8.
Marex Spectron's take on the LME's day: "Base metals sells-off in the afternoon resulting in a mixed performance across metals, with Nickel the laggard as the metal settled on session lows, down 3.9% on the day. CTA buying still noted across the complex."
Coking coal futures in China reached their highest in nearly four months, as coal mines gradually suspend production ahead of the country's Lunar New Year holidays and as imports plunged in December.
The most actively traded coking coal futures on the Dalian Commodity Exchange for May delivery closed 1.2% firmer at 1224.5 yuan ($US177.72) per tonne, the highest since September 23, 2019.
"As the Spring Festival nears, local and state-owned coal mines are gradually suspending production and going on holiday, and the supply of coking coal in production areas have decreased," said Huatai Futures in a note.
Meanwhile, recent trade data also aggravated supply concerns of the steelmaking ingredient. China's coal imports in December slumped to 2.77 million tonnes, accounting for merely 13% of the 20.78 million tonnes in November, data from the customs showed on Tuesday.
Iron ore futures, however, slid after top steel-producing city Tangshan issued a fresh smog alert.
Dalian's benchmark iron ore contract, with May expiry, closed down 1.2% at 658.5 yuan per tonne.
"As restocking ahead of the Spring Festival enters its tail-end, steel mills have sufficient inventories ... Buying interest is poor," added Huatai Futures' note regarding iron ore.
How CSL and BHP Group drove the ASX to 7000 : BHP Group and CSL are responsible for almost half the market's gains on the way to the 7000 level.
Buoyed by US-China relations, Australian shares closed at another record high on Thursday, with benchmark S&P/ASX 200 passing the historically significant 7000-points level for the first time.
The S&P/ASX 200 Index closed 47 points, or 0.67 per cent, higher at 7041.8, taking the year-to-date gains for the market past 5 per cent.
