Enjoy more articles from Auburn's Most Trusted Information Source. Subscribers can log in for unlimited digital access
Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul chats with Prison City Pub owner Dawn Schulz during a visit of Auburn businesses June 17.
Central New York's health metrics remain steady and will likely enter the fourth phase of the reopening process later this week.
What that fourth phase entails is a question regions are waiting for the state to answer.
According to the NY Forward website set up by the state to guide the economic restart, phase four industries include arts, entertainment, recreation and education. There are guidelines posted for the reopening of colleges and universities, but no other details are available.
On Tuesday, state officials reportedly informed local leaders that certain businesses wouldn't open in the fourth phase. The businesses include gyms, malls and movie theaters.
Onondaga County Executive Ryan McMahon's office confirms that those details were shared with the regional control room overseeing central New York's reopening process. McMahon asked members of Gov. Andrew Cuomo's administration to have conversations with businesses or groups representing gyms, malls and movie theaters before phase four begins later this week. The governor's representatives told McMahon they would have those discussions.
When McMahon spoke to The Citizen Monday, he expressed hope that those businesses would be allowed to open.
"I don't anticipate we'll be able to operate at 100% capacity for some of these things, but certainly we think just getting the doors open, whether it's 25 or 50% capacity, will be helpful," McMahon said.
Malls are one of the main focuses for McMahon because of Destiny USA in Syracuse. Destiny USA has been closed since mid-March due to the COVID-19 pandemic. With the shopping center closed, the county and city of Syracuse are losing millions in sales tax revenue.
McMahon argued that a lot of the businesses within the mall are "entertainment-driven," so they should be allowed to open in phase four. But state officials, for now, are delaying the reopening of these facilities.
"They need to make a living," McMahon said. "And quite frankly, for the mental health of the community, getting out to the bowling alley or getting to your gym for a workout or going to the (Everson Museum of Art), these are things that are important."
Despite the lingering questions about the fourth phase, McMahon believes reopening in stages has worked well. There was a cluster of COVID-19 cases at an apple packaging plant in Oswego County, but there haven't been spikes elsewhere in the region.
McMahon hopes the state will allow central New York to open more businesses as the region prepares to enter phase four.
"We can do this now," he said. "We're going into a new phase. We've learned how to crawl in this process and then walk and we're starting to jog. Jogging before you start sprinting is always a good idea. Phase four can catch up some of these other things from other phases."
Politics reporter Robert Harding can be reached at (315) 282-2220 or robert.harding@lee.net . Follow him on Twitter @robertharding.
