China's currency, the yuan, slipped to its lowest level in a decade on Thursday, a few weeks after China allowed it to weaken past the notable level of seven to the dollar.
The weaker currency should help China in its trade war with the US, as it makes Chinese goods comparatively cheaper and more attractive, but it also makes other countries' exports more expensive for Chinese importers.
China retaliated to new tariffs announced by President Donald Trump earlier this month by letting its currency fall — in doing so it sent markets tumbling.
View Markets Insider's homepage for more stories.
China's currency, the yuan, slipped to its lowest level in over a decade on Thursday, dropping 0.2% to 7.0749 to the dollar.
The dollar-pegged currency, also known as the renminbi, trades within a band set by China's government, and earlier this month the band was moved to fight back against President Donald Trump's newly announced tariffs. A weaker currency makes Chinese exports comparatively cheaper and more attractive, potentially lifting overseas demand and boosting China's economy.
In turn, the move could affect demand for US exporters, whose goods become comparatively more expensive in China.
The horse may have already bolted the stable, however, according to Mark Williams, a senior Asia economist at Capital Economics.
"The renminbi's weakness will give a small boost to China's exporters, and help offset some of the impact of US tariffs," Williams said. "But we're beyond the point where exchange rate moves matter much for US producers exporting to China."
"China's demand for US goods has already collapsed," he added.
Chinese imports from the US have dropped significantly, falling 19% in July from a year earlier .
Hong Kong's Hang Seng stock index fell by 0.8% on the latest currency news.
China's move earlier this month to let its currency slip past the notable level of seven yuan to the dollar sent markets into meltdown. Stocks fell more than 2%, with the Chinese government blaming protectionist policies for its decision.
At the time, the government said it "has the experience, confidence, and capacity to keep the renminbi exchange rate fundamentally stable at a reasonable and balanced level."
