China’s currency has barely moved up the charts in terms of demand for cross-border transactions. In March 2018, it accounted for 1.6% of all transactions. By comparison, the U.S. dollar went from 39.4% of all transactions in March 2018 to 44% in March 2020.
The highest share for the RMB was 2.2% in August 2019, according to SWIFT. China’s currency has been a top six or top five traded currency for the last three years.
Expectations were that China’s renminbi would become more of a global player post entry into the International Monetary Fund’s currency basket, known as a Special Drawing Right. That took place in late 2015.
China’s bond market has increasingly opened to foreigners, but the biggest holders remain Chinese financial institutions as well as financial firms and high net worth individuals in Hong Kong.
For years, the global south has speculated that one day a competing currency would knock the dollar down a peg. That currency was always considered to be the RMB.
The assumption was that global central banks in the emerging markets, namely those that have high foreign currency reserves like Brazil, Russia and India, members of the BRICS family, would increase their holdings of RMB bonds in order to diversify.
China’s RMB has moved up the food chain when it comes to trade finance, though.
In March 2018, it was the fourth most used currency and accounted for $1.5% while the U.S. dollar accounted for 84.6%. Last month, it climbed up one rung to third place, or 2.4% of trade finance deals. The U.S. rose too, at 85.3%.
One of the more interesting takeaways from the SWIFT Tracker is that the U.K. was the lead foreign country working as trade settlement brokers. Some 37.5% of spot market transactions in the Chinese currency took place in London, suggesting that its recent move to invite Huawei into its 5G telecom network was at least partially due to a desire to keep financial ties in tact.
China threatened to shut down London to Shanghai securities exchange interconnectability when word got out that the Brits were listening to the Americans talk smack on Huawei, among other matters stirred up by the trade war.
Should the U.K. reverse course and decide not to allow Huawei to take part in the country’s 5G infrastructure, the currency and securities connect with China would be threatened.
The U.K. is second to Hong Kong as the top offshore RMB economies based on inbound and outbound transactions. Hong Kong accounts for over 75% and the U.K., in a distant second, accounts for 6.7%, followed by Singapore at 3.5% and then the U.S. at 2.8%. That the U.S. is so low on the totem pole, despite being China’s most important trading partner, suggests the RMB is totally outmuscled. They would need the Europeans to opt into more trade settlement in renminbi than in dollars for China to make a dent in the greenback anytime soon.
China once tried getting some Middle Eastern oil producers to price their oil in RMB by creating a futures market for it in their currency. That idea was rejected not only because of politics, as it was first brought up with brokers from Dubai, but also because traders felt they could not trust the value of the Chinese currency.
China is the only currency in the IMF basket that is not free-floating.
Within that basket, China’s RMB represents 10% now. The dollar is still king at 41.7%, followed by the euro at 30.93%.
