Commission (CSRC) on October 11, 2019, foreign shareholding
restrictions in fund management companies, which will take effect
to foreign investment over ten years ago. We summarize below the
futures company in 2005 under CEPA (i.e. Closer Economic
Supervision and Administration of Futures Companies, the scope
cooperation memorandums (Cooperation Memo) with CSRC. According to
presidents of China and the US in 2017. The Administrative
companies would be fully lifted in 2021.
was advanced to 2020 without specifying an exact date.
We note from the information publicly available, there have been
only three foreign-direct-invested futures companies in China,
with JP Morgan holding 49 percent equity interest.
companies has been permitted for more than ten years, it has not
gained much traction in the eyes of foreign investors. There may be
restricted have obviously had an impact.
opening up China's financial services markets, efforts have
to both domestic and foreign investors, enlarging foreign
Derivatives Forum held on November 30 and December 1, 2019, Mr.
years and outlined the focus of the future steps. According to this
in China's futures market, including 14 new products (e.g. CSI
300 index options) listed in 2019, being the most in a single year.
In addition, normal trading of stock index futures, which was
sharply down due to the market crash in 2015, has been in revival.
According to Mr Fang Xinghai, by the end of October, the aggregate
with a total transaction value of approx. RMB235 trillion,
Among the over 70 futures products in the China market, four
special types of products are now available to foreign investors,
technically specified rubber (TSR) 20, through the Shanghai
but for hedging purpose only. In February 2019, CSRC published
its draft implementation rules. According to these draft rules,
subject to suggestions from the exchanges and approval by CSRC.
China has 149 futures companies, which, according to Mr. Fang
Xinghai, have some common issues in capital strength, professional
capability, service quality and talent reserve and, generally
regulate the futures companies in light of these issues, CSRC has
compliant operation and steady development of futures companies. In
and more stringent obligations on the shareholders generally, than
those in the 2014 version of the measures.
governing the futures sector in China, the market expects the
Futures Law to introduce important reforms: for instance,
on the Administration of Futures Transactions (2017 Revision) issued by the State Council.
to domestic futures brokerage business, a futures company may also
three domestic futures companies (i.e. China International Futures,
futures brokers to conduct overseas futures brokerage businesses.
International Futures at that time, the first step of the pilot
program, once it is officially launched, would allow Chinese
program has not yet been launched.
involved in cross-border transactions (e.g. "Belt and
brokerage business for their Chinese clients in the future. This
companies to cope with these challenges.
restrictions in the futures companies in China. It is hoped that
1 According to public information, the two shareholders
Futures to China Galaxy Securities Co., Ltd. http://cdn.chinastock.com.cn/doc/pdf/gsgg/6503566.pdf. However,
hereof, RBS Asia remains a shareholder holding approx. 16 percent
equity interest in Galaxy Futures.
general guide to the subject matter. Specialist advice should be
sought about your specific circumstances.
