CNY farm sells out drive-in movie event, plans more
This photo provided by Katie Jerome shows Arlington Acres, a 100-acre farm featuring a wedding barn and event venue, located at 1155 Apulia Rd in LaFayette, N.Y.
Now that drive-in movie theaters are allowed to resume operating in New York state, a Central New York farm has been given the go-ahead to host its first ever pop-up drive-in movie event. And it’s already sold out.
Arlington Acres in LaFayette, New York, will show “The Goonies” on a big screen after sunset on Saturday, May 23. The 100-acre family farm, also known as a barn wedding and event venue , announced on Facebook that reservations were filled within hours.
“Our first drive-in movie night is SOLD OUT. Unfortunately, we cannot accommodate drive up admission so please do not try to come without a ticket,” the venue said.
Arlington Acres, which still can’t hold weddings due to the coronavirus pandemic, plans to hold more drive-in events; people interested can sign-up for their movie newsletter at www.arlingtonacresevents.com/movies .
Arlington Acres owner Katie Jerome told syracuse.com | The Post-Standard that they will not be charging for tickets, but will ask for a suggested donation of $15 per car or $5 per person to help cover costs of the first event.
“I don’t expect to make money, it’s more of a community thing,” she said.
Movie theaters and other non-essential businesses remain closed due to New York state’s stay-at-home order, but Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced this past week that drive-ins can open as an exception with safe social distancing practices. Fingerlakes Drive-In in Auburn opened Friday with a showing of “Trolls World Tour” and the Midway Drive-In in Minetto said it plans to reopen within the next few weeks.
Jerome said she hopes to temporarily “pivot” to hosting drive-in events until she can resume hosting weddings, to help give the community something fun to do.
“We are not trying to steal any business from any drive-in movie theaters or other businesses,” Jerome explained.
Nomad Cinemas co-founder Michael Flores told syracuse.com that his company, which sets up outdoor movie screenings at places like the Everson Museum and the Syracuse Inner Harbor, will follow state and local government guidelines to help ensure safety amid Covid-19 concerns.
Flores said they’ll set up the pop-up big screen movie theater, along with an FM transmitter, so attendees can stay inside their car and listen to the film through their radio. Cars are typically spaced out to give everyone an optimal view, but may spread them more than six feet apart.
Flores, who also works as a filmmaker and has contributed to productions like “A Quiet Place,” said he and Mario Restive started Nomad Cinema in 2014 to create more community events in the Syracuse area. He said he hopes this event, their first since the coronavirus pandemic began, will give people a break from staying home and binge-watching Netflix.
TCP Contracting and Woodford Bros. are sponsoring the Arlington Acres event. Jerome said additional sponsors could help put on more movie nights, with ads shown on the big screen before shows start.
For more information and updates, visit facebook.com/arlingtonacresevent .
*Editor’s note: An earlier version of the story incorrectly said Nomad Cinema was providing the screen for the drive-in event.
