"Worst Cooks in America" mentors Anne Burrell and Alex Guarnaschelli, center, pose with season 20 contestants Dolores Aguilar-Fernandez, Domaine Javier, Evan Baker, Julie “Jewels” McIlroy, Erin Sullivan, Denise Schroder, Zack Ignoffo, Darian Barnes, Eric Smart, Johannes “Yo” Phelps, Louisa Shramatyan, Holly Brooks, Brianna Weidenbach and Ariel “Ari” Robinson. McIlroy is seventh from left, behind Burrell's shoulder.
Syracuse, N.Y. — Is a Central New York woman one of the worst cooks in America?
Julie “Jewels” McIlroy, who lives in Baldwinsville’s Radisson community, will appear on season 20 of “Worst Cools in America” premiering this weekend. The Food Network series features Iron Chef Alex Guarnaschelli and Cazenovia native Anne Burrell as mentors in a kitchen boot camp aiming to whip cooking-challenged recruits into culinary shape.
McIlroy is a single mom who works for Advocates Inc. in Liverpool, supporting children and adults with disabilities and their families. At home, she admits she needs a little help herself as she realized she does not know how to cook many meals beyond pasta — and often relies on cereal or ordering pizza.
In a phone interview, she told syracuse.com | The Post-Standard that she wants to learn how to cook so she can teach her 15-year-old daughter before she goes off to college. She vaguely remembered learning a little about cooking in a home economics class in high school, but was not a top chef.
“I remember I would make things and they would never turn out like anybody else’s,” she recalled. “I’m just not a domesticated person.”
Last year, her friends suggested she apply for “Worst Cooks in America” like it was a dare. She ended up being one of 14 people selected for season 20′s competition, which filmed all seven episodes before the coronavirus pandemic began.
The recruit who makes the biggest culinary transformation wins a $25,000 cash prize and bragging rights for their team leader.
“It was an amazing experience,” McIlroy said. “Of course Anne is from Cazenovia (which I didn’t know at the time) so that was pretty cool. That was neat to have someone from your hometown.”
McIlroy recommends other people who aren’t confident in their cooking skills to tune in and learn.
“I wanted to learn everything I could learn,” she said. “There’s lots they can learn on the show. They teach really good culinary skills. There’s a technique for everything, even measuring cups — I didn’t even know how to cut an onion, and I know that sounds crazy but I did not know any of that.”
“Worst Cooks in America” premieres Sunday, June 21 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on the Food Network. Episodes this season will include making Jamaican jerk chicken, a Japanese cuisine themed sushi-rolling and bento box challenge, a blindfolded doughnut-eating contest and a trip through past kitchen disasters.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
