Syracuse, N.Y. — Amie Estrella drops off coffee and doughnuts from Dunkin’ for her 17-year-old disabled son, Jack, every weekend at his group home in Oneida County, but cannot go inside to visit him.
Estrella, of Sherrill, has not seen him since March 24 when the state banned visitors at all group homes to keep the coronavirus out.
Jack has autism and does not speak. He is one of six residents in the group home. He used to come home every Friday for the weekend before the pandemic. Estrella and her husband, Matt, have explained to Jack over FaceTime why they have stopped bringing him home and visiting, but they are not sure he understands. That’s why they call the group home before they drop off the coffee and doughnuts to make sure Jack is not outdoors. The Estrellas don’t want him to see them because they know that will upset him.
The Estrellas and other families with loved ones in group homes are frustrated because the state has not told them when and if the visitation ban will be lifted.
“Everyone else has a plan for reopening — businesses, beaches, casinos, but we don’t have any indication of what the plan is for group homes,” Estrella said.
There are about 38,000 New Yorkers living in 7,250 group homes regulated by the state Office for People with Developmental Disabilities. As of June 10, 2,396 residents had tested positive for Covid-19, including 38 in the agency’s Central New York region which includes Onondaga, Madison, Oswego, Cayuga, Cortland, Oneida, Herkimer and Lewis counties. Statewide there have been 375 group home resident Covid-19 deaths, including one in Central New York.
A Syracuse woman whose 19-year-old brother lives with five other young people in a group home started an online petition demanding that OPWDD communicate with parents about resuming visitation at the facilities. More than 5,000 people statewide have signed the petition.
Madelyn Smith said her brother Caleb Smith, who has autism, does not understand why she and her parents have stopped visiting on weekends. “The fact he hasn’t been able to see my family is making him upset and confused,” Smith said. “It’s hard on my family.”
OPWDD said it understands the concern of families. The agency said in a statement it is working with the state Health Department to develop a process and timeline to safely resume group home visitation. “We hope to announce those new guidelines soon,” the agency said.
OPWDD recently told families it will allow “window visits” between group home residents and their loved ones. Visitors and residents can see each other through a window and talk by phone, a practice common at nursing homes which have also banned visitors.
But Estrella said she and some other parents fear window visits could backfire.
“He (Jack) will think we are there to bring him home,” she said. “I’m afraid he will come out the door and run to us. The staff will have to restrain him. That would be traumatic for him and us.”
Arc of Onondaga, which runs 22 group homes in Onondaga County for the developmentally disabled, has seen residents become more frustrated during the pandemic, said Ellen Gutmaker, the agency’s executive director.
In addition to family visits, many of the residents’ day habilitation programs and other community activities have been suspended.
Gutmaker hopes OPWDD allows family visitation to resume. She believes it can be done safely if people wear masks, visit outdoors, keep a safe distance from each other and have time limits on visits.
“I do think as our communities open up, this is something we need to look at for families and for the people we support and try to do this in a way that is reasonable and safe,” Gutmaker said.
Arc’s group homes are for adults ranging in age from their 20s to 80s. Each home has anywhere from three to eight residents. Many of the residents have underlying medical conditions such as diabetes, immune deficiencies and heart conditions that increase their risk of Covid-19, Gutmaker said.
A recent study by Syracuse researchers found people with intellectual and developmental disabilities are at greater risk of dying from Covid-19 because they often have underlying health problems and live in group homes.
Gutmaker said none of Arc’s group home residents have been infected with the virus. She attributes that to group home workers who have been diligent about cleaning, screening residents, wearing masks and social distancing.
Group home employees must take their temperatures every day. They cannot come to work if they have a temperature over 100 or have any other Covid-19 symptoms. Gutmaker said every resident’s temperature is taken twice a day.
Estrella said there have been no positive cases reported at her son’s group home run by Upstate Cerebral Palsy in Rome. She’s very pleased with the care he gets there.
But she worries that her son has become depressed during the lockdown. On Facetime he’s not as responsive as usual and often has a “solemn look” on his face, she said.
“One of his favorite things to do is go for car rides, but he can’t do that now,” Estella said. “He has not left that patch of earth in three months. We miss him dearly.”
