The Syracuse skyline is seen from the former Nynex building in downtown Syracuse. Syracuse City Hall is on the right and the State Tower Building is in the middle of the photo. (Rick Moriarty | rmoriarty@syracuse.com)Rick Moriarty
Syracuse, N.Y. — Hours before Central New York will resume some non-essential business activity, several questions about how that will work remain unanswered. Among them is whom to call with questions.
Onondaga County Executive Ryan McMahon said regional officials overseeing the restart will announce a hotline number Friday for CNY businesses to call if they have questions about how to operate during the Phase One restart.
Central New York leaders got confirmation just today that the economic restart can begin at 12:01 a.m. Friday, following a two-month lockdown spurred by the novel coronavirus . Many of the details are still being worked out.
All businesses that reopen are required to have a written safety plan and to sign lengthy online documents affirming that they will follow the state’s recommendations for protecting customers and employees from the spread of coronavirus.
As of Thursday afternoon, there was no central number to call with questions or concerns. McMahon said that will be rectified soon.
“It’s happening quickly,” McMahon said. “We’re all dealing with something we’ve never dealt with before.’’
McMahon and Syracuse Mayor Ben Walsh, both members of a nine-person “regional control room’’ that will oversee local progress during the Phase One restart, said they did not know yet how many CNY businesses had submitted the documents and were ready to open. They also said they were unsure whether the information filed by each business would be public.
“I would think so,’’ McMahon said, adding that it would have to be discussed.
County employees will be available to inspect businesses to ensure they are eligible to operate and comply with the procedures to which they agreed. The inspections will likely be driven by complaints initially. McMahon said violators would typically receive a warning, but inspectors might have authority to issue fines in serious cases, he said.
That’s another unresolved question. County lawyers are still reviewing how fines could be implemented, McMahon said. No amounts have been determined. McMahon said he would confer with state health officials before trying to institute fines.
“We want to be consistent’’ with the rest of the state, he said. “I’ll probably try that. My executive orders have to get approved by state DOH related to Covid. We’ll probably put forward a fine.’’
But McMahon said public officials are relying heavily on the good judgment of private businesses to operate safely. Business owners, employees and customers should remain vigilant to prevent a resurgence of the coronavirus, he said.
“You can’t answer every single specific question based on one set of rules,’’ he said. “Functionally, it’s impossible. So, we just need to use our best judgment and common sense.’’
There are still questions about whether certain healthcare providers are free to resume routine in-person care, McMahon said. Some providers, such as eye or foot doctors, may be able to provide non-urgent care soon, he said.
“It sounded to me like they’re OK to go, but we have to iron these things out,’’ he said.
Routine dental care is a special concern because of the risk of infection from saliva, McMahon said. County officials are still working with the state health department on plans for dental checkups, with no date yet in sight, he said.
McMahon said he and other members of the regional control room will work quickly to make information available as the restart gets under way. But he acknowledged that there are complexities that will take time to work through.
Restarting business under the new normal is more complicated than shutting it down, he said.
“Easy to shut down — you just tell people to shut down,’’ he said. “Harder to get going under this new environment.’’
