Prisoners got coronavirus stimulus checks; IRS wants them back
”Guilty until proven innocent”: Three former Syracuse football players joined The Post-Standard/syracuse.com for a conversation about systemic racism in the wake of the deaths of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery and Breonna Taylor. Watch the video and hear the full conversation .
SU basketball readies for return: Syracuse men’s basketball coach Jim Boeheim and his staff decided to bring back players the weekend of July 6. When asked whether SU basketball players will undergo to the same Covid-19 testing protocols as the football team, Boeheim said, “Yeah, we’ll test. Everybody will get tested.”
SOUTH SIDE HOME SEVERELY DAMAGED IN FIRE: Firefighters are working to determine what caused a fire that severely damaged a home Wednesday on Syracuse’s South Side . When the Syracuse Fire Department arrived at the Wood Avenue home, the front of the house was engulfed in flames. Firefighters doused the two-story home with water and cut holes in the roof. National Grid workers picked up wires that fell onto the street. Masked bystanders stood on the sidewalk across from the Wood Avenue home, watching as firefighters put out the fire burning their neighbors’ home. (Samantha House photo)
Major changes in Liverpool school district: An elementary school will close and the district offices will move as part of a series of changes the Liverpool Central School District is making in the next couple of years. Here’s a look at what the district is planning to do .
Does Albany’s celebrated police reform live up to hype? Police reform advocates celebrated the repeal this month of a 44-year-old law that shielded police disciplinary records from the public. But some familiar with the new law are concerned that it doesn’t go as far as advertised .
Movie memorabilia for sale: Want to own a piece of Central New York movie history? Syracuse Studios is hosting a garage sale this Saturday at the movie studio and film school. The former A.V. Zogg Middle School in Liverpool will be selling furniture and other items used in recent movies, including “The Night House” and American High productions like Pete Davidson’s “Big Time Adolescence.” The garage sale will help raise money for Ophelia’s Place .
Strong Hearts on the move: For 12 years, Syracuse’s Strong Hearts Cafe has won accolades and built a loyal following as one of Syracuse’s first all-vegan dining spots. But the cafe closed its original location on Wednesday to prepare for a move to a new spot .
