Herkimer, N.Y. — A Central New York gym is staying closed after threatening to reopen early despite concerns about the coronavirus pandemic.
Jason Crippen , a Herkimer police officer who owns Revamp Fitness in Herkimer, New York, said last week that he would reopen the independent gym on Monday, May 11, despite a statewide order designating gyms and fitness centers as non-essential businesses that must stay closed until at least May 15. Crippen argued the shutdown shouldn’t apply to Herkimer County, which has confirmed less than 100 cases of COVID-19 and three deaths.
On Sunday, he announced that the gym would not be opening early.
“To be clear, opening early was not a knee-jerk reaction, but one where research, statistics and science played a role in the decision-making process,” he wrote on Facebook . “Because Herkimer County had 63 confirmed cases (at time of decision) and three deaths, I feel our county’s directives are being driven by controversial Downstate numbers. So, with other gyms already opening up in other states across the country, AND with the increase in testing, I researched what types of safety guidelines those gyms were implementing, and how Revamp could also do it SAFELY.”
Crippen said he showed the guidelines to his attorney, who said he didn’t see any difference in health risks exercising in a fitness center compared to shoppers at “Lowe’s, Walmart or a liquor store.”
“People can say what they want but it’s not about being selfish and making a buck, it’s about survival. We are a small business. If we continue being dictated by downstate numbers, there will be no more nice fitness facilities around this area PERIOD!” he continued.
“Finally, after telling the #fakenews the entire aforesaid information, the only story they seemed to run with is how a Herkimer Police Officer is defying a governor’s direct order and opening his business anyway (some got it straight). It has absolutely nothing to do with that. It’s about doing what’s right for the people of this county and protecting a business we believe the community deserves. We want to thank everyone that has showed tremendous support over the last week! We hope these shelter-in-place orders are lifted soon, and we can’t wait to get back to business as usual."
Crippen said a new reopening date would be announced later.
Crippen, who first opened the gym in 2018, told syracuse.com | The Post-Standard last week that he was losing more money by staying closed than the cost of any civil penalties, which could have been $10,000 per day. He also said he applied for government assistance but was told “there’s no money left” and most of his employees are high school and college students, part-time workers who are not eligible for unemployment benefits.
“It really puts us in a tough spot,” Crippen told syracuse.com | The Post-Standard.
He also said that the Herkimer Police Department has not been enforcing social distancing rules and mask requirements, though they have received complaints about violations. He said those would be civil penalties that result in fines, not laws being broken.
“This is America,” Crippen said. “We’re not a communist country.”
He said last week that the majority of people supported his decision to reopen.
However, a Siena College poll released two weeks ago shows most New Yorkers agree with Cuomo’s decision to put schools and businesses on PAUSE until May 15 (87%) and the decision to require face masks in public (92%). Gyms and fitness centers are “specifically enumerated as non-essential and are, therefore, unable to request a designation" to be considered essential.
Gov. Cuomo said he plans to gradually reopen parts of New York state where coronavirus cases are minimal or have slowed, and will confer with county executives and other local officials on Monday. But Crippen expects gyms to be included in phase four of the reopening plan , which could come weeks or months after construction/manufacturing (phase one), retail/professional services (phase two) and restaurants/hotels (phase three).
“We’re definitely Phase 4,” Crippen said. “When’s that? It keeps getting pushed back.”
When Revamp Fitness does reopen, Crippen says the gym will remain safe with new guidelines, including taking temperatures of all staff before the start of their shifts; requiring staff members to wear face masks; rearranging exercise equipment to maintain distances of six feet; and regularly cleaning equipment. Gym members, however, would not be required to wear masks as face coverings could cause people to pass out during cardio exercises.
