The Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, in downtown Syracuse, held Sunday services under new rules that allow 25% capacity.
As Monsignor Neal Quartier, rector at the Catholic Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, blessed the water and wine for Communion Sunday, the congregants took part in their own purification.
They reached into their handbags for bottles of hand sanitizer and shared it among families. The scent rose from the pews like a new kind of incense.
For some, Sunday’s service was the first in-person visit to church since the middle of March, when the government shut down large gatherings to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.
The virus has killed more than 24,000 people in New York and more than 100,000 across the country. As the rate of infection declines, the state is starting to allow limited restarts. Restaurants have opened outdoor seating. Stylists are repairing bad home haircuts.
But many consider churches to be among the most dangerous communities to return to full capacity. Many people gather in confined spaces with singing, talking and poor ventilation.
“This is different from Wegmans,” Quartier said.
Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Saturday that places of worship could fill the pews to 25% capacity, starting the next day. Last week, groups up to 10 were allowed to worship together.
Many people are attending church services through online platforms during the shutdown and some plan to continue that out of an abundance of caution.
Episcopal Bishop DeDe Duncan-Probe led a virtual worship Sunday for the entire diocese. Because the diocese has a higher median age than the general population, its churches plan to return to in-person gatherings more slowly and cautiously than required by government, according to the website.
There was not enough time for the Catholic Diocese of Syracuse to communicate with all of its members overnight. But church leaders had already prepared for the moment they could open their doors. About 30 people showed up at the downtown Cathedral on Sunday morning.
People who wanted to attend Mass were invited to pre-register. The church can hold 107 people under the guidelines.
At the door, volunteers took each person’s temperature, recorded their names and escorted them to a seat. Every other pew was roped off.
There was no air conditioning – a system that could blow germs around the church.
There is nothing to touch – no church bulletins or hymnals. The collection envelopes are dropped in a basket at the door.
Nearly everyone who attended church on Sunday filed forward to receive Communion.
Quartier announced some guidance in advance: Clean your hands, walk single file and stay six feet apart.
Form your hands into the shape of a cup and allow the lay person to drop the wafer into your hand. Then, step to the side, lower your mask and take it.
Quartier said he would not be serving Communion himself because he has a family history of heart conditions.
“I want to stay around,” he said.
Later, he said he chose to share his personal medical history to serve as a role model for others who need to weigh their own health and the risks in participating. Like Quartier, many of the Catholic church’s members are over age 65, he said.
“This is not something to take lightly,” he said.
There were other differences in Sunday’s service.
People waved to each other instead of shaking hands and sharing a sign of peace.
Instead of a big choir, the music was played by an organist and sung from the balcony by one cantor.
There were fewer songs to sing. The responses were short.
Quartier said everything about the service was designed to limit talking and congregating.
He would like to keep each service within 40 minutes. That means he’ll have to pack all of his thoughts into five-minute homilies.
There was a lot to pray for on Sunday.
Since they last came together in person, people have lost their health, access to family members and their jobs.
The death of a black man in Minneapolis under the knee of white police officer has prompted protests across the U.S.
On Saturday, more than 2,000 people marched past the Cathedral , at Columbus Circle, to bring attention to racial injustices in Syracuse and beyond.
Sunday’s novena was a big ask. Quartier directed parishioners to pray for an end to the coronavirus as well as to end racism, tumult and worldwide need.
Quartier wrapped the inhumanity of the virus and the injustice of racial inequality into a quick sermon to honor the “Feast of the Trinity” – a celebration traditionally held 50 days after Easter to honor the father, son and Holy Spirit.
He used quotes from the Black Lives Matter movement and Martin Luther King, Jr.
The Holy Trinity is about relationships, he said.
So are the current circumstances, he said.
“We need each other more than ever,” he said. “We cannot do this alone.”
