Another Amazon warehouse in CNY: Onondaga County legislators will hold a special session next week to complete their environmental review of a 112,000-square foot warehouse in DeWitt that will be constructed for Amazon. The special meeting was arranged to help Amazon and its developer fast-track construction of the DeWitt facility so that it can be finished at the same time as the giant distribution center Amazon will open next year in Clay, Legislature Chairman David Knapp said .
More abuse lawsuits against Syracuse diocese: Nearly 40 new lawsuits have been filed against the Roman Catholic Diocese of Syracuse, alleging child sex abuse by priests and a teacher. The lawsuits were filed under the New York State Child Victims Act, and join 40 suits already filed against the diocese under the act .
Plan your weekend: This weekend we celebrate Father’s Day, Juneteenth, Pride Month and more with a mixture of outdoor activities and virtual happenings. Here are 11 events you shouldn’t miss .
“I’VE NEVER HAD A SUMMER WITHOUT BASEBALL”: Arizona Diamondbacks outfielder Tim Locastro, a native of Auburn, is spending baseball’s hiatus at his condominium in Scottsdale, Arizona. He’s mainly pushing through baseball workouts at the Diamondbacks’ complex, but also squeezing in a round or two of golf per week. “When they announce something, we’ll be ready,” Locastro said of a timetable for a return. “That’s definitely the hardest part about this whole thing, we don’t have an exact date.” (AP Photo)
Axe: College athletes not “sticking to sports” anymore: College football players are riding a rising wave of empowerment to speak out on injustices in their circle of life and the world around them. Syracuse football coach Dino Babers admitted he was prodded to weigh in on the current racial strife in our country at the urging of his players. Brent Axe writes that this is a good thing, and players with something to say shouldn’t listen to the “stick to sports” crowd .
Runners go ‘coast-to-coast’ for coronavirus aid: West Genesee’s cross country runners have embarked on a virtual 3,150-mile journey along Route 20 from Boston to Oregon, with the dual goals of staying motivated during the quarantined summer months and helping to raise money for those in need because of the coronavirus pandemic .
