A helicopter lands on the roof of Upstate University Hospital Wednesday afternoon, March 19, 2020. Michael Greenlar | mgreenlar@syr
Syracuse, N.Y. — About 8,000 people in Central New York likely have had the novel coronavirus and didn’t even know it, according to new estimates from Upstate Medical University.
The university’s updated model estimates that 8,600 people in Madison, Onondaga and Oswego counties have been infected since the virus showed up this winter. That’s nearly 12 times higher than the 742 confirmed cases those counties have reported.
Those 8,600 cases represent 1.3% of the population of the three counties. The number could have been much higher if local residents hadn’t embraced social distancing, said Dr. Kathryn Anderson, one of the professors who put together the model. With no social distancing, she said, 7.9% of the 660,000 people in the region would likely have been infected by now, or more than 50,000.
Anderson said social distancing has reduced the average number of people who catch the virus from an infected person from 2.6 to 1.3. That means spreading of the virus has slowed dramatically.
“The fact that we went from 2.6 to 1.3 is remarkable and has had effects," she said. “We’re not seeing an overwhelming number of cases, and that’s thanks to our community members.”
Most of the people who have had the virus have already recovered, she said.
The battle is far from over, Anderson said, and warned people not to get complacent. Keeping the rate this low requires all social distancing measures in place now to continue through summer, and it could still overwhelm hospitals in the summer.
“We are only one giant pool party away from having an increase in cases,” she said.
Anderson said keeping the numbers low will protect Central New Yorkers until better treatments or a vaccine are developed. A vaccine could take 12 to 18 months.
A revised model by Upstate Medical University shows how few cases of COVID-19 there have been in the Syracuse area. Strong social distancing has helped us avoid the red curve and put us on the yellow curve; even more stringent controls could drop us to the purple line at the bottom. The "R" values are how many people are on average infected from one person carrying the virus. Upstate Medical UniversityUpstate Medical University
There are several reasons for the big disconnect between the numbers announced daily and the estimates of people who’ve contracted the virus, which causes an illness known as COVID-19. Cases are confirmed by testing, which has been limited by the supply of testing kits. Patients are generally tested only if they have symptoms bad enough to seek medical attention.
Many patients with mild symptoms never go to the doctor and never get tested. About 80% of people get better without ending up in a hospital. As many as half of people infected with the virus have no symptoms at all and never seek medical care.
All of those people, though, with mild or no symptoms, could still pass the virus to an average of two to three people, which makes epidemiologists nervous. Not knowing how widespread the disease is hampers the ability to relax social distancing measures and start up the economy again.
“When you don’t have the right data to input into your model, you can’t even project how many cases you have and how far this might go out,” said Shannon Monnat, a public health professor at Syracuse University.
In addition, many people might have had the illness before the first reported case in Onondaga County on March 16, Anderson said. The virus likely reached Central New York in late January or February, she said. Upstate saw an increase in late February of patients with symptoms similar to COVID-19, she said.
“People began presenting with upper respiratory illnesses right around the time when influenza cases went down,” she said. “We’ll never know for sure, but we think that was a sign of an uptick in (COVID-19) cases.”
COVID-19 isn’t unique in being underreported. That’s common with infectious diseases, especially those where symptoms can be mild, like the flu. Others, like Lyme disease, are more common than reports indicate for a variety of reasons: the symptoms mimic other diseases, medical professionals are still learning how to diagnose it, and tests are far from perfect. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention receives reports of about 30,000 cases of Lyme disease each year, but two CDC-funded studies said the real number could be 10 times higher.
Confirmed cases of diseases are what epidemiologists call the tip of the iceberg; or, in a more colorful analogy offered by Syracuse University public health professor David Larsen, the ears and eyes of a hippo visible above the water. Most of the cases of many diseases lie beneath the surface of testing and are never detected.
Diseases with near total fatality rates, such as rabies and Ebola, are the only ones where observed cases almost always equal real cases, said Brian Leydet, a professor of epidemiology and infectious disease at SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry.
Epidemiologists try to estimate the actual number of cases of a disease, called the prevalence, in a variety of ways based on previous studies, current data and assumptions of how the disease moves. That’s particularly difficult with COVID-19 because it’s so new: The virus emerged just six months ago in China and burned a rapid path across the world. More than 2 million cases have been confirmed so far across dozens of countries, with at least 138,000 deaths.
One way to estimate a disease’s spread is to work backward from the number of deaths among the people who were infected. That’s called the case fatality rate, and it can help scientists estimate the total number of infections.
With COVID-19, Upstate uses a case fatality rate of six deaths for every 1,000 cases. Central New York has had 24 deaths, so that math would suggest about 4,000 cases.
Even that likely undercounts COVID-19 cases. New research suggests that the number of confirmed deaths from COVID-19, like the number of cases, might be lower than reality because people die without being tested. In addition, it takes a COVID-19 patient about three weeks from the time of infection to death, Leydet said. Therefore, working backward from a single death estimates how many cases there were three weeks ago, not on the day the person died.
