Was the return of indoor dining a success? There was a lot of joy inside newly reopened Central New York bars and restaurants over the weekend; they were able to open their dining rooms on Friday for the first time in almost 90 days. Here's a look at how the weekend went .
Movie Tavern owner details new coronavirus protocols, reopening soon
Heart-wrenching choice: When Elaine Marcus contracted the coronavirus, her son knew she would have a tough road. The 75-year-old mother of two had other health problems ― COPD, Parkinson’s disease, high blood pressure and obesity, said her son Greg, who lives in California. As the virus took hold and she struggled to breathe, she made a heart-wrenching decision .
Food giveaways this week in CNY: More than 16,000 gallons of milk, 31,000 pounds of produce, 25,000 pounds of meat, and 12,000 pounds of other dairy products will be given away this week across a series of drive-thru food distributions open to the public .
More police reforms signed: Courts in New York must now publish new demographic data on arrests under a bill signed into law by Gov. Andrew Cuomo. It was one of three police-reform bills signed by Cuomo Monday ; they join several reforms he signed earlier, including banning chokeholds, repealing a law that kept police discipline records from public view and guaranteeing the right to record police.
Major CNY beer distributor closes: Spirit & Sanzone, one of Central New York’s oldest and largest beer distributors, has closed after selling its lineup of brands to competitors. The 100-year-old company closed its plant and warehouse in East Syracuse and laid off 64 employees .
“The Condemned,” part 5: Our new true crime and local history podcast tells the backstories of five men from Onondaga County who were all sentenced to die in the electric chair. Listen to the latest episode and catch up on any you may have missed .
FORMER SAS STAR TRANSFERS TO DIVISION II SCHOOL: Former Syracuse Academy of Science basketball standout Lyrik’ Jackson — shown above in her high school days — will be suiting up for Division II New Haven next season. Jackson is transferring from Mohawk Valley Community College . As a sophomore in 2019-20, her 26.2 points per game average earned her NJCAA All-American and Region III Player of the Year accolades. In addition, she was first team All-Conference, All-Region and All-Nation while earning Region III MVP accolades. Jackson was the syracuse.com 2016 All-CNY girls high school basketball player of the year for SAS. (File photo, Stephen D. Cannerelli)
Babers opens up: Syracuse football head coach Dino Babers went on radio with Jim Rome early Monday afternoon to talk about race, coaching during the coronavirus pandemic, redshirt junior quarterback Tommy DeVito and the 3-3-5 defense that first-year coordinator Tony White began installing this spring. Here’s a look at what he said .
Pastime? Or past its time? For those that miss baseball, this is the week when it really hits home. The kids are out of school, the nights are getting warmer and baseball was ready to take the baton and guide us through the summer. The Syracuse Mets had six home games scheduled for NBT Bank Stadium this week. Instead, the ballpark sits quiet. Baseball will survive this. It always does. But Brent Axe asks this question: Can baseball thrive again?
