by Hassan Aslam , (Last Updated May 4, 2020)
One of the biggest economies in the world became the first major country to launch the first ever digital currency the e-RMB (electronic Renminbi) that can change the world of finance forever. China is the 2nd largest economy in the world on the basis of nominal GDP and number one on the basis of purchasing power parity. The world’s most populous country, with a population of around 1.428 billion, China over the past 40 years has successfully achieved trade, economic and military geostrategic globalization. However, China has failed to achieve financial globalization.
In order to understand why let’s take a step back to analyse the basics of the Chinese currency first. The RMB abbreviation means “Ren Min Bi” that translates into “People’s money”. While Yuan is the base unit for RMB – just as Dollar is for USD, Renminbi is the official currency of China and acts as a medium of exchange. Yuan is the most dominant currency in the realm of trade globalization where China has become the highest exporting nation in the world. This obviously did not happen overnight, but after almost half a century struggle of economic reforms. One of the most significant milestones of Chinese trade domination was achieved back in 2002, when China became a member of WTO (World Trade Organization), at the behest of United States of America. This alone was a game-changer that allowed China to export in large quantities to the rest of the world year upon year. From there, China went on to become an economic leader in the world. Since 1991, the Chinese economy has never grown less than 6% reaching a height of 14.2% in this period in 2007 becoming a $14.1 trillion economy as of today.
In conclusion, the e-RMB will start small, but the digital Yuan can disrupt both traditional banking and the post-Bretton Woods system of floating exchange rates that the world has lived with since 1973.
As a key player in economic globalization, China began giving credit lines to needy countries. Many of those who were unable to repay eventually had to convert the debt into equity – Sri Lanka, being just one of many classic examples. As a result the companies in China grew massively, becoming multinationals of enormous size, adding significantly to the Chinese economy.
While achieving all the economic power, the Chinese military achieved new heights of geostrategic globalization too. One of the prime examples here was the opening up the naval bases in Djibouti which is located in the Horn of Africa after striking a deal with then President Ismail Omar Guelleh back in 2015. This was the first overseas military base for China and was built at a cost of over half a billion dollars. This facility significantly increased China’s power projection capabilities in the Indian Ocean. And of course, the OBOR (one-belt-one-road) initiative where China took over the entire Eurasia influence in one-shot.
But despite all of this, China failed miserably on one side – which was financial globalization. This was primarily because the Chinese financial markets, including the capital and debt markets, were not as open to the rest of the world. This was mainly because of the policies and sentiments of Chinese Communist Party’s authoritarian and totalitarian tendencies. As a result the Chinese currency influence could never grow on global trade compared to the dollar, as the dollar remained as the reserve currency or the primary currency for global trade. Oil, gold or any commodity’s price was always quoted in US dollar terms. Hence, China realised that it has to displace the US dollar as a reserve currency to fulfil its dream of becoming the global super power by 2050. This idea has given birth to electronic RMB (e-RMB).
The launch of e-RMB can be backed by 6 reasons which will put China as a global financial leader:
Replacing the US dollar – A sovereign digital currency provides a functional alternative to the dollar settlement system and blunts the impact of any sanctions or threats of exclusion both at a national and company level.
Financial globalization of China – It may also facilitate integration into globally traded currency markets with a reduced risk of politically inspired disruption.
More control – Because cash transactions were offline and transaction data from existing payment platforms was scattered, the Central Bank of China (PBoC) was unable to monitor cash flow in real time.
The rise of private money – There is a growing sense that central banks worldwide should issue a digital version of cash to prevent the “privatization” of money by commercial entities and IT firms.
Chinese blockchain existence – China has in the past weeks made its Blockchain-based Service Network – or BSN – available for global commercial use, according to reports. The BSN, led by the Chinese government-backed think tank State Information Center, is a global infrastructure that claims to help project, create and run new blockchain applications for a lower cost. It also aims to accelerate the development of smart cities and digital economies.
Impact of Coronavirus (Covid-19) – The still-raging novel coronavirus pandemic and the higher health and hygiene awareness among the masses have also added impetus to the trial of the digital currency. While there has been a dramatic drop in cash in circulation in Wuhan, the initial ground zero of the virtual outbreak, most retailers over there refuse to accept coins or paper money as a precaution against the highly contagious pathogen.
What happens next? The emerging economic powers such as India, Brazil and Russia will now be evaluating adoption of the new modern alternative financial economic system to remain relevant. Interestingly, the PBoC’s Digital Currency Research Institute does not want a blockchain-based approach as it is a decentralized and distributed ledger because in that way that centralized book keeping and administration of the Chinese state would lose control. Therefore the sovereign digital currency will have to be pegged against the national currency. The digital Yuan e-RMB will have the same legal tender status as cash.
Now you must be thinking, what happens to the existing system? The other forms of money supplies and savings like M1 (total amount of M0 outside of the private banking system, the amount of demand deposits and other checkable deposits) and M2 (M1 plus savings accounts and money market accounts etc) will remain unchanged. Actually, a part of the nation’s M0 supply will be digitalized while M0 supply will be the monetary base that is the total of all physical currencies including coinage. China’s M0 supply stood at 8.3 trillion yuan ($1.17 trillion) in 2019 but the annual increase in this has slackened to just 3-4% since 2012 and impervious to the surges in credit and loans. The interesting thing is that since 2000-2010 the M0 throughout this period was double-digit. Meaning that all the paper money already issued in circulation or deposits has not been affected. But the cash system needs to be reformed now, which will not disrupt the velocity of the money in circulation. On the contrary in the US the M0 has grown at a very steady pace.
In conclusion, the e-RMB will start small, but the digital Yuan can disrupt both traditional banking and the post-Bretton Woods system of floating exchange rates that the world has lived with since 1973. For China, blockchain and the Yuan digital currency are a national strategic priority – almost at the level of the internet. We are entering into a new era. An era of BharatCoin (India), FedCoin (United States of America), E-Krona (Sweden) amongst many other digital currencies which will form the basis of a truly new digital financial system in which e-RMB will set the base for China to be the new superpower of the 22nd century.
He can be contacted at: hassanaslam145@gmail.com
