Syracuse, N.Y. — A former Central New York cross country coach will spend 15 years in federal prison after coercing a teen girl into taking pictures of a younger girl , then sharing those pictures on Twitter, prosecutors announced.
Martin Nicholson was 32 when he was arrested in 2018 as part of a joint investigation between federal, state and local officials. The probe began after Nicholson tried to share one of the pictures of child porn on Twitter, which flagged the post and alerted the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, according to court papers.
All told, Nicholson had collected 44 images of the then-14-year-old victim on a flash drive, labeled with her name, authorities said.
In committing the crime, Nicholson first had a relationship with a 17-year-old, then threatened to cut off that relationship if that girl didn’t take photos of the younger girl.
“As profound as these offenses are, Nicholson did not stop there,” federal prosecutor Lisa Fletcher wrote in court papers. “He took the images produced for him (by the older girl) and shared them with at least one like-minded anonymous person on the Internet, leaving (the younger girl) to know, for the rest of her life, that explicit images of her body are irretrievably in the hands of pedophiles — and leaving (the older girl) with the guilt of having produced them.”
Nicholson had contact with student-athletes at Bishop Ludden, Jordan-Elbridge and Westhill school districts. But authorities do not believe other students were victimized, beyond the ones known from the investigation, Onondaga County District Attorney William Fitzpatrick has said.
The case was eventually turned over to federal prosecutors, who charged Nicholson with sexual exploitation of a child and a receipt of child porn. Nicholson pleaded guilty last year, admitting he shared the images over Twitter, Kik and Wickr.
Federal prosecutor Fletcher had pushed for Nicholson to receive 30 years in prison , the maximum under law, noting that he was a coach entrusted with protecting children.
Senior U.S. District Judge Thomas McAvoy sentenced Nicholson to 15 years in prison instead. He’ll also be required to pay restitution.
Staff writer Douglass Dowty can be reached at ddowty@syracuse.com or 315-470-6070.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
