New York state is still slowly reopening during the coronavirus pandemic , and gatherings of up to 25 people are now allowed as we are in phase three. You can also now see movies at reopened Midway Drive-In and Finger Lakes Drive-In .
This weekend we celebrate Father’s Day, Juneteenth, and Pride Month with a mixture of outdoor activities and virtual happenings.
If you know of a virtual or outdoor event you would like to see on this list, let us know at features@syracuse.com .
This virtual event will be streamed online via Zoom and on Cafe Sankofa Cooperative’s Facebook page. Juneteenth commemorates the day when Union soldiers finally arrived in Galveston, Texas, to announce that the Civil War was over and that all slaves were free. Free To Be is a collaboration with the Sankofa Wellness & Resource Liberty Resources and aims to tie together the celebration of Juneteenth and current events which have spurred daily protests against police brutality across the nation. There will be guest speakers, spoken word and more.
When: June 19 from 1-2 p.m.
Beak & Skiff Apple Orchards is hosting a summer drive-in movie series this weekend and various dates through July 30. This weekend will feature an ’80s nostalgia movie and there will be a charge per car, not per guest. When purchasing tickets, patrons are also encouraged to pre-order their movie drinks and snacks at the same time through Eventbrite .
Where: Beak & Skiff Apple Orchards, 2708 Lords Hill Rd. (Rte. 80) LaFayette, NY 13084
Baldwinsville Center for the Arts is sponsoring its first ever haiku contest. Traditional and non-traditional haiku will be accepted on the theme of summer. Individuals of all ages and locations may submit up to three entries. All entries will be reviewed and judged by members of the BCA board, as well as the community on baldwinsville.org. Winning poems will be seen on colorful lawn signs along Baldwinsville streets.
How much: Free to enter. First-place award will be a $100 Gift Basket including local gift certificates. Second prize will be a $25 gift certificate to a local restaurant.
Breathe yoga of Fayetteville is offering a free community yoga class. No prior yoga experience required, but you will need to bring your own mat. Donations will be accepted, but not expected for Black Lives Matter Syracuse. Parking will be available at Wellwood Middle School.
When: June 20 from 10-11 a.m. (rain date June 27)
The In My Fathers Kitchen (IMFK) annual 5k is going virtual and seeks to bring awareness as well as resources to individuals who are homeless living on the streets, in abandoned houses and under the bridges of our city. Since 2011 IMFK has assisted 191 individuals off the streets and into safe housing in the Syracuse community. The run will have prizes for top 3 finishers for men and women, for the largest team on the virtual platform, and for the largest amount of money raised.
Join The Twisted Sage Apothecary to celebrate the official start of the summer season. They will have a day filled with fun and games for all ages, a small rite, a potluck dinner and a fire.
When: June 20 from noon to 8 p.m.
Redhouse Arts Center presents a two-part play written specifically for Zoom. In a season when theaters, playgrounds, schools and churches are shuttered by a modern plague, the rector of a small church on Long Island gathers a handful of parishioners via video conference.
When: “Waiting For The Host” streams from June 18 at 7 p.m. – June 22 at 7 p.m., “Still Waiting” streams from June 25 at 7 p.m. – June 29 at 7 p.m.
This show is scenes and excerpts from the life and work of Tony and Pulitzer-Award winning Wendy Wasserstein, ranging from her well-known comedies to her insightful lesser-known essays. Compiled by Hangar AD Michael Barakiva, who worked for Wendy for the last five years of her life. There will be a pre-show conversation with Julie Salamon, author of Wendy’s biography “Wendy and the Lost Boys: The Uncommon Life of Wendy Wasserstein."
When: June 20 at 7:30 p.m.
Hangar Theatre Company will be presenting several virtual plays and musical performances for children as part of its KIDDSTUFF programming. They include “Mario & The Dancing Princesses” on June 13, “The Emperor’s New Clothes” on June 20, “The Magic Paintbrush" on July 18, and “The Velveteen Rabbit” on July 25. Hangar Theatre’s seasons have gone virtual with performances for both kids and adults.
Over the past few weeks, these migratory birds have arrived back in our region after a perilous journey south and are now raising their young, who will make their own journey soon enough. Join naturalist Rand Michaels as he takes a closer look at this avian phenomenon, with help from the researchers at Onondaga Audubon.
