Grandmother accuses CNY school priest of molesting her when she was a girl: ‘They can’t get away with this’
Mary McLoughlin, top center, in a yearbook photo from St. Joseph's school in Utica. This photo is from the 1960s, when she alleges in a lawsuit that she was abused by the school priest, Rev. Conrad Somerville.
Whitesboro, N.Y. — It was always old Frankenstein movies. Or ghost stories.
“Any little thing where he got you alone in the dark,” Mary McLoughlin recalled. Then the priest at her family’s church would sexually abuse her, she said.
She was 11; the abuse happened numerous times, according to a lawsuit McLoughlin filed against the Syracuse Roman Catholic Diocese Wednesday.
McLoughlin’s suit was one of 38 filed against the diocese this week , a new wave of complaints under the New York Child Victims Act.
McLoughlin’s is one of the few filed against the diocese by women; most of the accusers have been men who alleged the abuse happened when they were boys.
McLoughlin, 66, says her abuser was the Rev. Conrad Somerville. At the time, he was in his 30s at St. Joseph’s school and parish in Utica.
Somerville has not been named in the diocese’s list of known offenders. He died in 2013 at 85; his last post was at the Franciscan Place at Destiny USA.
A spokeswoman for the diocese said they have not seen the new cases yet, but they take seriously all allegations of sexual abuse.
“We continue to pray for the healing of those who have been harmed in the past and continue to be vigilant in our safe environment protocols in order that this very dark chapter in the Church will never happen again,” said Danielle Cummings.
The priest was trusted by McLoughlin’s family and that of the other girls in her school, according to the lawsuit filed by Jennifer Freeman of Marsh Law in Westchester.
The sexual abuse happened in movie theaters, church youth outings and in Somerville’s car, according to the lawsuit.
Somerville used his position at the school and church to groom McLoughlin and other girls so he could molest them, according to the suit. The allegations outlined in the lawsuit happened between 1964 and 1965.
“I hope it makes people like Father Conrad realize they can’t get away with this. For over 50 years, I’ve been wondering who else, or how many other kids did he hurt,” said McLoughlin, who lives in Troy now and is a funeral director.
McLoughlin said she found out the priest was abusing one of her friends, as well. The two girls were talking about it on the phone when McLoughlin’s mother picked up the receiver and overheard.
McLoughlin said her mother was furious. Her mother had spent four years in a convent and was the head of the PTA at the church grammar school where the priest worked and ministered. She and other parents confronted the school’s administration and, like in so many other cases, Somerville disappeared, McLoughlin said.
He was transferred almost instantly; nothing more happened or was said, McLoughlin said.
She didn’t talk about the abuse much until she was in her 40s and other victims of priest sex abuse began to come forward.
When she heard others’ disbelief, she said, she couldn’t stay quiet.
“I just remember saying, ‘I was one of those kids,’” McLoughlin said. “That’s when I first came out, when I got tired of people who didn’t believe.”
McLoughlin said she raised the issue of the abuse once to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Albany, in the early 1980s. She had been married, briefly, and sought an annulment so she could be remarried in the church.
At first, the church denied her annulment, she said. So she went to the diocese and retold her story of abuse at the hands of Somerville. No one ever said anything more to her about the allegations, she said. But the decision was reversed on her annulment, which was granted.
Why come forward now with the lawsuit now, after all these years? The child victims act opens a narrow window that allows people like McLoughlin, who have carried their stories for decades, an opportunity to seek justice and, possibly, change the system that hid abuse, shuffling deviant priests from one parish to another.
McLoughlin is angry about the innocence she lost at the hands of the priest. At an age where she should have been playing with dolls, she was manipulated and molested, she said.
As she raised her five daughters, she kept them close, trying to protect them from what happened to her.
Now her granddaughters are 9 and 10. When she looks at them, it’s hard not to remember what happened to her.
“I want to protect them,” McLoughlin said.
Marnie Eisenstadt is a reporter who writes about people and public affairs in Central New York. Have an idea or question? Contact her anytime: email | twitter | Facebook | 315-470-2246
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
