Gree Electric Appliances, Inc., a major appliance manufacturer and the world’s largest residential air-conditioner manufacturer, headquartered in Zhuhai in Guandong province (‘Gree’), has succeeded before the Guandong Higher People’s Court in patent infringement proceedings against Ningbo Aux Air Conditioner Co Ltd (‘Aux’).  The damages award in the case is one of the highest IP awards to date in the home appliance industry.
In 2017, Gree brought a patent infringement action before the Guangzhou Intellectual Property Court against Aux and Jingdon Trading Co., Ltd (‘Jingdon’).  It claimed that Aux had intentionally and repeatedly infringed its patent for “an indoor air conditioner unit” (Patent No.: ZL200820047012.X) by making, selling, and offering for sale eight types of air conditioner, including KFR-35GW/BpTYC1+1, and that Jingdong had infringed its patent by selling and offering for sale the air conditioners manufactured by Gree. Gree sought an Order that Aux immediately cease the infringement and pay compensation of CNY 40 million (approx. USD 5,600,000), and that Jingdong cease selling and offering for sale the infringing air conditioners.
In April 2018, the Guangzhou Intellectual Property Court held at first instance that the alleged infringing product fell within the scope of Gree’s patent, and that Aux’s prior art defence could not stand. Gree had provided preliminary evidence of the gains Aux had made from the infringement, but, as the relevant books of account were mainly held by Aux, the Court ordered it to submit the relevant material within a specified time. Aux provided statistical data relating to only four types of the infringing product and refused to provide the original material on which the statistical data was based.  The Court, therefore, decided to award damages on the basis of the evidence provided by Gree in relation to both online and direct sales. It ordered Aux to cease the infringement and compensate Gree in the sum of CNY 40 million (approx. US$5,600,000), and Jingdon Trading to cease the infringement.
Aux appealed to the Guangdong Higher People's Court. In 2019, the Guangdong Higher People's Court rejected the appeal and upheld the first instance decision.
Aux then lodged an Enforcement Objection Application with the Intermediate People's Court of Guangzhou City, pursuant to Art.224 of the Civil Procedure Law, requesting suspension of execution of the civil judgment and postponement of payment of the full amount of compensation. The Court rejected the application and Aux applied to the Guangdong Higher People’s Court for reconsideration.
In March 2020, the Guangdong Higher People's Court upheld the Intermediate People’s Court’s decision and proceeded to enter the ruling.
