Guangzhou Redsun Gas Appliance Co., Ltd. (‘Redsun Company’) has, since 1993, used ‘Redsun’ as both its corporate name, and the brand name for its highly regarded kitchen and bathroom products. Its registered trademark, ‘Redsun and Silhouette’, has been recognized as a well-known trademark by the Trademark Office.
The Defendant Shi is a former employee of Redsun Company.  He left his position in Redsun Company’s marketing department in 2016, and established Guangdong Zhimei Electric Co., Ltd. (‘Zhimei Company’) to manufacture and sell  REDSUNHOME  integrated stoves and other products. Shi used the sales channels and outlets established by Redsun Company and its distributors for large-scale sales. Zhimei Company's stores sold both Redsun products and its own REDSUNHOME products and displayed two signboards:  ‘Red Sun Kitchen and Bathroom’ (the same as signboards used at Redsun Company's store)  and ‘REDSUNHOME’ signboards. In addition, Zhimei Company used Redsun Company's after-sales service cards and business cards, as well as misleading slogans such as ‘Redsun Kitchen and Bathroom Upgrade’, ‘Big Brand, New Image, New Model’ in its stores and WeChat public accounts.
In 2017, Redsun Company filed a lawsuit against Zhimei Company and four provincial distributors with the Guangzhou Intellectual Property Court. The Court of first instance determined that the Defendants had engaged in trademark infringement and unfair competition. It held that the infringement was obviously malicious and fully supported Redsun Company’s claim for compensation of CNY 50 million (approx. US$ 7,000,000). Zhimei Company and the other Defendants appealed to the Guangdong Higher People's Court.
The Guangdong Higher People's Court rejected the appeal.  It held that before Zhimei Company began its operations, the ‘Redsun’ corporate name had a high reputation and was an "influential enterprise name" for the purposes of the Unfair Competition Law. Zhimei Company used various publicity and marketing methods to confuse the source of commodities, even claiming that Zhimei Company 's REDSUNHOME product was an upgraded version of the Redsun product, which was obviously malicious and could easily lead to confusion among the relevant public.  The Defendants’ behaviour thus constituted unfair competition.
Zhimei Company’s use of the REDSUNHOME and ‘Redsun and Silhouette’ trademarks on relevant products (i.e. products in respect of which Redsun Company's ‘Redsun and Silhouette’ trademark was registered) and its use of the domain name ‘www.redsun-gd.com, constituted trademark infringement, causing Redsun Company extremely large economic loss. Further, Zhimei Company had refused to submit full and complete financial books in the lawsuit, which constituted obstruction of evidence, and had continued to sell infringing products after an injunction had been granted by the Court of first instance.  This amounted to malicious infringement.
Zhimei Company was ordered to immediately stop the infringement, and compensate Redsun Company for economic loss in the sum of CNY 50 million (approx. US$ 7,000,000) and reasonable fees of CNY 450,000 (approx. US$ 63,696). The four provincial distributors were held jointly and severally liable with the Zhimei Company. So far, the award in this case is the highest that has been made in intellectual property disputes in the home appliance industry.
