Will the U.S. declare China a currency manipulator?
The pressure on China’s currency continues to mount as the world’s second-largest economy shows more signs of slowing and traders bet that the dollar will soon buy a record amount of yuan in the offshore market.
As the country returned to work on Monday after the Golden Week holiday, the People’s Bank of China cut the Reserve Ratio Requirement , the percent of deposit liabilities owed to its customers banks are required to hold, for the fourth time this year.
While that may spur banks to lend more, it sent the Chinese yuan USDCNY,
another leg lower, moving toward its August low against the greenback and in sight of the psychological 7.00 level. A move through 7.00 would be a record low in offshore trading.
The yuan has already posted six straight monthly declines against the dollar, including a drop of 0.6% in September.
Read: China stocks tumble 3% on return from holiday, even as its central bank takes action
Why is the yuan weakening?
The slide in the yuan comes as the economy shows more signs of slowing. A closely watched economic activity indicator, the official Purchasers Manufacturing Index, fell to 52 in September, from 52.2 in August, according to Wei Yao, an economist at Société Générale.
Magnifying concerns around the Chinese economy was a steeper-than-expected drop in China’s foreign-exchange holdings during September, to $3.087 trillion . A decline in the country’s reserves raises concerns that the PBOC could not defend the yuan in should a large amount of money flee the country.
Furthermore, the yuan weakness is part of a widespread selloff in emerging-market currencies. The Indian rupee USDINR,
Despite the external factors weighing on the yuan, the White House is putting pressure on Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to officially label China a currency manipulator, according to a Bloomberg report .
The Treasury Department is expected to release its semiannual currency report later this month and, should it wish, could designate China a currency manipulator in that report.
However, analysts at Bank of America Merrill Lynch said the move in the currency is more in line with the divergence in the economic outlook for the respective countries: “If anything, the 100bp RRR cut and a more hawkish Fed since last week only strengthens the case of further monetary policy divergence in China and the US,” they said. “Both soft and hard data suggest that China and US remain in different business cycles, resulting in China rates to be more immune to the US due to lower sensitivity.”
With the U.S. economy humming along, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates in September for the third time in 2018 and signaled a fourth hike is likely in December.
How low can it go?
The trade war between the U.S. and China is showing no signs of a let-up. Given that the yuan has become the barometer for the back-and-forth between President Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping, the yuan’s weakness has more room to run, said Brad Bechtel, managing director at Jefferies LLC.
“The currency remains an outlet valve for a lot of this [trade disputes], and I don’t expect we are done just yet,” he said. “We put up 3 big figures last night with highs around 6.9369 and we are keeping an eye on that mid-August high as it looks vulnerable.”
That is a sentiment shared by Hussein Sayed, chief market strategist at FXTM. “It now seems a matter of when, not if, the currency will reach the key physiological level of 7,” he said.
