The Euclid Restaurant in Clay is owned and operated by Fran Fiorito (right), his wife Cindy Fiorito and her son Paul Stott. Hidden Gems of CNYCharlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
(This is part of an ongoing series that showcases some of the best food and drinks in Central New York that you probably don’t know about. Do you have a hidden gem? Share your favorite by emailing me at cmiller@syracuse.com or texting me at 315-382-1984. I might even buy you lunch. If you want to know my next hidden gem before it’s published, join my text group for subscribers where I’ll announce it a day in advance. That’ll allow you to get there before everyone else.)
Clay, N.Y. — This story should have two parts: one written during the takeout-only era brought on by coronavirus and one reported after restaurants can fully reopen.
The Euclid Restaurant in Clay is serving most of its regular menu to go, but some of the specialties that have made The Euclid a favorite for generations won’t be available until customers can dine in.
Readers have been nominating the Euclid as a 'Hidden Gem’ since last fall. Connie Webb and her husband, David, drive 30 minutes from their home in Pulaski on Fridays for the Euclid’s fried haddock dinners. “We have been going there for years (decades, actually) and haven’t yet found fried haddock anywhere else that compares to the Euclid’s," Connie said.
The Euclid is hardly hidden, though. It fills the northwest corner at Route 31 and Morgan Road. Fran Fiorito, 68, bought it 39 years ago this month. He runs the restaurant with his wife, Cindy, and her son Paul Stott.
The building was erected in 1853 as a motel with a restaurant that seated 20. It later became the Euclid Hotel. When he bought it in 1981, Fran converted the second-floor rooms into a dining/banquet space that seats 125 people. The first-floor dining room and bar now can hold 150.
The Euclid Restaurant in Clay. Hidden Gems of CNYCharlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
The menu is five pages, and almost everything on it is homemade from fresh ingredients. It’s got something for everyone: pizza, Italian dinners, steak, salads and sandwiches. Fish and prime rib are the top sellers, but during the quarantine, they’re not serving prime rib.
While maintaining the inventory for such an expansive menu seems challenging, Fran knows just how much food to order from his suppliers. He still tracks his stock with pen and paper every day. He can tell you everything he sold on this day nine years ago, or any other date of any other year since ’81.
The sign out front on Friday was promoting the bullhead dinner for $16.99. It’s the tail end of the bullhead season, and I’d never eaten this red-blooded fish before.
“Are you really sure you want to try the bullhead?" Fran asked. "All of our fish is so good. People who’ve never tried are hesitant because of the, you know, bones.”
He makes a good point. The jumbo haddock fillets come in from Boston on Tuesdays and Thursdays each week. They also serve walleye and perch from Upstate New York.
As tempting as that sounded, I’ve lived here long enough to know many consider bullhead a local delicacy, so today was the day.
A bullhead dinner at The Euclid Restaurant in Clay. Hidden Gems of CNYCharlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
This bullhead comes from 80 miles north in the Thousand Islands. Paul said the deep-fried bullhead attracts customers from all over Central New York. Fran said during the short bullhead season, he will go through 300 pounds a week. Not a lot of restaurants serve this fish, and it was a rough year for bullhead fishing because of the weather.
Steve Clark, the Euclid’s cook for six years, makes his own breading to coat the fish. The dinner comes with 18 ounces of bullhead (three to five filets), thick steak fries and Cindy’s finely chopped coleslaw.
Fran gave me a quick lesson on how to eat bullhead. You’ll need two forks: one to hold the fish carcass, the other to gently scrape the meat from the ribcage. It’s a little work because you have to rotate the fish and flip it and rotate it again, but you’re left with a few forkfuls of shredded bullhead.
That ... was some good Central New York eatin'. (By the way, the photo below is incomplete. I learned that the crunchy tail is just as good as the meat. I just forgot to snap a photo after I chewed it off.)
The remnants of the bullhead. The Euclid Restaurant in Clay. Hidden Gems of CNYCharlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Chicken riggies ($17.99): For something completely different, I ordered the chicken riggies at Paul’s suggestion.
He said their recipe is different than most area restaurants because the sauce is thicker. He still uses thick cubes of chicken breast, chopped hot cherry peppers, parmesan cheese and their own red sauce mixed with cream.
Somehow they’re able to get it to stick to the rigatoni. The thick plastic take-home container kept the meal warm for my 30-minute drive home. The food itself lasted about 10 minutes among three people. It was that good. Paul was telling the truth: the sauce was so thick that little remained at the bottom of the empty container.
Spicy chicken riggies from The Euclid Restaurant in Clay. Hidden Gems of CNYCharlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Fried chicken ($15.99): Several readers who suggested the Euclid are Wednesday night regulars. That’s all-you-can-eat southern fried chicken night. Seriously? I had a dream once that I died, went to Heaven and was treated to all-you-can-eat fried chicken.
This meal comes with four pieces of chicken, steak fries and coleslaw or a hot vegetable. Fran and Steve dip the chicken in a honey-based batter and dust it with breading just before dropping it into the fryer. They’ll go through 48 meals on a typical Wednesday.
The restaurant shutdown can’t end soon enough. I need to be here on Wednesdays so I can realize that all-you-can-eat honey-dipped fried chicken isn’t just a heavenly dream.
Hours: Currently 3 to 8 p.m., Tuesday-Thursday and Saturday; noon to 8 p.m. Friday. Closed Sunday and Monday.
Inside seating: Plenty, but until we’re allowed to eat inside restaurants during the coronavirus pandemic, it’s takeout only.
