(This is part of an ongoing series that showcases some of the best food and drinks in Central New York that you probably don’t know about. Do you have a hidden gem? Share your favorite by emailing me at cmiller@syracuse.com or texting me at 315-382-1984. I might even buy you lunch. If you want to know my next hidden gem before it’s published, join my text group for subscribers where I’ll announce it a day in advance. That’ll allow you to get there before everyone else.)
Syracuse, N.Y. — The gyros in Philadelphia, where Meru Patel grew up, had a unique flavor about them. The gyros he’d buy from a street vendor in Brooklyn also were a hyped-up version of the classic Greek sandwich. They were more than just lamb, a couple vegetables and feta cheese wrapped in a pita.
Meru, 26, wanted that flavor in Syracuse.
“It was a mix of Greek, Indian and Middle Eastern,” he said. “It was a little spicy, but it was full of flavor. I call it Mid-Eastern fusion, and now I’m making it for Syracuse.”
Meru’s family has owned the Westcott Grocery store on Westcott Street for 15 years. It’s a mid-sized convenience store next door to Boom Babies clothing store a mile east of the Syracuse University campus. The store had a pizzeria inside for years, and it was once pretty popular among the late-night student crowd. Meru wanted to try something different, so he and two friends — Mohamed Solima and Rami Amer — opened Syracuse Halal Gyro last April.
They wanted to put their own spin on halal food (foods allowed under Islamic dietary laws) and liven up classic traditional dishes like chicken wings, burgers and cheesesteak sandwiches. He figured SU brings a lot of students here from New York City and Philadelphia who miss this type of food they get at home.
Meru Patel, the owner of Syracuse Halal Gyro on Westcott Street, shaves the lamb meat from the spit for my gyro. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Meru arrives at the store two hours before the restaurant portion opens. He seasons the meat before he leaves each night, and he starts his day by putting it on the vertical rotisserie cooker. They get the lamb and chicken from Casa Imports in Utica. They’re one of few local suppliers that sell halal meat.
Everything Syracuse Halal Gyro serves is made in-house except for the pita bread. (Those come from Kontos Bakery in New Jersey.)
The gyro ($6.99) is the most popular item on the menu. Customers going in probably expect a gyro like those at the State Fair. Nothing wrong with that; I end every night at the State Fair with a gyro from Kiki’s, my favorite local Greek restaurant. This gyro is different.
Meru starts by shaving off two fists-full of lamb off the rotating spit. He sears it on the flatiron grill for a minute and then mixes in some green peppers and onions. Just as the onions become translucent, he puts the 7-inch pita on top for 30 seconds.
The flatbread then comes off the grill and gets a layer of lettuce, cucumbers and tomatoes. The lamb-onion-pepper mix goes on top of the sandwich salad, and Meru dresses it with his tzatziki sauce.
Don’t bother asking him how he makes his tzatziki; he’s not going to tell you. The tzatziki is a spicier version of the traditional white sauce made with yogurt, cucumbers, garlic, salt and olive oil.
Honestly, the best part about this gyro is the meat. “You can smell the coriander,” Meru said.
Yes, you can smell (and taste) the coriander, and oh-so-many other spices. The lamb is moist, but it’s not greasy or too salty.
The regular gyro before the tzatziki sauce from Syracuse Halal Gyro on Westcott Street. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Chicken gyro plate ($8.99): Regulars here call this the “chicken platter.” I don’t care what you call it; I call it a true bargain. I can’t understand why these guys are charging $9 for something that should run $15. I’m not complaining, but this is a MOUND of fresh food. Three other customers were waiting for these when I visited the Westcott Grocery on Thursday.
Meru grills a few spiced chicken thighs over an open flame for five minutes. They then spend a couple minutes on the flattop grill where he chops them into ¾-inch chunks before spreading them over yellow rice that’s been cooking since 10 a.m.
This all goes next to a salad of lettuce, cucumbers, tomatoes, and myriad spicy peppers.
The kicker is the white tzatziki and the spicy red sauce criss-crossed over everything. It’s like a high-class international garbage plate.
The chicken gyro platter over rice with the tzatziki and spicy red sauce at  Syracuse Halal Gyro on Westcott Street. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Falafel plate ($8.99): Take everything I said about the chicken platter above and apply it to this falafel platter. You get the fresh salad, and you get the white and red sauces, but you get a falafel that Meru mixed that morning and deep-fries while you wait. You also get a half-cup of his hummus with a side of grilled pita bread.
The six falafel spheres are cooked for a couple minutes in oil that’s only used for vegetables. They come out with a crispy outer-layer and a soft inside.
This meal is enough for two people, so plan accordingly.
The falafel plate at Syracuse Halal Gyro on Westcott Street. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Chicken wings (6 for $4.99): I visited Syracuse Halal Gyro to try the gyro and the Mid-Eastern fusion, but I’m a sucker for good chicken wings . Meru urged me to try the wings with his signature sauce.
These didn’t last long. They were that good. The creamy sauce is the star here. You can see every speck of worldly spices mixed in; you just don’t know what it is. They’re not too (spicy) hot, but they’re certainly not mild.
If you don’t want to break out of your Upstate New York comfort zone, Syracuse Halal Gyro can make BBQ, mild, hot, and zesty lemon wings.
Just remember, you can get those anywhere. Go ahead. Take a chance.
An order of 6 chicken wings with the house sauce at Syracuse Halal Gyro on Westcott Street. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Hours: Currently noon to 7 p.m. seven days a week. Normally 10 a.m. to 10 p.m.
Inside seating: Yes, but until we’re allowed to eat inside restaurants during the coronavirus pandemic, you’ll have to get your food to go or have it delivered.
