Tim Tschernjawski opened Salt City Soup Company in Liverpool in March, days before the coronavirus shut everything down. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
(This is part of an ongoing series that showcases some of the best food and drinks in Central New York that you probably don’t know about. Do you have a hidden gem? Share your favorite by emailing me at cmiller@syracuse.com or texting me at 315-382-1984. I might even buy you lunch. If you want to know my next hidden gem before it’s published, join my text group for subscribers where I’ll announce it a day in advance. That’ll allow you to get there before everyone else.)
Syracuse, N.Y. — It was 91 degrees and sunny outside, perfect weather for a nice bowl of hot soup. It sounds nuts, but you’ll understand once you try the soup at Salt City Soup Co.
This lunch counter sells boutique sandwiches and scratch-made soups from a first-floor corner of the Salina Meadows office park off of Buckley Road. The law offices, insurance companies and other business headquarters inside offer a built-in lunch crowd.
Tim Tschernjawski, 35, originally wanted to open a restaurant downtown. That was his dream when he gave up his corporate job in Boston to move back home. He spent six years at Kitty Hoyne’s Irish Pub, the last three as the sous chef. He moved onto The Sherwood Inn and then took a management job at Original Grain.
When he decided to go out on his own, realtor Michael Greene found this spot. Salt City Soup Co. opened on Tuesday, March 10, to a full dining room. His crowds expanded each day that week.
“And then it just stopped. The state shut everything down,” Tim said. “I was watching the (governor’s) press conference and just put my head down. I said, ‘You’ve got to be kidding me.' I had this plan and it just went out the window.”
The week after he opened, his built-in clientele went home to work. Most of the offices in his building temporarily closed to help slow the spread of the coronavirus. Like all restaurants in New York, Tim could only offer takeout meals. He shortened his workday and tightened up the menu, and he stopped serving breakfast.
Salt City Soup Company in Liverpool. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
The lines at the stainless steel counter suddenly disappeared, but Tim remained determined to keep going. He upped his social media presence, posting his specials and the ever-changing menu. Soon, customers raved about their meals online. and that drew more customers and more rave reviews.
“Yeah, the food speaks for itself. It has to,” Tim said. “This is just simple food done right.”
The food does speak for itself, but plenty of customers speak about the food, too. Several readers suggested I try it out.
“He is always thinking of creative ways to pair flavors together, to make your bellies full and happy,” wrote Nancy Olson, of Camillus.
My belly wanted to be full and happy, so I visited the Salt City Soup Co. on a hot and humid afternoon last week, days after the state restored in-house dining. And I had lots of soup.
Tim figured out soup was his specialty while working at Kitty Hoyne’s. He’d make cream of mushroom soup all year long, even in the summer. “It’s my elevated comfort food,” he said. “It could be a day just like today and people would still order soup.” Those same customers would also order Kitty Hoyne’s Chef Damien Brownlow’s shepherd’s pie on a hot day, he said.
At his restaurant, Tim rotates the soups weekly. Last week he offered cream of mushroom and a roasted red pepper bisque. This week it’s cream of mushroom and fire-roasted tomato and corn.
By the time I walked in, Tim had sold out of the mushroom soup. I ordered a 12-ounce bowl ($6). It was almost too big; a cup ($4) would’ve been better to pair with a sandwich. I ended up bringing half of it home, and that made me popular in my house.
Red pepper bisque is usually pretty simple. It’s a slightly creamy and mild soup. Tim’s recipe, however, is much more complex and takes you through different layers of flavor. It starts creamy, but a few seconds later the peppers take over. It’s not spicy at all, but you’ll get hints of onion and garlic if you eat it slowly enough.
Tim experiments when developing his recipes, and he might eventually try a cold soup.
The roasted red pepper bisque at Salt City Soup Company in Liverpool. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Yes, this is a soup place, but Tim makes a mean sandwich. They’re all designed to go with his soups. The most popular sandwich on his menu is the No. 5 ($9). This was made to compliment the bisque.
He starts with spreading his own rosemary aioli on Pastabilities stretch bread. He adds a layer of spinach and tomatoes before laying down a ¾-inch mound of oven-roasted turkey. That’s covered with a full layer of bacon and smoked gouda cheese.
The bread alone with a bit of the aioli would be perfect to dip into the bisque, but everything else is a bonus. No one is going to judge you if you dunk the No. 5 into the soup. In fact, they’ll probably judge you if you don’t stir your soup with this sandwich.
The No. 5 (turkey, bacon, smoked gouda, spinach and tomato) at Salt City Soup Company in Liverpool. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
The No. 4 ($9): This sandwich was designed with the neighboring office workers in mind. There’s nothing more depressing than craving a nap after a hefty lunch. It’s not a problem when you’re working at home, but when you’re at the office, you have no place to hide.
This sandwich has no meat, and it’s served on a tortilla wrap. It’s stuffed with diced avocado, sliced cucumbers, pickled red onions, tomatoes and spinach. The key ingredient, however, is sliced jalapeño peppers. It’s just hot enough, and it goes well with soup.
“It’s tough to find a veggie sandwich that appeals to people who aren’t vegetarian,” he said.
I love meat, and yet I love this sandwich. I will get this on my next visit. Hopefully he’ll have some cream of mushroom soup left.
The No. 4 (avocado, cucumber, red onion, tomato, jalapeno, spinach sandwich) from Salt City Soup Company in Liverpool. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Sweet potato fries ($3): Believe it or not, this is more of a dessert than a side dish. The deep-fried sweet potato wedges are sweet by themselves, but Tim serves them with a cup of maple aioli.
Like everything in the Salt City Soup Co., it’s made here from locally sourced ingredients. This contains real maple syrup from around here.
Sweet potato wedges with maple aioli from Salt City Soup Company in Liverpool. Hidden Gems of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Next time: I’m going to get my big butt out of bed early and return just to have breakfast here. Tim just started offering a breakfast sandwich with egg, sausage, cheddar cheese, arugula and maple aioli on Pasta’s bread ($5).
He serves Salt City Coffee ’s Syracuse blend for $2. Now I wish our office were in Salina Meadows so I could start my day with that combo.
