Manuel Lopez and Lucy Diaz outside El Trailer Del Sabor, at the corner of Niagara and Seymour streets on Syracuse's Near West Side.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
(This is part of an ongoing series that showcases some of the best food and drinks in Central New York that you probably don’t know about. Do you have a hidden gem? Share your favorite by emailing me at cmiller@syracuse.com or texting me at 315-382-1984. I might even buy you lunch. If you want to know my next hidden gem before it’s published, join my text group for subscribers where I’ll announce it a day in advance. That’ll allow you to get there before everyone else.)
Syracuse, N.Y. — Believe it or not, you can find a new place serving great food during a pandemic. I happened by one last week.
And this gem is more disguised than it is hidden. It’s an old 18-foot camper parked in a vacant lot on the city’s Near West Side. At the corner of Seymour and Niagara streets you’ll find El Trailer del Sabor, Spanish for The Flavor Trailer.
Inside Lucy Diaz will be preparing authentic Dominican food, and her boyfriend Manuel Lopez will be at the window taking orders from customers.
“I love the look on people’s faces when they take their first bite of my food,” Lucy said. “People will try it, and they’ll come back, and they’re willing to wait for it if there’s a line. I like to test Americans with something new.”
She grew up in the Dominican Republic, where she cooked three meals a day at home. She emigrated to the United States 10 years ago.
Lucy and Manuel met a few years ago. He was driving a taxi, taking her to work at Dominick’s Neighborhood Market on the North Side. She talked about her passion for cooking, and he commiserated about how ride-sharing apps like Uber were killing his business. They’ve been together since.
They bought this camper for $300 in LaFayette and gutted it, replacing the insides with kitchen equipment bought from a restaurant that had closed. After painting it blue with a red stripe and tacking on some white lights, they got their restaurant permit from the city in September and opened for business.
El Trailer del Sabor originally parked in front of the old Nojaim supermarket on Gifford Street, but the couple wanted a more permanent spot. “I asked the guy at that house if I could park here and sell food,” Manuel said, pointing at 230 Seymour St. “He said yes, and we’ve been here since.”
Lucy Diaz grinds garlic and plantains in El Trailer Del Sabor, at the corner of Niagara and Seymour streets on Syracuse's Near West Side.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
The Flavor Trailer’s specials change daily, depending on what the couple comes up with at the dinner table after work. Manuel visits restaurants and food trucks throughout the week for ideas. “And then we will make what the others don’t have,” he said. “Our food, our flavors are different from anything else you’re going to find around here.”
They replenish their inventory once a week at Lorenzo’s Wholesale Foods, 3½ miles west on Fay Road. The staples include plantains, steak, chicken, fish, lobster tails, shrimp, rice and vegetables.
Lucy starts cooking at the trailer each morning at about 9. She’ll begin with mangú, a Dominican breakfast made of fried eggs, fried salami, fried cheese and sometimes avocado. She usually sells about five breakfasts before turning her attention to lunch and supper.
Manuel posts each day’s menu on their Facebook page . By 3 p.m., business picks up. They average about 50 meals a day, even during the winter. It’s best to call (315-965-6616) an hour before you pick up your order because the wait can get long in the afternoon.
If you don’t want to drive to them, Manuel will drive your food to you in his minivan. Since we’ve been under quarantine, he’s been delivering food all over the city, including to all the local hospitals.
Manuel Lopez shows off a serving of mofungo with shrimp at El Trailer Del Sabor, at the corner of Niagara and Seymour streets on Syracuse's Near West Side.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Lucy makes a beef stew, a chicken stew, roast pork and different kinds of rice each day. That gives her something to serve when people drive up and want something right away. Everything else is custom made, right down to hand-mashing the plantains with a pestle in a steel mortar. Most dishes take 15 minutes to prepare.
T.J. Walker of Syracuse stops by at least twice a week for fried fish and fried rice, and he has no problem waiting for his food. “Once you try this food, you’ll come back, and you won’t mind waiting for it,” he said Thursday after picking up his to-go lunch. “It’s affordable, and it’s better than a lot of restaurants.”
In addition to traditional Dominican food, Lucy makes fried chicken, burgers, fries and chicken wings.
Mofongo ($10-$15): They sell more of this classic Dominican/Puerto Rican dish than anything else on the menu. It’s fairly basic: fried green plantains mashed with garlic, olive oil and pork. From there, Lucy customizes it to your taste. She offers three homemade sauces: garlic, spicy diablo or red creole.
Lucy will top your mofongo with your choice of shrimp, chicken, steak, fish or lobster tail. Your meal will come with a side of fried plantains drizzled with any of her sauces and a mound of rice and beans.
I opted for shrimp and the garlic sauce, simply because she peeled and crushed the garlic herself. It wasn’t from a jar. She sautéed the 10 medium-sized shrimp in butter with red and yellow peppers and garlic. Delicious.
It was deep with Caribbean flavor (garlic, green onions, peppers, celery and herbs). Next time, though, I’ll order the diablo (‘devil’) sauce. It was 52 degrees out when I stopped by the trailer for my to-go meal. I needed some heat.
A serving of mofungo with shrimp at El Trailer Del Sabor, at the corner of Niagara and Seymour streets on Syracuse's Near West Side.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
New York steak combo ($15): This is more of a dinner than a lunch, unless you don’t plan on returning to work. This Styrofoam platter weighs about 2½ pounds. If you eat all of this during your lunch hour, you’ll be going to your bed rather than your desk.
Lucy slices up the fresh short loin and sautés it with peppers and onions with the creole sauce. She’ll cook it to your desired doneness. (I recommend nothing more than medium rare.) You also get five shrimp in your of sauce, rice and beans and a salad.
This is a true bargain. It’s what draws Wilauer Mateo here.
“Amazing food they have,” Mateo said. “It’s a great place for a Dominican flavor. It shows that when you love doing something, it can grow to something greater."
Pepper steak, shrimp and fried rice at El Trailer Del Sabor, at the corner of Niagara and Seymour streets on Syracuse's Near West Side.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Once the pandemic ends and restaurants can reopen, Lucy and Manuel hope to open a restaurant. They’re eyeing a storefront on South Avenue.
“The food that comes out of this trailer is like the food you’d get in a restaurant,” he said. “Our taste is different than any other Spanish restaurant around here. Once you try it, I think you’ll agree.”
