Sean Gates leases the kitchen at McAvan's and does all the cooking. Within a week after opening, it became known as a Hidden Gem of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
(This is part of an ongoing series that showcases some of the best food and drinks in Central New York that you probably don’t know about. Do you have a hidden gem? Share your favorite by emailing me at cmiller@syracuse.com or texting me at 315-382-1984. I might even buy you lunch. If you want to know my next hidden gem before it’s published, join my text group for subscribers where I’ll announce it a day in advance. That’ll allow you to get there before everyone else.)
Syracuse, N.Y. — The kitchen at McAvan’s Pub in Syracuse’s Tipperary Hill neighborhood had sat dormant since 1997. Regulars were fine with the bar being nothing more than a place to knock back a few cheap beers and watch a game.
When Gov. Andrew Cuomo ordered bars to close on March 16 in an effort to slow the coronavirus , the McAvan family decided to make the best use of that time. They ripped up the old tile flooring and yanked out the trough cradling the front of the bar that years before had served as one giant spittoon. They laid down dark wood, replaced the ceiling and dressed up the back room with new bar-top tables and three electronic dart boards.
Then they focused on the kitchen. Even after 23 years, it was in good shape; the appliances just needed some updating.
Sean Gates, a cook who’s served as executive chef at Asti’s and worked at Mirbeau Inn & Spa, Prime Steak House, the Hotel Syracuse and most recently Tuscarora Golf Club, approached Sean McAvan about leasing the kitchen. They’d been friends for 20 years, and they agreed it would be a win-win situation for both.
They started the work on St. Patrick’s Day, the first full day bars were closed in New York.
“We put lipstick on the old girl. Fire engine red lipstick,” Sean Gates said from the kitchen, looking out into the back room. “I finally have something that’s mine. I can make it what I want, but I know it’s got to be good so people keep coming back.”
McAvan’s is still a neighborhood bar. Now it’s a neighborhood bar with excellent food.
Sean started small with a takeout menu, mostly bar food with an upscale twist: wings, burgers, sandwiches, salads and appetizers. That’ll change soon now that we can eat in. He’s going to offer two specials a day, and he’ll have a soup and salad combo for $7. He’ll do a pig roast in the fall and one in the summer.
Gates hasn’t done much to lure customers other than post a menu on the bar’s Facebook page and hang a sign over the front door. The word got around. A few readers tried it and immediately suggested I visit. Ryan Murphy, a reader who lived upstairs above McAvan’s years ago, texted on Wednesday and said I needed to stop for lunch.
“I know you like chicken wings,” he said, “You’re going to LOVE these.”
'Everything Bagel' wings and spicy barbecue wings at McAvan's, a Hidden Gem of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Ryan’s text got him a free lunch on me Thursday. He took a break from his job at the city’s Water Department and met me at McAvan’s. We shared a batch of wings before ordering lunch.
An order of 10 wings costs $11, and it includes celery and homemade blue cheese dressing. Ryan was pushing the hot barbecue wings, so we got five of those. I asked for the ‘Everything Bagel’ wings just because I’d never heard of such a thing. The seasoning was exactly what you’d expect on a bagel ... just on chicken: poppy seeds, toasted sesame seeds, dried garlic, dried onion and salt. Sean sprinkles them with scallions and shredded parmesan cheese.
The wings are big, but not so meaty that they become tough and chewy. They came out crispy and golden before he tossed the flavor onto them. Both flavors we tried were tasty. Aside from the basic mild-to-hot, Sean offers garlic parmesan, Buffalo Blue, nacho cheese, honey sriracha and salt & pepper.
Yes, you read that right: Nacho cheese chicken wings. I think I just gained 10 pounds typing that.
It’s been nine days since Sean opened his kitchen, and business has picked up exponentially. Since last week, when bars were allowed to reopen, he’s fried 500 pounds of chicken wings. That’s 2,500 drums and flats. He went through 30 pounds of haddock last Friday.
“I couldn’t ask for a better start,” he said. “The word-of-mouth has been amazing. Each day I have what I call a ‘bingo’ number, the amount I need to sell. I’ve hit it times six every day since I opened.”
Until the kitchen reopened, McAvan’s would sell food twice a year. They’d sell corned beef sandwiches on St. Patrick’s Day and the day of Syracuse’s St. Patrick’s Day parade.
Gates brought that gem back, and that’s what Ryan ordered. The menu says the $8 sandwich on dark rye contains 5 ounces of corned beef, but this looked more like a half-pound with just enough Thousand Island dressing to keep the sandwich moist.
Ryan finished half of the sandwich and took the rest home for dinner, along with a few leftover chicken wings.
Ryan Murphy, a syracuse.com reader who turned us onto McAvan's,  takes a bite from his corned beef sandwich.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
The burgers ($8.50 to $13): The secret to Sean’s burgers is the frying pan. He could use the perfectly good flattop grill next to his stove, but that’s for bacon, the buns and maybe some vegetables. Sean cooks the 8-ounce patties on a 16-inch cast-iron skillet. He uses black angus reserve with an 80-20 meat-to-fat ratio.
He seasons them lightly with his mixture of granulated garlic, granulated onion, sea salt and cracked pepper as they quickly sear.
“They cook quickly and the juices stay right here,” he said, gently plopping three patties onto the skillet. “You get a better flavor, and you can control the temperature better.”
I ordered two burgers to go. The Station #5 burger, named after the nearby Syracuse Fire Department house, is topped with jalapeño relish, sriracha mayonnaise and onion rings. That was $10. All burgers come with his homemade kettle chips. For an extra dollar, you can substitute fries.
Tip: Stick with the chips. Sean starts each day cutting 20 pounds of potatoes. He also cuts his own fries. The chips are crispy, seasoned but not too salty, and they’re warm. I like them so much I bought an extra order. Don’t get me wrong, the fries are excellent, but these chips are special.
The Doublin Burger ($13) gets its name from its size: it’s double the meat and cheese. Basically, this mound of protein is a pound of beef, a few slices of Monterey Jack cheese with a few thick strips of applewood-smoked bacon. Don’t worry, you get your serving of vegetables too. Somewhere in this sandwich are a few pieces of lettuce.
This is truly two meals in one box. My 16-year-old son could get through half of it. (He finished the other half after baseball practice, so no food went to waste.)
The Doublin burger from McAvan's, a Hidden Gem of CNY. It has two 8-ounce ground beef patties, Monterey Jack cheese and applewood-smoked bacon.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
Black & Blue salad ($13): For all those of you who want to be a little more healthy, you must try this salad. Sean starts by slicing a ¾-inch thick steak off a rib loin. That goes into the skillet with the same seasoning he uses on the burgers.
As the meat sizzles for three minutes, he loads the box (It’ll soon be served on plates.) with chopped romaine lettuce, black olives and red peppers that Sean roasted in the oven. He cuts the steak into strips and sets them on top of the garden, and then he sprinkles on blue cheese and lays down four onion rings.
This is the best bargain on the menu. This is a $20 meal that he’s selling for $13. “Yes, but I always feel that if someone’s going to actually pay $13 for a salad, it had better be one hell of a salad,” he said.
This was probably the first salad I’ve ever ordered as an entrée, and it was worth it.
The Black & Blue salad at McAvan's, a Hidden Gem of CNY.Charlie Miller | cmiller@syracuse.com
McAvan’s has always had its share of regular customers since Jerry McAvan bought the bar in 1983. He died last June at 74.
Since the kitchen reopened and all the renovations, a newer crowd has already started stopping in.
“Hopefully our father would be proud,” Sean McAvan said.
