High-end Ithaca steakhouse closes: How many more restaurants will shut down in CNY?
This file photo show the John Thomas Steakhouse in Ithaca at the time of its opening in 1994.
John Thomas Steakhouse, a fine dining restaurant in Ithaca, has become the latest in the Central New York area to announce it is permanently closing amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Some, like the 26-year-old steakhouse, are high-profile places. That would also include a place like Kelley’s Bar & Restaurant on Velasko Road, which announced its permanent closing in early June.
The permanent closings also include diners and pizza shops. Some were old, some were fairly new.
It can be difficult at this point to determine whether a restaurant has permanently closed, or is just keeping its doors shut until the pandemic eases and the restrictions on operating are relaxed.
That’s the case, for example, with Riley’s Restaurant in Syracuse. It is closed now, but plans to reopen this fall.
Do you know of a Central New York restaurant that has decided to permanently close amid the coronavirus? Send an email to Don Cazentre at dcazentre@nyup.com .
Below is a sampling of the permanent closings we have confirmed so far:
John Thomas Steakhouse, located at La Tourelle Hotel & Spa , 1152 Danby Road, Ithaca. Owner Michael Kelly told Ithaca.com that the coronavirus outbreak had made the business unsustainable and too dangerous to operate for staff and customers. Kelly, 72, said he expects a restaurant of some kind to take the space. John Thomas Steakhouse, named in a Bloomberg article in 2017 as one of the 30 best steakhouses in the world , opened in 1994.
Kelley’s Bar & Restaurant, 5076 Velasko Road, Onondaga. Although owner Jon Kelley initially thought he would reopen after the pandemic, he decided, at age 65, to retire instead. Kelley’s had been a popular hangout  for 37 years. Kelley said he’s willing to help another owner start up in the space.
Brewerton Diner, 5771 Miller Road, Brewerton. This diner announced via Facebook it is closing for good after failing to receive a federal PPP loan. Owner Michael Piraino has added brekafast items to his other restaurant nearby, Bear Creek at 5480 Bartel Road. Bear Creek remains open.
The Chef & The Cook, 7 Syracuse St., Baldwinsville. It closed in late March , becoming the first publicly acknowledged restaurant shutdown related to the coronavirus. The restaurant, operated by DeAnna and Mark Germano, had only been open since March 2018. (In early May, however, Brick-n-Barrel , billing itself as a “village gastropub,” opened in that location).
Circa Ce Soir, 8240 Cazenovia Road (Route 92), Manlius. This restaurant, a new version of the pioneering farm-to-table Circa in Cazenovia, closed in early May after just a few months in business. Co-owners Alicyn Hart and Marco Locicero say they are looking for new opportunities.
Niki’s Quick Cup Diner, 1513 W Genesee St., Syracuse. This 47-year-old diner on the city’s West Side closed in mid-May . Owner Nichole Shue cited the social distancing guidelines that would likely be in place on reopening, saying they would not work in her small diner.
Patsy’s Pizza, 1205 Erie Blvd. W., Syracuse. This pizza/Italian specialties place on the West Side closed May 21 after 38 years in business. It had been founded near Le Moyne College in 1982 and moved to the West Side later. It was operated by Mike and Rose Insalaco.
NY Gianni’s Bronx Style Pizza, 1428 Burnet Ave., Syracuse. Fans of this pizza place had been seeing indications it wouldn’t reopen for some time before its Facebook post made it official on May 24.
North Street Diner, 3 North St., Marcellus. This popular local hangout announced its closing on Facebook on May 23.
Ten Forward Cafe, 115 E. State St., Ithaca. This vegan eatery in downtown Ithaca announced on Facebook it is closing due to the coronavirus pandemic.
Denny’s Restaurant, seven locations in Central New York. The franchisee for the Central New York locations, Feast American Diners , filed a notice with the State Department of Labor that it has closed its local stores , putting 240 employees out of work. The seven locations including two in DeWitt, and one each in Mattydale, Liverpool, Camillus, Cicero and Auburn. Other Denny’s have closed across the state and the country. The local franchisee cited “unforeseeable business circumstances prompted by Covid-19.”
