Since its launch just over five years ago, The Hong Kong-China Stock Connect programme has allowed foreign investors faster access to the China A-shares market and facilitated the inclusion of China A-shares into key global indices. Epitomized as the gateway collaboration between the Hong Kong, Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges, the Stock Connect programme is flourishing.
Hong Kong’s Stock Connect has seen a surge in average daily turnover since last April, with the value of northbound trading almost trebling between January 2019 and January 2020. The lion’s share of this sum – 60 billion yuan (US$8.66 billion) in average daily turnover (ADT) – has been channeled into the northbound Stock Connect, in which the Shenzhen Stock Exchange accounted for more than 50% of ADT in January 2020, peaking at 60% of ADT on February 25.
In January 2015, three months after the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect was launched, northbound Stock Connect funds accounted for a mere 5% of the nearly 600 billion yuan (US$86.6 billion) of foreign capital market investment in mainland China, with the majority invested under the qualified foreign institutional investor (QFII) and RMB QFII (RQFII) schemes. Yet by December 2019, that proportion had increased to around 68% of the approximately 2 trillion yuan (US$289 billion) worth of Chinese A-shares held by foreign investors.
Tae Yoo, managing director of global client development in the markets division at Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing (HKEX), says: “We now have 9,759 institutional accounts open.” That’s almost three times the number opened two years ago in January 2018, a development he attributed to the many market improvements that have been made, such as the introduction of real-time delivery versus payment, and a multi-currency settlement arrangement spanning renminbi and Hong Kong and US dollars.
These figures represent tremendous growth of equity ownership held through the Stock Connect programme, demonstrating the fact that it has become an important avenue for international investors looking to invest in Chinese capital markets.
Yoo added that “despite the Sino-US trade war, there has been consistent foreign investment growth in China’s capital markets. Global investors have continued to invest in A-shares, and that trend is not slowing down.”
“Growth and participation in Stock Connect has resulted in a large increase in the balances and books of global investors, and clients have found ways to utilize these assets within their global collateral,” says Greig Ramsay, product manager of clearance and collateral management for Asia-Pacific at BNY Mellon. “Collateralizing these assets can help manage capital funding and balance sheet considerations.”
Efforts to make improvements to Stock Connect are ongoing. As of early this year, a number of significant projects are under review by the relevant regulatory authorities:
*         Distributed Ledger Technology solution – HKEX are planning to introduce a new integrated settlement platform using distributed ledger technology (DLT) for Northbound Stock Connect to better manage the T+0 settlement market, which challenges the current established operation and settlement flow designed for a T+2 settlement market. (To be further communicated to the market in the near future subject to regulatory approval)
Other Stock Connect enhancement initiatives are being reviewed:
As the China market continues to reform, more future enhancements are expected to further improve operating model and market accessibility.
Magdalene Tay is BNY Mellon Asset Servicing’s APAC custody product manager.
