Some might nevertheless have a feeling of déjà vu given that the Chinese authorities attempted to make the currency fully convertible before in the late 1980s and early 1990s. But the onset of the Asian financial crisis seriously postponed those plans in 1996 and the experience made Chinese policy makers extremely cautious. A level of caution exists to this day.
Chinese policy makers fear that a nationwide liberalisation of capital and currency controls would spark a cash exodus. Indeed, according to a recent Hurun report a whopping 44% of Chinese individuals holding over RMB10m in their name have plans to emigrate. Also of particular concern are hot money flows, whereby money is invested to reap short-term profits on interest rate differences between countries.
While HSBC has been impressed with the Renminbi’s “rapid internationalization” over the past 2-3 years and significant progress made to date, the investment bank believes that China still has a long way to go before the Renminbi is fully liberalized and becomes a world currency.
Some commentators believe this internationalization has been far faster than expected. Indeed, today in excess of 10,000 financial institutions transacted business in the RMB - up from just 900 in June 2011 - according HSBC’s report. At the same time, the monthly average RMB trade volume surged 40% in 2012 to RMB245 billion (bn) over 2011’s RMB173bn.
While Chinese nationals are not entirely free to take money out of the country, in reality many are trying to do so illegally and using underground banks. At present the investment cap is set to $50,000 (c.€40,000) per annum. But illicit transfer of funds comprise hundreds of billions leave China according to The Wall Street Journal through the special administrative region of Hong Kong, which has less stringent capital controls.
As the RMB is not yet fully convertible, the Chinese government has in recent years promoted an offshore market where the currency can be used outside the Chinese mainland. In order further open up the currency for legal cross border transactions, special administrative zones are being established such as the Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone (‘PFTZ’) - dubbed the ‘hole in China's currency wall’. In such special zones, full convertibility of the renminbi is allowed but only a small scale and under certain circumstances.
According to recent financial guidelines issued by The People’s Bank of China (‘PBC’) titled ‘Opinions on Leveraging the Role of Finance in Supporting the Construction of China (Shanghai) Free Trade Zone’, residents in the PFTZ are allowed to set up “resident free trade accounts” in domestic and foreign currencies. RMB under these accounts will be fully convertible but only “when conditions are ripe”. Other reforms exclusive within the PFTZ revealed in PBC’s document are designed to further facilitate cross border currency flows.
Provinces like Tianjin and Guangdong are also seeking permission to set establish special trade zones to benefit from more relaxed cross currency restrictions. If reforms in special zones are rolled out nationally across China, in effect the RMB will become fully convertible and a global currency as HSBC has predicted. Watch this space.
I am a freelance financial journalist based in London and former FT staff writer covering stock exchanges and transaction services. In recent years I have written for a…
I am a freelance financial journalist based in London and former FT staff writer covering stock exchanges and transaction services. In recent years I have written for a number of trade titles like Futures & Options World (FOW), magazines such as the FT’s Investors Chronicle and UK national newspapers like The Independent. Prior to this I worked as a ratings editor for Moody’s in London and New York, and subsequently became Fitch Ratings’ first comment writer across EMEA. My writing spans business topics across the trading lifecycle - front to back. During my career I have interviewed leading bankers, brokers and exchange officials in London, New York, Paris, Prague, Warsaw and Zurich. Presently I am also an Associate Analyst for BISS Research (www.bissresearch.com), the UK-based independent benchmarking firm. For my sins I support Arsenal FC and rugby club Saracens.
