Hotel operating costs for the first quarter of 2020 were RMB2.4 billion (US$336 million), compared to RMB1.7 billion in the first quarter of 2019 and RMB1.9 billion in the previous quarter. Excluding DH, hotel operating costs for the first quarter of 2020 were RMB1.7 billion represented 129.7% of net revenues, compared to 72.7% for the first quarter in 2019 and 64.6% for the previous quarter.
Selling and marketing expenses for the first quarter of 2020 were RMB146 million (US$21 million), compared to RMB77 million in the first quarter of 2019 and RMB134 million in the previous quarter. Excluding DH, selling and marketing expenses for the first quarter of 2020 were RMB65 million, represented 5.0% of net revenues, compared to 3.2% for the first quarter in 2019 and 4.6% for the previous quarter.
General and administrative expenses for the first quarter of 2020 were RMB316 million (US$45 million), compared to RMB206 million in the first quarter of 2019 and RMB330 million in the previous quarter. Excluding DH, general and administrative expenses for the first quarter of 2020 were RMB226 million represented 17.5% of net revenues, compared to 8.6% for the first quarter in 2019 and 11.3% for the previous quarter. The impacts of a number of our costs cutting initiatives, such as streamlining of head office headcounts, will only be reflected in the future quarters as payroll reduction in Q1 had been offset by the related severance costs.
Pre-opening expenses for the first quarter of 2020 were RMB111 million (US$16 million), representing a 6.7% year-over-year increase and a 25.5% sequential decrease. Excluding DH, our pre-opening expenses for the first quarter of 2020 were RMB110 million, representing a 5.8% year-over-year increase.
Other operating income, net for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB88 million (US$13 million) mainly related to subsidy income and a one-off compensation from franchisee totaling RMB26 million, compared to RMB6 million in the first quarter of 2019 and RMB89 million in the previous quarter.
Loss from operations for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB857 million (US$122 million). Excluding share-based compensation expenses, adjusted loss from operations (non-GAAP) for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB828 million (US$118 million), compared to adjusted income from operations (non-GAAP) of RMB290 million in the first quarter of 2019 and adjusted income from operations (non-GAAP) of RMB508 million in the previous quarter. Excluding DH, our loss from operations for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB731 million, compared to income from operations of RMB264 million in the first quarter of 2019 and income from operations of RMB486 million in the previous quarter.
Operating margin, defined as income from operations as percentage of net revenues, for the first quarter of 2020 was negative 42.6%. Excluding DH, the operating margin for the first quarter of 2020 was negative 56.8%, compared with 11.1% in the first quarter of 2019 and 16.7% in the previous quarter.
Other expense, net for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB102 million (US$14 million), compared to other income, net of RMB65 million for the first quarter of 2019 and other income, net of RMB45 million for the previous quarter. Other expense, net for the first quarter of 2020 was mainly related to impairment loss on investments totaling RMB92 million.
Unrealized losses from fair value changes of equity securities for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB1.0 billion (US$142 million), compared to unrealized losses from fair value changes of equity securities of RMB90 million in the first quarter of 2019 and unrealized gains from fair value changes of equity securities of RMB230 million in the previous quarter. Unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities mainly represents the unrealized gains (losses) from our investment in equity securities with readily determinable fair values, such as AccorHotels.
Income tax benefit for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB30 million (US$4 million), compared to income tax expenses of RMB31 million in the same period of 2019 and income tax expenses of RMB133 million in the previous quarter. The effective tax rate of 1% in the first quarter of 2020 was mainly related to certain non-taxable loss of the fair value changes in equity securities investments and the valuation allowance provided for deferred tax assets.
Net loss attributable to Huazhu Group Limited for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB2.1 billion (US$301 million). Excluding share-based compensation expenses and the unrealized losses from fair value changes of equity securities, adjusted net loss attributable to Huazhu Group Limited (non-GAAP) for the first quarter of 2020 were RMB1.1 billion (US$155 million). Excluding DH, the net loss attributable to Huazhu Group Limited for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB2.0 billion, compared to net income attributable to Huazhu Group Limited of RMB106 million in the first quarter of 2019 and net income attributable to Huazhu Group Limited of RMB619 million in the previous quarter. Excluding DH, the adjusted net loss attributable to Huazhu Group Limited (non-GAAP) for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB981 million, compared with adjusted net income attributable to Huazhu Group Limited (non-GAAP) of RMB222 million in the first quarter of 2019 and adjusted net income attributable to Huazhu Group Limited (non-GAAP) of RMB411 million in the previous quarter.
Basic and diluted losses per share/ADS. For the first quarter of 2020, basic and diluted losses per share were RMB7.46 (US$1.05). For the first quarter of 2020, excluding share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities, adjusted basic and diluted losses per share (non-GAAP) were RMB3.85 (US$0.54).
EBITDA (non-GAAP) for the first quarter of 2020 was negative RMB1.7 billion (US$245 million). Excluding DH, the EBITDA (non-GAAP) for the first quarter of 2020 was negative RMB1.7 billion (US$234 million), compared with positive RMB412 million in the first quarter of 2019 and positive RMB1.1 billion in the previous quarter. Excluding share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities, adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) for the first quarter of 2020 was negative RMB704 million (US$99 million). Excluding DH, the adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) for the first quarter of 2020 was negative RMB631 million (US$88 million), compared with positive RMB528 million in the first quarter of 2019 and positive RMB854 million in the previous quarter.
Cash flow. Operating cash outflow for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB1.3 billion (US$190 million). Investing cash outflow for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB5.2 billion (US$739 million), mainly included RMB5 billion (net cash out) for the acquisition of DH. Financing cash outflow for the first quarter of 2020 was RMB3.9 billion (US$550 million), mainly related to repayment of bank loans and dividend paid to shareholders.
Cash and cash equivalents and Restricted cash. As of March 31, 2020, the Company had a total balance of cash and cash equivalents of RMB1.8 billion (US$254 million) and restricted cash of RMB1.7 billion (US$237 million).
Debt financing. As of March 31, 2020, the Company had a total debt balance of RMB13.6 billion (US$1.9 billion) and the unutilized credit facility available to the Company was RMB2.0 billion. On April 17, 2020, we obtained a leverage covenant waiver for our syndication loan, which consisted of US$500 million and EUR440 million, due in December 2022. On May 26, 2020, we issued US$500 million of convertible senior notes due 2026. The proceeds of these convertible senior notes were partially used for the repayment of the revolving portion of our syndicated bank borrowings.
With China declaring an early victory in the containment of COVID-19 and normalized epidemic prevention and control, domestic travel is gradually rebuilding with eased travel restrictions and national policy for resuming production and work. Our occupancy rate has been improving steadily from March through early June, at which our hotels in China has reached 83%. Since June 11, 2020, more COVID-19 patient cases have been discovered in Beijing, and Beijing has reinstituted strict travel restrictions to curb the spread of COVID-19 once again. However, the Chinese government is more experienced and more prepared this time, and is more capable of preventing a nationwide spread of COVID-19.
Since early March 2020, Deutsche Hospitality hotel operations have also been affected by COVID-19 in Europe. In order to contain the spread of COVID-19, local governments ordered a number of our European hotels to be closed. At the end of March 2020, 74% or 85 of hotels of DH hotels were closed. The German government has implemented measures against COVID-19. Due to the German government’s measures and our employees’ great efforts, we have observed an initial recovery in our hotel operations since May. As of June 27, 2020, 79% or 91 of hotels of our DH hotels have resumed operations. We have also reached out to our banks for additional bank facilities to support our operations in Europe during this period. As of June 24, 2020, we secured EUR45 million from banks in Germany to support our cash needs.
In the second quarter of 2020, Huazhu expects net revenues to decline 32% to 34% year-over-year or 35% to 37% if excluding the addition of Deutsche Hospitality. Given the uncertainties amid the mix of recovery in China and wider spread of COVID-19 outside of China, we are not able to provide meaningful revenue guidance for the full year 2020 at this time. We will continue to closely monitor these developments and provide more updates when possible.
The above forecast reflects the Company’s current and preliminary view, which is subject to change.
Huazhu’s management will host a conference call at 9 p.m. ET, Tuesday, June 30, 2020 (or 9 a.m. on Wednesday, July 1, 2020 in the Shanghai/Hong Kong time zone) following the announcement.
The conference call will be hosted by a Direct Event and all participants must preregister online prior to this call. Please use the link http://apac.directeventreg.com/registration/event/6692286 to complete the online registration at least 15 minutes prior to the commencement of this conference call. Once preregistration has been completed, participants will receive dial-in numbers, an event passcode, and a unique registrant ID. To join the conference, please dial the number you receive, enter the event passcode, then your unique registrant ID, and you will be connected to the conference. Please dial in approximately 10 minutes before the scheduled time of the call.
A telephone replay of the call will be available after the conclusion of the conference call until August 7, 2020. To access the replay, please dial +1 855 452 5696 (for callers in the US), 400 632 2162 (for callers in China Mainland), 800 963 117 (for callers in Hong Kong) or +61 2 8199 0299 (for callers outside of the US, China Mainland, and Hong Kong) and reference the conference ID 6692286.
To supplement the Company’s unaudited consolidated financial results presented in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (or U.S. GAAP), the Company uses the following non-GAAP measures defined as non-GAAP financial measures by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (or SEC): hotel operating costs excluding share-based compensation expenses; general and administrative expenses excluding share-based compensation expenses; selling and marketing expenses excluding share-based compensation expenses; adjusted income from operations excluding share-based compensation expenses; adjusted net income attributable to Huazhu Group Limited excluding share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities; adjusted basic and diluted earnings per share/ADS excluding share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities; EBITDA; and adjusted EBITDA excluding share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities. The presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. For more information on these non-GAAP financial measures, please see the table captioned “Reconciliations of GAAP and non-GAAP results” at the end of this release. The Company believes that these non-GAAP financial measures provide meaningful supplemental information regarding Company performance by excluding share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities that may not be indicative of Company operating performance. The Company believes that both management and investors benefit from referring to these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing Company performance and when planning and forecasting future periods. These non-GAAP financial measures also facilitate management’s internal comparisons to the Company’s historical performance. The Company believes these non-GAAP financial measures are also useful to investors in allowing for greater transparency with respect to supplemental information used regularly by Company management in financial and operational decision-making. A limitation of using non-GAAP financial measures excluding share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities is that share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities have been and will continue to be significant and recurring in the Company’s business. Management compensates for these limitations by providing specific information regarding the GAAP amounts excluded from each non-GAAP measure. The accompanying tables have more details on the reconciliations between GAAP financial measures that are most directly comparable to non-GAAP financial measures.
The Company believes that EBITDA is a useful financial metric to assess the operating and financial performance before reflecting the effects of investing and financing transactions and income taxes, given the significant investments that the Company has made in leasehold improvements, depreciation and amortization expense that comprise a significant portion of the Company’s cost structure. In addition, the Company believes that EBITDA is widely used by other companies in the lodging and other industry, and may be used by investors and Company management as a measure of financial performance. The Company believes that EBITDA provides investors with a useful tool for comparability between periods because it eliminates depreciation and amortization expense attributable to capital expenditures. The Company also uses adjusted EBITDA, which is defined as EBITDA before share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities, to assess operating results of our hotels in operation. The Company believes that the exclusion of share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities helps facilitate year-on-year comparison of the results of operations as the share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities may not be indicative of Company operating performance.
The Company believes that unrealized gains and losses from changes in fair value of equity securities are generally meaningless in understanding our reported results or evaluating the economic performance of our businesses. These gains and losses have caused and will continue to cause significant volatility in reported periodic earnings.
Therefore, the Company believes that adjusted EBITDA more closely reflects the performance capability of our hotels. The presentation of EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indication that the Company’s future results will be unaffected by other charges and gains considered to be outside the ordinary course of business.
The use of EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA has certain limitations. Depreciation and amortization expense for various long-term assets (including land use rights), income tax, interest expense and interest income have been and will be incurred and are not reflected in the presentation of EBITDA. Share-based compensation expenses and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities have been and will be incurred and are not reflected in the presentation of adjusted EBITDA. Each of these items should also be considered in the overall evaluation of the results. The Company compensates for these limitations by providing the relevant disclosure of the depreciation and amortization, interest income, interest expense, income tax expense, share-based compensation expenses, and unrealized gains (losses) from fair value changes of equity securities and other relevant items both in the reconciliations to the U.S. GAAP financial measures and in the consolidated financial statements, all of which should be considered when evaluating the performance of the Company.
The terms EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA are not defined under U.S. GAAP, and neither EBITDA nor adjusted EBITDA is a measure of net income, operating income, operating performance or liquidity presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. When assessing the operating and financial performance, investors should not consider these data in isolation or as a substitute for the Company’s net income, operating income or any other operating performance measure that is calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In addition, the Company’s EBITDA or adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to EBITDA or adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures utilized by other companies since such other companies may not calculate EBITDA or adjusted EBITDA in the same manner as the Company does.
Reconciliations of the Company’s non-GAAP financial measures, including EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, to the consolidated statement of operations information are included at the end of this press release.
Originated in China, Huazhu Group Limited is a world-leading hotel operator and franchisor. As of March 31, 2020, Huazhu operated 5,953 hotels with 575,488 rooms in operation in 16 countries. Huazhu’s brands include Hi Inn, Elan Hotel, HanTing Hotel, JI Hotel, Starway Hotel, Orange Hotel, Crystal Orange Hotel, Manxin Hotel, Madison Hotel, Joya Hotel, and Blossom House. Upon the completion of the Deutsche Hospitality acquisition on January 2, 2020, Huazhu added 5 brands to our portfolio, including Steigenberger Hotels & Resorts, Maxx by Steigenberger, Jaz in the City, IntercityHotel and Zleep Hotel. In addition, Huazhu also has the rights as master franchisee for Mercure, Ibis and Ibis Styles, and co-development rights for Grand Mercure and Novotel, in the pan-China region.
Huazhu’s business includes leased and owned, manachised and franchised models. Under the lease and ownership model, Huazhu directly operates hotels typically located on leased or owned properties. Under the manachise model, Huazhu manages manachised hotels through the on-site hotel managers Huazhu appoints, and collects fees from franchisees. Under the franchise model, Huazhu provides training, reservations and support services to the franchised hotels, and collects fees from franchisees but does not appoint on-site hotel managers. Huazhu applies a consistent standard and platform across all of its hotels. As of March 31, 2020, Huazhu operates 17 percent of its hotel rooms under lease and ownership model, and 83 percent under manachise and franchise models.
For more information, please visit the Company’s website: http://ir.huazhu.com .
Safe Harbor Statement Under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995: The information in this release contains forward-looking statements which involve risks and uncertainties, including statements regarding the Company’s capital needs, business strategy and expectations. Any statements contained herein that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements, which may be identified by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “will,” “expect,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “forecast,” “project,” or “continue,” the negative of such terms or other comparable terminology. Readers should not rely on forward-looking statements as predictions of future events or results. Any or all of the Company’s forward-looking statements may turn out to be wrong. They can be affected by inaccurate assumptions, risks and uncertainties and other factors which could cause actual events or results to be materially different from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements. In evaluating these statements, readers should consider various factors, including the anticipated growth strategies of the Company, the future results of operations and financial condition of the Company, the economic conditions of China, the regulatory environment in China, the Company’s ability to attract customers and leverage its brands, trends and competition in the lodging industry, the expected growth of demand for lodging in China and other factors and risks outlined in the Company’s filings with the SEC, including the Company’s annual report on Form 20-F and other filings. These factors may cause the Company’s actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statement. In addition, new factors emerge from time to time and it is not possible for the Company to predict all factors that may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Any projections in this release are based on limited information currently available to the Company, which is subject to change. This release also contains statements or projections that are based upon information available to the public, as well as other information from sources which the Company believes to be reliable, but it is not guaranteed by the Company to be accurate, nor does the Company purport it to be complete. The Company disclaims any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this document, except as required by applicable law.
1 Hotel turnover refers to total transaction value of room and non-room revenues (i.e., leased and operated, manachised and franchised hotels).
2 The conversion of Renminbi (“RMB”) into United States Dollars (“US$”) is based on the exchange rate of US$1.00=RMB7.0808 on March 31, 2020 as set forth in H.10 statistical release of the U.S. Federal Reserve Board and available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h10/hist/dat00_ch.htm .
