Former Vice President Joe Biden speaks during a roundtable on economic reopening with community members in Philadelphia In this June 11, 2020, photo.AP
Former Vice President Joe Biden cruised toward a convincing win Tuesday in Central New York’s Democratic presidential primary election, but the final outcome will have to wait until election officials count a record number of absentee ballots.
Biden captured more than 71% of the vote Tuesday in the four-county 24th Congressional District over Bernie Sanders, his closest competitor, who had 18% of the vote, according to unofficial election returns.
The margin was the same in Onondaga County, where Biden dominated with 9,679 out of 13,571 votes cast on Tuesday.
Biden has already clinched the Democratic presidential nomination and the other 10 candidates on the New York ballot have ended their campaigns.
But the election will help determine how many delegates each candidate receives to the party’s convention this summer, and thus how much influence each candidate has on the Democratic platform.
Biden, a 1968 graduate of Syracuse University’s law school, is well known in Central New York. He is a regular visitor to the region and has maintained strong ties over five decades in public office.
Voters in the congressional district requested a record 44,625 absentee ballots in the presidential primary, and 29,455 ballots had been received after the state gave all voters the option to vote by mail during the coronavirus pandemic. About 16,000 people voted at the polls Tuesday.
Statewide, almost 1.9 million absentee ballots had been requested by voters, according to the state Board of Elections.
The outcome in New York won’t affect Biden’s standing as the Democratic Party’s presumptive nominee for president.
Biden clinched the Democratic nomination on June 5. He won enough delegates in state primaries to reach the 1,991-delegate threshold, the number needed to win the nomination on the first ballot at the Democratic national convention.
New York officials responded by canceling the state’s presidential primary because the 10 other candidates had ended their campaigns.
But Democratic presidential candidate Andrew Yang and his supporters successfully sued New York , forcing the state to hold the primary.
Sanders also wanted the election to move forward, giving him an opportunity to pick up extra delegates to the Democratic National Convention this summer and increase his influence over the party’s platform.
It’s too early to know how many New York delegates Biden captured to the Democratic National Convention. The state has 274 delegates up for grabs.
Delegates will be awarded proportionally based on the vote in each of New York’s 27 congressional district. Presidential candidates had to win at least 15% of the vote in a congressional district in order to win a delegate.
In Central New York 24th Congressional District, seven delegates will be allocated to the candidates. If Tuesday night’s results hold, Biden would receive six of the delegates and Sanders would receive one delegate.
Voters had a chance to vote separately for the delegates. The delegates with the most votes Tuesday night will go to the Democratic national convention.
The seven Central New York delegate candidates leading after Tuesday’s election are: Peggy Chase, Dia Carabajal, Diane Dwire, Bernard Washington, Bruce Conner, Daniel Farfaglia and William Scott. All seven delegates had pledged to support Biden at the convention.
