”They can’t get away with this” It was always old Frankenstein movies. Or ghost stories. “Any little thing where he got you alone in the dark,” Mary McLoughlin recalled. Then the priest at her family’s church would sexually abuse her, she said. She was 11; the abuse happened numerous times, according to a lawsuit filed Wednesday against the Syracuse Roman Catholic Diocese. It was one of 38 lawsuits filed against the diocese this week .
County, city declare today a holiday: Syracuse and Onondaga County have declared Juneteenth, which is today, an official holiday for city and county employees. Juneteenth is the oldest nationally celebrated commemoration of the ending of slavery in the United States. County and city offices will be closed .
SU's Assistant Coach Troy Weaver talks to Jeremy McNeil during game against Upstate NY AAU at the Carrier Dome.
FROM ORANGE ASSISTANT TO NBA GM: Former Syracuse basketball assistant coach Troy Weaver, shown above with Jeremy McNeil during a game against Upstate NY AAU at the Carrier Dome in 2000, is getting another promotion. The Detroit Pistons announced on Thursday a deal making Weaver the team’s general manager after a successful run as an executive with the Oklahoma City Thunder . Weaver spent four seasons with the Orange and recruited star Carmelo Anthony to Central New York for Syracuse’s title season in 2003. (Stephen D. Cannerelli file photo)
Coach leaves college job, comes back to CNY: It’s not every day that a college basketball coach decides to pack up and leave for a job at the high school level. In Kyle Martin’s case, though, it made perfect sense. The Central New York native was appointed the new boys basketball coach at Cicero-North Syracuse High School on Monday after spending five years at SUNY Purchase .
What’s ahead for the Syracuse Mets? An unexpected wave of optimism swept over Major League Baseball this week as the owners and players union appeared to close in on a deal that would return teams from their coronavirus hiatus as soon as late July. For minor league teams and players, though, the news did little to ease the sense of uncertainty. Here are seven questions that still need to be answered .
