U.S. Rep. John Katko, R-Camillus, wants Congress to investigate reports that Russia offered militants bounties to kill U.S. soldiers in Afghanistan. SYR
Washington — Rep. John Katko wants Congress to investigate a report that Russia secretly offered militants bounties to kill U.S. troops in Afghanistan, and if true, why the Trump administration has not held Russia accountable.
The New York Times reported Friday night that U.S. intelligence officials concluded months ago that Russia covertly offered the rewards to Taliban-linked militants.
The report said President Donald Trump had been briefed about the intelligence findings, but his administration had not taken any action against Russia.
Katko, R-Camillus, said Monday he wants Congress to determine if the intelligence existed, whether it was credible and whether Trump was informed about the potential threat.
“We definitely need to get to the bottom of whether this happened or not,” Katko said in an interview. “If it did, Russia needs to be held accountable for it. I say that not only as a member of Congress, but as the father of an Army infantry soldier.”
Katko’s oldest son is a lieutenant in the Army National Guard.
Trump has denied knowing anything about the Russian bounties detailed in The New York Times report published online Friday.
The president tweeted Sunday that he followed up with intelligence officials and learned that the information they received was not credible.
“Intel just reported to me that they did not find this info credible, and therefore did not report it to me or @VP,” Trump tweeted. He later added, “Everybody is denying it & there have not been many attacks on us.”
Nobody briefed or told me, @VP Pence, or Chief of Staff @MarkMeadows about the so-called attacks on our troops in Afghanistan by Russians, as reported through an “anonymous source” by the Fake News @nytimes . Everybody is denying it & there have not been many attacks on us.....
Katko, a senior member of the House Homeland Security Committee, said Congress should invite intelligence officials to testify and determine if Trump had been informed about the bounties, as The New York Times reported.
“I’m not taking his word for it,” Katko said of Trump. “I want to know what the facts are, and I want to have those facts verified. The American people and the service members deserve answers.”
If the report is confirmed, Katko said, he wants to know whether the president and vice president were informed by U.S. intelligence officials. If not, he wants to know why.
“If this is true, and they knew about it, most certainly they should have informed the president,” Katko said of intelligence officials.
At least a half-dozen Republicans in Congress have called for investigations into the report.
Separately, U.S. Sen. Charles Schumer said Monday that all members of the Senate should be briefed by intelligence officials on the issue.
“I am calling for the Directors of National Intelligence and the CIA to immediately brief all 100 Senators on reports that Russia placed bounties on U.S. troops in Afghanistan,” said Schumer, D-N.Y. “We need to know whether or not President Trump was told this information, and if so, when.”
The press secretary for Russian President Vladimir Putin told The New York Times that the Kremlin had not been made aware of the accusations contained in the report.
Got a tip, comment or story idea? Contact Mark Weiner anytime by: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
