Stolen Social Security numbers and other personal information are being used to file fraudulent unemployment insurance claims.
Syracuse, N.Y. – A nationwide unemployment insurance scam that often targets school employees has struck at least two more Central New York school districts.
Fraudulent unemployment insurance claims have been filed electronically on behalf of about 12 employees of the Onondaga Central School District and one employee of the LaFayette district by crooks who stole their Social Security numbers and other personal information.
The scam came to light in the Onondaga Central schools last week after some of its employees got letters from the state Labor Department requesting additional information about unemployment claims they never filed, said Rob Price, the school district’s superintendent. The district also started receiving notifications from the state Labor Department asking it to verify unemployment requests for employees who were never laid off.
“It’s scary that this is out there,” Price said.
Jeremy Belfield, LaFayette superintendent, said his district reported its one case to the state Labor Department and encouraged the affected employee to contact law enforcement.
“It’s unfortunate this is hitting schools and other employers at such a challenging time,” Belfield said.
The scam comes at a time when New York and other states are struggling to keep up with high volumes of unemployment claims filed by people who have lost their jobs because of the coronavirus pandemic.
“Unemployment insurance fraud, unfortunately, is a scourge that the DOL fights every day, but those who seek to exploit a global pandemic for these criminal purposes are especially despicable,” said Deanna Cohen of the state Department of Labor.
She said the agency investigates all reports of fraud, but would not comment on the school cases.
People become victims of unemployment insurance fraud after their personal information such as full name, Social Security number and date of birth is stolen and used to file a phony claim under their name with the state.
Cohen said this is not caused by a breach of the labor department’s computer system, but may be related to previous hacks of computer systems at banks, insurance companies and the victim’s employer.
The Onondaga and LaFayette superintendents said there is no evidence hackers broke into their computer systems to obtain personal information of employees. A Syracuse district official said the same thing. The city district was hit by a cyberattack a year ago that crippled its computer system. District spokesman Michael Henesey said there is no indication the fraudulent claims are related to that attack.
There have been many reports nationwide of school employees being targeted by the scam. A Secret Service memo said a Nigerian fraud ring is behind the “massive” scam that often targets school, employees, first responders and government workers. The memo obtained by The New York Times said the scheme could result in “potential losses in the hundreds of millions of dollars.”
Cases have been reported in Washington, North Carolina, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Oklahoma, Wyoming, Florida and Upstate New York.
WHEC-TV in Rochester recently reported school employees in the Brockport, Greece, East Irondequoit, Batavia and Rush-Henrietta districts have been victimized.
The state Attorney General’s Office says on its website the unemployment insurance scam is similar to schemes that involve filing for fraudulent federal and state tax refunds. In those schemes, scammers recruit people to receive direct deposits from the phony transactions.
The AG’s Office says victims should contact the nearest office of the U.S. Secret Services which is investigating the scam.
The department advised victims to:
Change passwords, logins and personal identification numbers for online accounts, especially bank accounts;
Place a free fraud alert on accounts with the three credit bureaus: Experian, TransUnion and Equifax;
Report the identity theft to the Federal Trade Commission;
File a report with local police departments.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
