THE CONDEMNED PODCAST, COMING JUNE 1: “The Condemned” true-crime podcast will tell the stories of five men, each sent down “the last mile” to be executed in a machine that was invented in Upstate New York. If you’re interested in checking out “The Condemned,” you can listen to the trailer and subscribe on our Acast page . Our podcasts are also available on all the popular platforms including iTunes , Spotify and Google .
Tom Brady sends a message to CNY student: A Baldwinsville graduating senior received a very special message of congratulations recently — a personal video from NFL quarterback Tom Brady. Watch the video .
Will AHL look different next season? The AHL canceled the remainder of the regular season and playoffs on Monday. That gives teams and league officials plenty of time to plan for a wide range of contingencies for 2020-21. Here’s a look at some variables the league has to consider .
Frost begins to melt  at moisture hangs over the valley at the Beak & Skiff apple orchards in Lafayette, The orchards had the workers working late Tuesday night and early Wednesday morning. They got the wind fans going and the smudge pots burning. The pots are an oil-burning device used to prevent frost on fruit trees. Dennis Nett | dnett@syracuse.com
MAYBE YOU CAN FOOL MOTHER NATURE: Frost begins to melt as moisture hangs over the valley at the Beak & Skiff apple orchards in Lafayette early Wednesday morning. The National Weather Service had issued a freeze warning for Central New York, saying that temperatures could drop as low as 27 degrees across the region. That’s a dangerous number for near-blossoming apple trees, so the farm’s crew headed into the cold, dark orchard just after midnight to protect the buds from the potentially deadly freeze. “We can trick mother nature by about 2 degrees, and that’s all it takes," said Peter Fleckenstein, a partner at Beak and Skiff. Find out how they did it and see more photos . (Dennis Nett photo)
Syracuse restaurant back on “Triple-D”: Funk 'N Waffles was first on Guy Fieri’s “Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives” show on the Food Network back in 2012. The restaurant will be back on the show next week, but thanks to the coronavirus, this appearance will be much different than the first.
Plan your weekend: As the pandemic continues, more and more online events are popping up. This week you can check out a “Pizza Palooza,” Fulton’s first ChalkFest, Syracuse Stage’s first virtual Young Playwrights Festival, running and walking challenges and more .
