Song with “Seinfeld” star earns Syracuse native an Emmy: Hughie Stone Fish, a Jamesville-DeWitt High School graduate, recently won a Daytime Emmy Award for a song he wrote with actor Jason Alexander. “The Bad Guys?” is a song about anti-Semitic stereotypes and was featured on the web site Funny or Die. Watch the song’s video .
Axe: In July, sports ventures into the unknown: July is usually the month where the sports world downshifts to a lazy summer crawl. This is 2020, though, and July is busier than ever on the sports calendar while playing a game of chicken with a pandemic that shows no signs of slowing down. Will the fast and furious return of sports bring us a step closer to normal? Or two steps beck from it?
From CNY to the NFL: Latavius Murray, the former Onondaga High School star who is now with the New Orleans Saints, talks about Drew Brees' recent comments about the anthem; getting ready for a season during a pandemic; accepting his role on the team; getting an MBA from Syracuse University; and more. Read what Murray had to say .
A group of protesters enter Texas Roadhouse to sit in because of what they believe to be an unjust mask policy. The protest lasted about 30 minutes.
SIT IN OVER MASK POLICY: A group of protesters — who have marched daily through the streets of Syracuse to protest police brutality since the end of May — held a sit-in at a Texas Roadhouse restaurant in DeWitt on Monday. The protesters, members of the Last Chance for Change group, said they went to the restaurant to protest its policy of not allowing employees to wear masks supporting Black Lives Matter. Two employees said they were told not to wear masks with those words or that represented the group . (Chris Libonati photo)
Restarting New York: What about weddings? Gov. Andrew Cuomo has increased the limit on social gatherings to 50 people in regions that have entered phase four of restarting the economy. What does that mean for weddings set for this summer ?
State gets strict on travel: Don’t go to a state with coronavirus on the rise and expect to get paid sick leave benefits when you come back to New York. Gov. Andrew Cuomo signed an executive order Saturday that strips the paid sick leave protections for New York employees who voluntarily travel to high-risk states after June 25 .
Cuomo to malls: Take steps to clean the air: New York state will require large malls to take steps to remove particles of the coronavirus from indoor air in order for the properties to reopen, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Monday. That could include installing air filters powerful enough to remove the virus or taking other steps to exchange air .
