Syracuse teen shot at party had graduated 6 hours before; family says he’s not expected to survive
County OKs energy tax: Onondaga County lawmakers on Tuesday approved a new residential energy tax that will cost a typical household about $6 per month and raise up to $12 million a year for county government. County Executive Ryan McMahon proposed reimposing the tax on households to help deal with a projected $100 million budget deficit expected this year .
J.C. Penney begins liquidation sale: Looking for a deal at J.C. Penney? Now’s the time. A liquidation sale has begun at the J.C. Penney store at Destiny USA, one of the first 149 stores nationwide the troubled department store chain is shuttering .
J.C. Penney store in Oswego gets reprieve, will stay open
SU’s Hawaii connections help land recruit: Syracuse football’s Hawaiian roots are deeper than some in Central New York might think. Head coach Dino Babers and offensive line coach Mike Cavanaugh have both spent extensive time in the state. That paid dividends when the Orange landed a commitment from offensive lineman Austyn Kauhi .
Play ball! MLB to start 60-game season in July: Major League Baseball plans a return next month, but it’ll look different. There will be empty stadiums, a DH in the National League, a runner on on second to start extra innings — and a regular season of just 60 games .
Students, wearing face masks and paying attention to social distancing, study at Les Magnolias primary school during the partial lifting of coronavirus, COVID-19, lockdown regulations in Brussels, Monday, May 18, 2020. Belgium is taking the next step in its relaxation of the coronavirus lockdown on Monday, with more students going to school, markets and museums reopening and the snip of a barber's scissors filling the air again.AP Photo/Francisco Seco
Students, wearing face masks and paying attention to social distancing, study at a primary school in Belgium recently. (AP photo)
Ahead for schools: “A year like we have never seen before”: Staggered schools days? No cafeteria? Temperature checks? School district officials are preparing for all sorts of scenarios, but one thing is clear: Schools will look dramatically different than they did before they closed because of the coronavirus pandemic in March .
Frustrations rise for bar owners who follow rules: Jim Nichols owns Sharkey’s Bar & Grill on Route 57 in Liverpool. He’s doing his best to follow the limits and restrictions during the current phase of restaurant reopening amid the coronavirus pandemic, so he finds it frustrating when he stops by another place and see something completely different. “I get it. We all want to get back to normal. But we have say to them, ‘These are the rules.’ “
