Designing a new flag for Syracuse: The city of Syracuse’s flag has been described as “objectively ugly” by one city official -- so, what should a new flag for the city look like? Adapt CNY, a community organization, is collecting ideas for what should be represented by a new flag; those ideas will be used to guide a public design process .
Have we seen the last of the Auburn Doubledays? There will be no minor league baseball this summer, thanks to the coronavirus pandemic. Whenever minor league baseball resumes, it will likely look a lot different as an entity than it does now -- and the future of teams like the Auburn Doubledays of the New York-Penn League are in doubt .
Mike's Mailbox: How would TBT teams fare against top college teams? Just how good are the teams playing in The Basketball Tournament? Would they be good enough to win an NCAA championship? Mike Waters and ESPN analyst Fran Fraschilla tackle that question this week .
NYS withholds $12 million from Syracuse: New York State is withholding more than $12 million in subsides to the city of Syracuse, Mayor Ben Walsh said. It’s not clear whether the state will eventually pay the money, or if the city will have to make up for the lost income. If the latter is the case, the city may need to cut programs, close buildings and lay off employees, Walsh said .
Why bars are a big risk for coronavirus spread: Authorities are closing honky tonks, bars and other drinking establishments in some parts of the U.S. to stem the surge of coronavirus infections — and the risk factors go beyond wearing or not wearing masks. In the words of one study, it comes down to the danger of "heavy breathing in close proximity." One outbreak tied to a brewpub near Michigan State University has spread to nearly 140 people .
You’ll need a mask with that boarding pass: If you fly out of Syracuse Hancock International Airport, you’ll have to wear a face mask no matter what airline you fly on. Allegiant Air on Thursday joined the four other carriers serving Syracuse — American, Delta, JetBlue and United — in requiring passengers to wear face masks .
Extension likely for PPP loan program: It’s been two days since the Paycheck Protection Program closed to new applications from small business owners, but Congress is moving quickly to extend and possibly expand the popular coronavirus relief program .
