With the event of the coronavirus pandemic , our weekly things-to-do list is a collection of activities you can take part in while practicing social distancing. This week we see Fulton’s first ChalkFest, virtual running and walking challenges begin, Syracuse Stage’s first virtual Young Playwrights Festival, and more. Need a bit of excitement in your next virtual video call? Consider inviting a llama, goat, or pig from two Upstate New York farms via Goat-2-Meeting .
If you know of a virtual event happening, let us know at features@syracuse.com .
Bell’s Brewery is hosting a National Pizza Palooza on Facebook live for Bell’s Brewery at 7 p.m. on May 15. Jacki Hannon, is a self-proclaimed beer nerd and lover of the culinary arts, will be hosting the event from her home in Baldwinsville. Hannon will be doing beer pairings with pizza from Apizza Regionale, Pizza Man and Kitty Hoynes. Want to participate in the tasting? Order the Pizza Pairing pizzas from participating locations and find more information on the Bell’s Brewery website .
Finger Lakes winery Silver Thread Vineyard is offering virtual wine tastings throughout the month of May. Wines can be ordered for shipment or for pickup at their vineyard in Lodi on Seneca Lake. Wine tastings are broadcast live on their Facebook page and their next livestream will be on May 15 from 5:30-6:30pm.
Fulton is having its first annual Chalk the Walk on May 17. Fulton residents are encouraged to get outside and do chalk art somewhere in front of their house. On the day of the event judges will drive around and take a look at the drawings of registered locations to win potential prizes. Register your location at FultonChalkFest.com .
Travel the length of New York state virtually in the ONE New York Virtual 500k and 1000k . The challenge begins May 15 and runs through Aug. 31. Interested participants can register for $60 at onenychallenge.com . Compete with the nationwide leaderboard and earn custom OneNY SWAG like hoodies, gaiters and medals.
The annual Run for Recovery is going virtual this year from May 15-May 17. Run, walk, roll, skip or dance your way through 3.1 miles. Every person who registers for the Run for Recovery receives a free race shirt and custom sunglasses. Beak & Skiff Apple Orchards is donating prizes for the race-day contest on May 17. More information and registration can be found on the Run for Recovery website .
Willow Running is hosting a May-hem Virtual Challenge throughout the month. Accumulate weekly mileage to reach race distance milestones of 5K, 10K, 15K, half marathon, full marathon, an Ultra 50K and more. Registration via runsignup.com . All donations and a portion of the event proceeds will go into a fund for health care workers and other first responders on the front line of the coronavirus pandemic to enable them to participate in future Willow Running events at no cost to them. If you would like to nominate someone you know (or yourself) that is working in the healthcare field or as a first responder, email willowrunningNY@gmail.com .
Baltimore Woods Nature Center Naturalist Lexi Grove will be teaching kids virtually all about the plant life cycle and the fun and rewarding experience of caring for growing plants. The program will be available for viewing from May 16-May 23 at noon. Participants can sign up on the Baltimore Woods website .
Rehouse Arts Center is offering the chance to see its 2019 production of “Almost, Maine” by John Cariani via a streaming service. The performance is available for purchase for $15 from now until May 17. A syracuse.com reviewer called it “sweet and quirky.” More details can be found on redhouse.org .
Syracuse Stage is hosting its first virtual Young Playwrights Festival. From May 12-15, Syracuse Stage will go live at 7 p.m. on its Facebook page with digital performances of its semifinalists and finalists plays. Narrowed down from over 200 submissions, these sixteen 10-minute plays and performance pieces showcase the amazing work of our high school students from across central New York.
Onondaga County Public Libraries has partnered with Syracuse Shakespeare In The Park to bring you Shakespeare Unstaged every Thursday at 2 p.m. Enjoy a sampling of scenes, monologues and sonnets performed by the talented volunteers of SSITP on Facebook Live .
The India Community Religious and Cultural Center is hosting a Virtual Spring Festival on May 17 at 4 p.m. It will showcase a variety of music and dance performances from members of the local community. The live event will take place on Zoom and the password can be obtained through the Facebook event .
Queerantine : A Virtual Dance Party is a weekly event on Zoom hosted by artists Jess Posner, Andrea Kennedy, and more. The next event, sponsored by CNY Pride, will be May 15 at 9 p.m. This week’s theme is outer space so put on your best alien, astronaut, astronomical, astrological and other cosmically inspired outfits, props, and zoom backgrounds.
SAGE Upstate is hosting a Friday with Friends Social Hour online on May 15 from 3-4:30 p.m. to play games via Zoom. Details available in the Facebook event .
Liverpool Art Center is hosting weekly Zoom dance parties on Fridays at 8:30 p.m. Interested participants are asked to register online through Eventbrite .
Josh from morning radio’s ‘The Show’ on KROCK will be DJ’ing from his house for virtual house parties every Friday at 7 p.m. You can tune in via the KROCK Twitch channel .
The Onondaga Historical Association will be hosting a Facebook live event every Friday at 1:30 p.m. Tour the exhibits, offices, collections and special storage with OHA’s Curator of History, Bob Searing. OHA’s Executive Director, Gregg Tripoli, will also be sharing some of his favorite and most fascinating stories from Syracuse history every Saturday at 1 p.m.
Fayetteville Free Library has begun a bi-weekly Netflix Watch Party for teens. The next viewing will be May 15 at 2 p.m. You must have a Netflix account and the Chrome browser Netflix Party plugin installed. Register on fflib.org/events to get the Netflix Party invite each week. Movies will be rated G - PG13. The library also offers virtual storytime with Miss Kristen every Thursday at 10 a.m. via Zoom .
Manlius Library is doing a series of YouTube videos including Toddler Story Time with Miss Karen on Mondays and Wednesdays at 9 a.m. and Teen Book Tuesday with Miss Lorie at 4 p.m. each Tuesday. There is also a virtual writers group that meets on Wednesdays from 3:30-5 p.m. Interested participants ages six and up should email slanger@manliuslibrary.org .
Liverpool Public Library is running an at-home program where you can earn points for reading and completing activities. Points turn into virtual raffle tickets that you can enter to win prizes. No library card needed to participate. Register individuals, families, or groups online at lpl.beanstack.org .
FlowerSchool New York is offering their Beginners Open Studio programs delivered directly to your door. Students will receive a box of flowers including premium blooms such as: Coral Charm Peonies, Dutch Premium Hydrangea, Specialty Tulips Fritillaria, Lisianthus, Daffodils, Hyacinth, Roses and others. Each box will yield 4-6 arrangements. Classes will be held on Zoom each week in May. You can also take classes without the purchase of the flower box. More information is available on the FlowerSchool website.
Painting With A Twist in New Hartford is offering painting classes on Facebook Live for both kids and adults. This weekend will include themes for moms and their kids. Materials can either be picked up curbside from the studio or purchased at places like Target and Walmart. For more information, check out the Painting With A Twist website . Classes range from $10-$20 and registration is online.
The Onondaga County Public Libraries are knitting and crocheting and socializing online together on Thursdays at 4:30 p.m. Registration is required and beginners are welcome. Visit their website to sign up and participants will be sent a Zoom meeting link.
Munson-Williams-Proctor Art Institute is offering a weekly kids craft on its Facebook page . This week is creating lace tapestries . You can also find links to virtual gallery tours, yoga videos and more on its page.
Symphoria will be hosting “At Home With Symphoria” on Facebook Live on May 14 at 12:30 p.m. This week will be an interview with Symphoria Cellist, Lydia Parkington.
Syracuse Trivia Company will be hosting three trivia games this week online. On May 13 at 8 p.m., they will be hosting “NY Sports Trivia Triple Threat” trivia night with an equal mix of questions about the Yankees, SU Basketball and Buffalo Bills. On Friday, May 15 at 8 p.m. they will be hosting a general knowledge virtual trivia night with half of all money raised being donated to support the ALS association’s Upstate NY chapter which provides resources to local people living with ALS. Players can join them on Facebook or on YouTube to play. The hosts recommend having a computer or at least two mobile devices to be able to watch the broadcast on one screen or window and also submit answers at quiznight.live .
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
