Subscribe to get the Good Morning, CNY newsletter (brought to you by Kinney Drugs) delivered to your email inbox weekday mornings.
High: 49; Low: 29. Will today set a record for cold?
The Syracuse Community Health Center COVID-19 mobile test site is now open to the general public without pre-screening, 819 S. Salina St., Syracuse, N.Y., Tuesday May 12, 2020. Scott Schild | sschild@syracuse.com
LONG LINES AS COUNTY OPENS UP TESTING: On the first day that Onondaga County opened up free coronavirus testing to the asymptomatic general public, individuals hoping to get tested created a line of about 50 cars that spilled onto two, and sometimes three, city streets . The tests were being provided free of charge at the Syracuse Community Health Center, part of the county’s effort to ramp up testing in advance of the loosening of restrictions on residents. Looking to get tested? Here’s a look at local testing site locations, hours, cost and what to bring . (Scott Schild photo)
Our reporters at syracuse.com | The Post-Standard are working around the clock to make sure Central New Yorkers have the news they need to stay informed on this public health crisis. Please consider helping support this important work with a subscription .
Sign up for our free text alerts about coronavirus in Central New York and get direct access to the latest developments, brought to you by syracuse.com ’s unparalleled team of reporters, visual journalists, editors and more, delivered right to your phone .
Do you have questions about CNY’s reopening? Ask us: Life will slowly but surely start to get back to business in Syracuse and Central New York on Friday. We want to know what questions you have about reopening Central New York’s economy during the coronavirus pandemic. We are here to get you answers from experts and trustworthy sources of information. What do you want to know?
Plans for reopening CNY begin to take shape: As Central New York inches toward reopening segments of its economy this weekend, local leaders are being given more discretion to dictate what that will look like. Gov. Andrew Cuomo has selected a group of regional leaders to serve as the state’s eyes and ears in Central New York. Cuomo has established four phases in which businesses can reopen; here's what we know about the process .
McMahon: Restart requires better social distancing: If you think that reopening the CNY economy means you can ease up on social distancing and put your masks away, you’re wrong. Now’s the time to be more cautious than ever before when it comes to the deadly COVID-19, Onondaga County Executive Ryan McMahon said. “If we want to get to Phase Two as quick as possible, the best way to do it is to do well in Phase One.”
