New York voters support a series of policing reforms passed by state lawmakers this month after the killing of George Floyd sparked nationwide protests to end police violence against Black people, a new statewide poll shows.
But New Yorkers say it would be wrong to defund police (60-35%) or reduce funding to police departments (57-37%) as part of those reforms, according to the Siena College poll released today.
Overall, New Yorkers said (60-35%) that the killings of Floyd and Rayshard Brooks over the past two months are part of a larger pattern of excessive police violence against Black people, the poll found.
Policing reforms passed by the state Legislature have strong bipartisan support (80-13%), including a ban on chokeholds by police and making public disciplinary measures against police officers.
“At least two-thirds of voters from every race, party, region, and age agree,” said Steve Greenberg, speaking for the Siena poll.
While New Yorkers support the reforms, most still have a favorable view (70-22%) of their local police department, the poll found.
When Siena pollsters last asked that question to voters in January 2015, about 81% had a favorable view of their local police department. About 16% had an unfavorable view.
The new poll found New Yorkers support proposals for a series of national reforms and laws to address racism and police violence. Voters strongly support:
Having mental health professionals respond along with police officers to 911 calls related to homelessness, drug addiction and mental illness (82-12%).
The poll of 806 New York voters was conducted June 23 through June 25 by live operators and through an online panel. The poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.9 percentage points.
Got a tip, comment or story idea? Contact Mark Weiner anytime by: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
