The Onondaga County legislative district map adopted in 2012, after the 2010 Census. Fifteen of 17 legislators elected in 2019 pledged to support independent redistricting after the 2020 Census. (Onondaga County Legislature)
The four letters below are in response to our editorial: Onondaga County legislators should keep independent redistricting pledge
The Onondaga County Legislature will take up an important redistricting proposal next week. Pay attention because gerrymandering has become a national problem.
Big money from groups such as ALEC and various PACs support a Republican strategy to entrench their party‘s power in states through gerrymandering. This strategy spread following the 2010 Census with the result that state legislatures with Republican majorities no longer feel responsible to voters.
Georgia’s recent primary debacle and the 2018 gubernatorial election, the legal battle in Michigan over an independent redistricting commission, and instances in North Carolina, Louisiana, Pennsylvania, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Nevada, and Missouri show us how Republicans want to keep certain citizens from voting or want to make their votes irrelevant. The U.S. Supreme Court has refused responsibility for gerrymandering issues, saying each state is responsible for redistricting.
Republican-controlled state legislatures have suppressed voters’ rights in state after state through burdensome voting requirements, closing registration offices, purging voters, closing polling places in minority districts, and even forcing in-person voting during the pandemic. 2020 is a census year and gerrymandering will be the major tool to cement Republican dominance for another decade if we allow it.
Our very democracy is under attack. People feel powerless. But we do still have power locally and it starts with fair election districts. Demand that our county representatives keep their promise and pass the independent redistricting bill.
I strongly urge Onondaga County residents to support the legislature’s July 7th vote to establish an Independent Redistricting Commission. We need citizens, not politicians, to eliminate gerrymandering and equalize each vote.
Please support the Fair Maps CNY Team and make this a better democracy.
I'm a partisan Syracuse Democrat who spends a lot of time looking at how district maps are drawn. From that perspective, the way this issue is framed in Onondaga County is misguided. As currently drawn, by my calculations, the county legislature has 12 seats won by Hillary Clinton, four won by Donald Trump, and one tied (the 5th).
If anything, the current map is a Democratic gerrymander that cracks the Democratic stronghold of Syracuse, spreading those votes out into the more Republican suburban and rural towns.
The problem isn't the map, the problem is that no Democrat represents a district that gave less than 60% of its votes to Hillary Clinton.
Kevin Holmquist is one of the most conservative members of the legislature and he represents a district that went 55/38 for Clinton and is one of the "cleanest" districts on the map, covering most of Manlius. The 12th district is messier and the one Syracuse, six DeWitt, and one Manlius election districts in that seat outvoted the entire towns of Fabius, Lafayette, Pompey, and Tully to give Clinton a 48.6/44.5 advantage. The proposals for "fair" redistricting will pack Syracuse voters into even more strongly Democratic districts while giving Republicans more durable seats outside of the city and a more stable majority in the legislature, even though no Republican candidate for president has carried this county since George HW Bush in 1988.
There is a lot of concern in today’s political climate about gerrymandering and the affect this has on every voice being heard and every vote counting. Re -drawing district lines only happens following the Federal census, every 10 years, and this is the year.
Fair Maps CNY is proposing a non-partisan Independent redistricting commission for Onondaga County. The current system supports a bipartisan commission that includes elected politicians and their appointed officials.  Some of the current county legislators would have you believe that the system is already fair and that they support a fair process for drawing district lines. The current redistricting commission includes both the Board of Elections commissioners (one Democrat, one Republican), a representative of the County Executive (Republican), a Representative of the majority and minority parties (one Democrat, one Republican), and the chairperson of the County Legislature (Republican). This most likely results in a 4 – 2 partisan majority.
So, what is the difference between nonpartisan and bipartisan?
Nonpartisan is defined as “objective,” or “not being controlled or unduly influenced by a political party or special interest group.” Bipartisan “involves agreement or cooperation of the two political parties that usually oppose each other’s policies. "
The county legislature will be voting on the Fair Maps CNY Proposal on July 7. It is important that your legislator hears from you about the need for a nonpartisan commission. Make sure your vote counts!
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
