By Friday, Central New York could enter the fourth and final phase of reopening after the coronavirus shutdown.
It sounds like the end of a painful 118 days without work, school and fun. But, unfortunately, entering the last phase does not mean the shutdown is over.
That’s because Gov. Andrew Cuomo has limited group gatherings to 25 people. That is a separate executive order that expires July 15. There are also still pages and pages of restrictions on the activities that have opened along the way. The guidelines for each industry that opened in earlier phases remain in place until they are amended or rescinded.
Entering phase four does not mean it is immediately OK to have a 200-person wedding or a big family reunion or a 5K road race. Golfers are still riding one person to a cart. Churches are still holding services for 25% of the capacity of the building.
Generally, the phases of reopening are geared toward businesses and allow each region to open separately. Central New York is in phase three. New York City enters phase two on Monday.
A review: Phase one allowed stores to open with curbside pickup and factories and construction projects started up. Phase two allowed real estate open houses and allowed customers to shop inside stores. Offices reopened. New Yorkers could finally get a haircut.
Phase three allowed restaurants to start serving customers indoors and allowed personal services like massage and nail salons, with safety restrictions and limits on capacity.
Phase four focuses on the broad categories of arts, entertainment and recreation and education. The state has not yet published guidelines for these. Watch for them this week on the governor’s website.
In addition to the phases for each region, the state has also published statewide guidelines on childcare and day camps, beaches, religious and funeral services, racing activities, dentistry, auto racing, professional sports training facilities, public transportation, sports and recreation.
Starting July 6 in Central New York, for example, moderate and low-risk sports like baseball and softball can hold practices and play games, but not travel. High-risk sports like football, basketball, volleyball and cheerleading can have sports clinics, but no competitive team practices or games, according to the state’s guidance.
Like everyone, sports leagues will still have to abide by limit on gatherings - which is currently 25 people.
Along the way, the following places have been specifically excluded from opening:
Large venues that host concerts, conferences or performances in front of an audience.
Gyms, fitness centers and exercise classes.
Amusement parks, carnivals, aquariums, water parks, bowling alleys and other children’s attractions.
Destiny USA mall remains closed despite pleas from the owners and from local state legislators for Cuomo to change his mind. Cuomo’s staff is treating the mall as a tourist destination rather than a collection of retail stores. Stores and restaurants with their own entrances have been allowed to open.
Cuomo’s website offers a lookup for businesses unsure of the guidelines. The New York Forward Lookup Tool has information specific to each region and each industry, using NAICS codes – the government code used in North America to classify each industry.
If you want to know if you can get your dog groomed, google the NAICS code for pet care (812910), type it in the box, choose the county and see that they are permitted to open in Central New York.
As for weddings, a ceremony in a place of worship falls under the guidance for religious services, which limits attendance to 25% of the capacity of the building.
Like all gatherings, wedding receptions are limited to 25 people. Catering venues are counted under the guidance for restaurants only if they have a license from the state liquor authority, according to a state spokesman.
Restaurants are limited to 50% capacity indoors and tables are limited to 10 people from the same party, but not from the same household.
