Senate considers vote on PPP bill: CNY small business owners say changes needed now
Pastabilities offers curbside services for takeout. Downtown Syracuse dust to dark during the coronavirus epidemic. The streets have been silenced. Workers have largely been working at home if they haven't been laid off. Restaurants that have remained opened are only offering take out options. Two of the drive up Covid -19 testing sites silent. after technicians have gone home, only to start again tomorrow. Dennis Nett | dnett@syracuse.comDennis Nett | dnett@syracuse.com
After two months, small businesses are about to find out whether the federal Paycheck Protection Program can be the answer to their coronavirus struggles — or simply a bridge to nowhere.
The U.S. Senate today is negotiating a PPP flexibility bill, that would give business owners some much-needed relief from the program’s stringent rules.
The more than $500 billion program, enacted as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, was widely touted as a lifeline for small businesses forced to close to prevent the spread of the virus. But after a clunky rollout, and months of closures in some states like New York, it remains to be seen whether the PPP can save many small businesses.
Restaurants and hospitality businesses have struggled especially hard to make use of the loans, which are forgiveable if businesses meet certain criteria. Borrowers have to rehire all their employees, spend 75% of the money on payroll, and use up the money within eight weeks of receiving it, under the current rules.
Restaurant and hospitality groups have lobbied for more flexibility.
Last week, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a measure that would expand the expenditure period from eight to 24 weeks. The measure would allow businesses to spend more of the money on non-payroll expenses; just 60% would be required to be spent on payroll. It would also give businesses a longer repayment period if they end up taking the money as a loan.
Rep. John Katko, R-Camillus, supported the PPP flexibility bill in the House, and held a web event last week with small business owners about why the PPP needs updates.
In the Senate, Minority Leader Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., proposed the measure for “unanimous consent," a fast-track to a vote, noting: “Our small businesses can’t afford to wait.”
“We have a long ways to go before the economy will come back in real ways,” Schumer said. “This will give businesses a more realistic timeline to get the help they need while bringing back employees."
According to Rollcall.com , Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., shot down the effort, noting he believed the current language would extent the entire PPP, including new applications, through the end of the year. Johnson said he thought consensus could be reached to amend the legislation, possibly through a letter on the record, either tonight or tomorrow.
The legislation appears to have bipartisan support, but it’s unclear at this point whether legislators can reach agreement before small businesses face program deadlines.
In an interview with syracuse.com, The Sweet Praxis Bake Lab + Kitchen co-owner Jennifer Walls said that while her business has been able to ramp up its offerings and bring back many staff members over recent weeks, she doesn’t think it will make sense for the business to be at pre-pandemic staffing levels.
“We just don’t have work for those people,” she said.
The Sweet Praxis has gotten creative, with contactless deliveries, baking kits and curbside pick-ups. The business has been able to expand its offerings and gradually give employees more hours.
Yet, like at most businesses, revenue is down, demand is down and the idea of spending all of the money within eight weeks seems unwise, Walls said.
“It’s a great loan, great interest rate,” she said. “However, spending all of the money eight weeks from the day we got it — I just don’t see how that’s going to be possible.”
For many businesses, that eight-week deadline is approaching fast. The earliest loan recipients will hit eight weeks within the next few days.
Jeffrey Scheer, a small business lawyer at Bond, Schoeneck & King, said when the law was passed, legislators probably weren’t planning for months-long shutdowns.
“Whoever wrote the legislation I think didn’t expect this to last as long as it’s going to last,” Scheer said. “I do think the monies were really intended to get us over that eight-week hump."
For some businesses, even if they are allowed to open in some capacity, the pain is going to last longer than eight weeks.
“A restaurant is a restaurant,” Scheer said. “It’s just not a business that’s easily convertible to something that it’s not. For some businesses, you can do it from home. There are a lot of reasons why this program, while well-intended, just isn’t a good fit for some industries.”
Bud Loura, who runs RestaurantQB, a consulting business for the Central New York dining industry echoed what experts around the country are saying: Many businesses are holding on to the loans or spending them how they need them, holding out hope that the rules change.
Loura said the PPP loans are causing a divide between those restaurant operators who are following the rules for loan forgiveness, versus those who are not.
“Some (owners) are paying close attention to every dollar they spend, using most on payroll like they’re told they’re supposed to,” Loura said. “Others are saying, ‘Well it’s going to change so I’ll go ahead and use it on rent, or supplies, or whatever.’ ”
“It’s a fairness issue,” he said. “What bothers the guy doing everything by the book is he looks across the street and sees the other guy spending money in ways he thinks he can’t. If they change (the rules), the first guy is going to say, ‘Hey why didn’t I just break the rules and spend the money like I wanted to?’ ”
Danny Klamm, owner of Prime Steakhouse in Hanover Square (and another near Rochester), got a PPP loan, but isn’t too worried about meeting the requirements for forgiveness. He has brought back some employees to help run the takeout business.
He thinks the rules will change because of the likely restrictions limiting seating once reopening starts.
“They have to change it,” he said. “You can’t make it work bringing back almost all your employees when you can’t bring back all of your business.”
Small business owners: Have a question or a story to share about how you’re coping through the coronavirus pandemic and subsequent shutdown? We want to hear from you. Contact Back in Business reporter Julie McMahon: Email | Twitter | 315-412-1992.
