A handful of gyms in Central New York appear to be breaking state guidelines in order to help you get a sweat. (Mark Pynes | mpynes@pennlive.com)
Syracuse, N.Y. — Like most gym owners, Joshua Kimball has been frustrated by the coronavirus . His business has come to a halt. There are few reliable places to get information. It’s still unclear when gyms will open to the general public.
His frustration reached a new level just over a week ago when Kimball, the owner of North Syracuse’s Rev Fit gym, began to hear from customers that some of his competitors had opened.
A handful, he was told, opened as part of phase three despite the fact that state orders dictate gyms remain closed. Once some opened others followed, leaving a split among local fitness facilities.
Kimball has remained waiting patiently at the starting line. As he has, his phone has filled up with information about gyms that decided not to wait. He’s faced questions from customers about why he won’t do the same and inquiries from those trying to help him get back to business.
Kimball said he doesn’t believe he’s lost customers yet. He suspects if this lingers for another two weeks, he will.
More importantly, he said, he worries about whether this is safe. Gyms that opened likely tried to develop comprehensive reopening plans. But none of those, Kimball notes, have been approved by state medical experts. Some medical experts believe gyms provide an atmosphere conducive toward spreading the virus.
Kimball said he doesn’t want to assume the worst out of those in his industry. He’s reached out to ask gym owners how they’ve managed to get permission or adjust their business to comply with current regulations. He’s spent time worrying he’s missed information coming from the state or that he hasn’t cozied up to the right politician.
“It’s tough to understand where the determination that they’re able to open is coming from,” Kimball said. “Some have said they submitted a plan and been approved. .... but I find it hard to believe gyms would be individually approved. I’d think it would be a more universal approach.”
Ultimately, there is no way for Kimball to know. Kimball and his business partner, Kyle Hierholzer, contacted Onondaga County Executive Ryan McMahon and other county officials about the places that might be operating out of phase. They haven’t heard anything back.
Kimball’s frustration is just the latest for gym owners in an industry that has endured a particularly frustrating experience with the coronavirus.
Central New York has not been impacted as severely as many places, and many gym owners believe they enhance public health by helping combat risk factors like obesity and diabetes. Many object to being forced to remain closed while businesses that cater to unhealthy habits, like liquor stores, remain open. Neither local, nor state officials have provided much information about businesses that have been subject to complaints or citations, creating questions about whether they have much interest in enforcing state mandates.
And the entire fitness industry has received scant guidance from the state throughout the past three months, leaving many gym owners preparing to open before dialing back and dealing with disappointment.
At one point, some gym owners believed they’d be able to open personal training services during phase two. Instead, guidance from the state seems to put nearly all indoor fitness activities in phase four.
But left to be their own judge, many gyms appear to have provided themselves friendly interpretations.
Some gyms have justified their return by saying that personal training and small group workouts are personal services and permitted to open as part of phase two. This doesn’t appear accurate. Kimball focuses on personal training and small groups. When information on the fitness industry is plugged into the state website it says: “Gyms, fitness centers, and exercise classes remain closed. CrossFit gyms and other forms of personal training remain closed. Remote instruction or streaming of classes from public or private schools or health/fitness centers is permitted, provided, however, that no other in-person indoor activities, including group classes or one-on-one personal training, are permitted.”
The State of New York currently says group fitness and personal training is not permitted.
Some owners have opted to rely on the state’s guidance that low-risk outdoor activities are allowed. The state doesn’t list fitness classes as a permitted outdoor activity. But it doesn’t explicitly prohibit it, either.
The ability to interpret those rules helped Jamar Clarke, the owner of Flight Room Fitness in Syracuse, feel like he’s permitted to open on a limited basis. He said he contacted the city of Syracuse and was told outdoor classes were permissible as long as he kept his numbers down and his customers spaced out appropriately.
“In my conversations with the city and other gym owners, everything is so open-ended that it’s how you interpret things,” Clarke said. “I read the rule as saying that if you do personal training, and that’s what we do in small groups, you’re allowed to be open if you follow CDC regulations. I opened up the gym and the response was great.”
Clarke has been public about his return, even posting a video of a workout to Instagram that showed individuals working out in his Syracuse facility. He talked of filling 47 of 48 spots last Saturday. Underneath it, his customers universally praised him for opening and the quality of the workout.
Prior to opening, Clarke said he sent a survey to his 150 customers, and 97% indicated they were ready to come back.
