Runners start the CNY Gay 5k at Long Branch Park, Geddes, NY, Saturday June 15, 2019. 
The CNY Gay 5K is a community-run, family-friendly event designed to celebrate our Central New York community and raise funds for local LGBT non-profits. Run, walk, skip, dance or sashay this virtual 5k in a location you choose on a date you choose.
Members of the Syracuse Food Truck Association will be in the New York State Fairgrounds Gray Lot offering delicious local foods. This weekend you will find Toss & Fire Wood-Fired Pizza, Saritas Food Truck, Byblos Street Grill, Cue Dogs and Ma & Pa’s Quarantine Concessions.
When: June 13 from noon-8 p.m.
CNY native, actor and songstress Carrie Manolakos will perform an informal concert featuring some of her favorite songs with accompaniment on piano.
When: June 11 from 8-9 p.m.
The Wild Animal Park has opened a new attraction on their adjacent farm. The safari drive is a little over a mile long featuring a variety of animals. Some of which you can feed from the car.
When: Monday through Friday from 9 a.m.-5 p.m. and Saturday and Sunday from 8 a.m.- 6 p.m.
How much: $12 for adults, $10 for kids, and 2 and under are free, season passes and any pre-purchased day passes can be used at this time
Symphoria’s in-person gala fundraiser has been converted into a virtual event. Hosted by Music Director Lawrence Loh and Executive Director Pam Murchison, with special appearances by Principal Pops Conductor Sean O’Loughlin and Symphoria Board President Mary Ann Tyszko, you will be treated to multiple chamber music performances by Symphoria musicians.
When: June 11 at 6:30 p.m.
Heritage Hill Brewhouse is hosting a sunset drive-in experience with live music along with food and drink from The Brewhouse. The next event will feature music from Slow Train. All interested participants are encouraged to review the details and rules posted within each Facebook event .
Syracuse Stage’s gala is a virtual event this year. Together for Stage honors outgoing Syracuse Stage Board of Trustees President Bea González and features exclusive video of beloved artists who have walked the boards at Syracuse Stage. The event also includes a online silent auction and includes a wide variety of unique items and priceless experiences.
