Survey: CNY parents want classrooms to reopen, will send their kids
Will schools reopen in the fall? Many school buses all over New York state have been idle during the coronavirus pandemic.Flickr / ThoseGuys119
School buildings have been closed since mid-March, and parents overwhelmingly say they want them to reopen this fall and they plan to send their kids, according to an informal online survey conducted by Syracuse.com | The Post Standard last week.
The coronavirus pandemic forced all school buildings to close in mid-March, and school districts switched to remote learning. As New York state begins to reopen in phases, parents and students are wondering whether school buildings will reopen for instruction in the fall.
There has been no decision yet by state officials.
We asked readers what they thought about schools reopening in the fall.
Among the 1,480 responses , 66% said they think school will reopen, and 71% of those taking the survey said they want in-person instruction to resume this fall.
Some parents have said on social media they are still too worried about the virus to send their kids back to school in the fall. But they seem to be in the minority, based on this informal survey.
If school buildings reopen in in the fall, 77% of respondents said they will send their children.
Here are the questions and the responses:
Do you believe the K-12 schools will open for in-person classes in the fall?
Do you believe the K-12 schools should open for in-person instruction in the fall?
If in-person instruction for K-12 resumes in the fall, will you send your children?
The Syracuse.com | The Post-Standard survey is now closed.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
