China's yuan surged beyond the key psychological level    of 7-per-US dollar Tuesday, reaching its strongest level in    three months.
The currency move arrives as trade tensions between the    US and China cool from their summer highs.
Though the 7-yuan-per-dollar threshold is largely    arbitrary, China acknowledged its psychological importance in    2016 when it propped up its currency to avoid crossing that    level.
Traders around the world have been closely watching the    yuan's strength as the two nations mull a "phase one" trade    deal.
China's currency surged below the key level of 7 yuan-per-US  dollar on Tuesday, reaching its strongest level in three months.
The move comes as trade tensions calm from peak  levels reached over the summer. The US and China are slated to  sign a partial trade deal as soon as this month and  bring a sign of progress toward ending the global conflict.
The White House is considering retracting some tariffs as  well. Negotiators reportedly pushed the Trump administration to  roll back duties on imports including toys, phones, and laptops  before they go into place December 15.
"If all of this is accurate, the US has blinked," Markets.com  chief analyst Neil Wilson said. "It seem that tariffs are hurting  voters in some important states. And at a time of impeachment  fears, Trump could do with a win on trade soon."
The yuan slide beyond the critical level in August as China  geared up for further retaliation against US tariffs. The nation  had previously adjusted the yuan's rate to stand below the  psychological threshold, and markets tumbled on August 5 as the  weakened currency forecasted new intensity in the trade war.
As US stocks tumbled, it became clear that the 7-yuan-per-dollar  level was something to be reckoned with. With traders,  economists, and central bankers alike now keenly focused on the  currency, the People's Bank of China's daily fix - or where it  pegs the yuan versus the dollar - has become the market  equivalent of appointment viewing.
We further unpack below why the 7-per-dollar level is so  significant, how a weaker yuan aids China, and why traders have  become so transfixed by the foreign currency:
How does China set its currency's value?
The yuan, unlike other currencies, isn't freely traded. On a  daily basis, the Chinese government fixes the rate of the yuan  and then allows it to fluctuate as much as 2% within that set  window.
While the yuan didn't move outside that 2% band Tuesday, the fact  that it moved below 7 per dollar for the first time in three  months reveals new levels of trade optimism from China's central  bank.
China has been more aggressive with its currency in the past. It  stepped outside its normal 2% band in August 2015 by weakening  the yuan in three consecutive devaluations, cutting more than 3%  off its value. The policy caused extreme market turmoil.
How does a weaker yuan help China?
Economists view a weakened yuan as a contingency against fallout  from the US-China trade war, as it gives China an advantage in  global trade.
When the yuan becomes cheaper compared with other currencies,  Chinese goods become cheaper in other countries. This would  counteract the tariffs set by President Donald Trump that are  meant to punish China over allegations of intellectual-property  theft and other issues.
It's not all good news for China. A cheaper yuan drives up the  price of imports, risking inflation as the Chinese economy is  already growing at its slowest rate in nearly three decades . It also motivates  traders to turn away from the yuan and other Chinese assets as  the weaker currency brings increased volatility.
What does the 7-per-dollar level represent?
Though the 7-yuan-per-dollar line is largely arbitrary and not  set by any specific policy, China has set a precedent for keeping  its currency stronger than that floor because of its  psychological implications.
When the nation faced a sharp yuan depreciation in 2016, its  government spent more than $107 billion of its foreign-currency  reserves in a single month to keep the yuan stronger than the  7-per-dollar level.
The strategy boosted China's export business but led investors to  move their funds out of the country's economy. It also prompted  the US Treasury Department to accuse China of currency  manipulation.
Other nations have long scolded the People's Bank of China for  its influence on the yuan, accusing the country of weakening the  currency whenever it needs a leg up in global trade.
The bank's governor countered  such claims in August , saying the country "will remain  committed to the market-based exchange rate regime, refrain from  competitive devaluations, and will not target exchange rate for  competitive purposes."
What does it mean to be labeled a "currency manipulator" by the US Treasury Department?
After the yuan fell below the critical level on August 5, the  Trump administration officially named China a "currency  manipulator." Though the designation is primarily symbolic,  it did escalate the trade war by showing a united front from US  officials against the Chinese government's decision.
The trade war raged on throughout the summer, but the weaker yuan  sparked a so-called "currency war." Trump has repeatedly called for a weaker dollar , and a prolonged  conflict could have prompted both countries to bring their  respective currencies lower than before. There were even reports  of the president looking to manipulate the dollar against the yuan to combat  China's actions.
The yuan's return to past levels brings peace to one corner of  the trade conflict and hints at an end to further tariff  escalation.
Why does Wall Street care so much about the foreign currency?
With the US-China trade conflict pushing well into its second  year, investors and analysts are desperate for a sign that the  two countries will ink a deal.
The trade war is playing a massive role in slowing global growth  and prompting rate cuts from central banks . Officials in Hong Kong cited  the conflict as a reason for its economic recession , and Germany's manufacturing sector slumped as trade hurdles hit  its key automotive industry.
The Federal Reserve issued three rate cuts over past months to  boost the US economy amid trade uncertainties, but Fed chair  Jerome Powell's latest statement hinted at a pause to future rate adjustments . With the US  economy growing at a moderate pace , an end to the trade war would  bring new fuel to the country's record-long expansion.
The 7-yuan-per-dollar level is just one part of the complex trade  war, but the currency's Tuesday surge signaled to investors that,  for now, the two nations are playing nicer than before.
