When it comes to the difficulties in liquidity management faced by treasurers operating in China, 21.3% say renminbi cash-pooling is top of the list of issues.
Bankers are already seeing demand for direct renminbi-sterling deals, and anticipate a rise in volumes and market makers, since the announcement on Thursday it is now possible to directly trade these two currencies in China’s onshore interbank foreign-exchange market.
While renminbi trade flows between mainland China and emerging markets continue to grow, many domestic and western corporates remain reluctant to trade in the Chinese currency.
The renminbi’s meteoric rise as a payments and trade currency has brought it closer to becoming mainstream than ever before. Precisely when this will happen is anyone’s guess. That it will is inevitable.
The renminbi has risen dramatically as a world payments and trade-settlement currency in the past three years. According to the Chinese bank ICBC, it could become a mainstream international currency as soon as 2017.
Damian Glendinning, Singapore-based group Treasurer at PC maker Lenovo, sees two-way volatility in the renminbi (RMB) as a key hedging challenge for the company, and for the market, in the coming period.
Though Germany lacks sizeable RMB deposits and liquidity, Frankfurt is well-positioned to intermediate trading flows between China and the eurozone, but it lacks London’s financial depth.
Capital controls in China are broken; Beijing faces a new 'impossible trinity'
The sharp jump in cross-border lending to China in recent years means capital controls are de facto broken. As a result, Beijing faces the “impossible trinity” – an inability to manage exchange rates, monetary policy and allow for free movement of capital, all at the same time. China faces an renminbi-policy crisis just as much as a potential credit crisis.
Competition among European financial centres to be the main renminbi trading hub is intensifying after the Bundesbank and Bank of England struck agreements with China to clear and settle payments in the currency.
The longstanding one-way bet on USDCNY has been in disarray, but worse might be to come, as China looks to its FX regime to cope with credit issues, and likely defaults this year, threatening volatility in the structured-product market.
A shock policy-driven fall in the onshore spot rate has ignited speculation that a widening of the exchange-rate band is on the cards, while others are unsure the 'two-way' volatility presages a structural shift.
Deutsche Bank has become the latest bank after Citi and HSBC to launch a service enabling the movement of renminbi-denominated cash between onshore and offshore accounts, crucially boosting companies’ liquidity in the currency.
