Gold (measured in dollar terms) had another rough week. That’s because everyone needs dollars and because the most liquid stuff has been sold off. Again, I’d emphasise – holding some gold when governments around the world are printing money like mad is not a bad idea because of the potential long-term consequences.
The US dollar index – a measure of the strength of the dollar against a basket of the currencies of its major trading partners – continued to surge. I explained some of the reasons behind this in Money Morning this week and the Federal Reserve has been trying to address it, so we’ll see if any of the pressure is alleviated next week.
The Chinese yuan (or renminbi) weakened further beyond the $1/¥7 mark that gets markets nervous, but again this is a pretty minor point in a week like this.
(Chinese yuan to the US dollar: since 25 Jun 2019)
The yield on the ten-year US government bond continued to rise. This is partly the rush for liquidity and partly because investors realise governments will print “whatever it takes”.
The yield on the Japanese ten-year also rose higher, all the way into slightly positive territory.
(Ten-year Japanese government bond yield: three months)
And the yield on the ten-year German Bund ticked higher too although it remained in negative territory.
Copper finally gave up the ghost and collapsed lower.
The Aussie dollar collapsed lower too.
(Aussie dollar vs US dollar exchange rate: three months)
Cryptocurrency bitcoin had a surprisingly calm week relative to everything else.
US weekly jobless claims rocketed higher to 281,000. The four-week moving average now sits at 232,250. Clearly, we’ve seen the trough for this cycle. And it’s going to get a lot worse – Goldman Sachs estimated a surge to over two million next week (that’s not a typo).
The oil price (as measured by Brent crude, the international/European benchmark) continued to fall although it rallied a little towards the end of the week as American hinted that it might intervene to buy more oil to prop up US shale producers.
Amazon rallied – if any company might do well out of everyone being stuck at home for a prolonged period, you’d think it would be Amazon.
Electric car group Tesla continued to fall back, although it’s still well ahead of where it was a year ago.
