Jim and Juli Boeheim, accompanied by their children, surprised Caden Custer (middle), a Make-A-Wish honoree, with a donation of $10,000 towards hunger relief to struggling children and families.
Syracuse, N.Y. — Make-A-Wish honoree Caden Custer received a few surprises during a press conference at the Food Bank of Central New York on Tuesday evening.
Jim and Juli Boeheim, accompanied by their children Buddy, Jimmy and Jamie, presented Custer with a $10,000 matching grant on behalf of their foundation.
The donation will go toward the Food Bank’s summer break box program, which was renamed “Caden’s Wish Break Boxes.”
Caden Custer announced today the second phase of his Make-A-Wish request to give hunger relief to struggling children & families.
During the presser, Custer was surprised by the Boeheim family, who announced a $10,000 matching grant on behalf of the Jim & Juli Boeheim Foundation pic.twitter.com/xTc0mZ6gdS
— Mike Curtis (@MikeACurtis2) June 23, 2020
“It was more than I could ever ask for,” said Custer, 18, who didn’t want to use the wish for himself even though he has cystic fibrosis.
The Boeheim Foundation recently gave $50,000 to Mercy Works , an organization that is feeding Syracuse city schoolchildren during the Covid-19 crisis.
“When you get a Make-A-Wish, usually you get something for yourself. When (Caden) decided to do something for the community, we wanted to help right away. We’re proud to be able to help,” said Jim Boeheim.
Custer also received a $5,000 donation from Chris and Nancy Gorman, along with their daughter, Emma.
The Gorman’s initially planned to use the money for a family vacation until they discovered Custer’s initiative last month.
“Given the challenges of the Covid-19 outbreak, we felt it wasn’t right that we had money for a luxury when so many people were struggling with their basic needs. We knew this was something we wanted to support,” said Chris Gorman.
Following the press conference, Custer, his family and other volunteers packed 400 boxes in preparation for the final phase of the program.
In mid-July, Caden’s Wish Break Boxes will be given away by the Food Bank to various youth service sites over the course of 10 weeks. A total of 2,125 boxes of food will be distributed this summer to locations in Cayuga and Onondaga counties through Custer’s wish.
The first phase of Custer’s wish featured a “Wish to Give” food drive in which he and his family collected over 5,700 pounds in food donations at Destiny USA.
