This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Updated Sept. 27, 2019 3:33 pm ET / Original Sept. 27, 2019 1:27 pm ET
The latest potential move in the U.S.-China conflict would hit investors more directly than the tariffs Washington has imposed as it pressures Beijing for concessions on trade.
On Friday, Bloomberg News reported that the White House is weighing limiting investors’ so-called portfolio flows into China and has been talking to Sen. Marco Rubio about his efforts to set stricter standards for Chinese companies’ inclusion in broad market indexes. Such moves could potentially affect billions of dollars of investment.
The iShares MSCI China ETF (ticker: MCHI) index slid 1.2% to $56.09 while the iShares MSCI Emerging Markets ETF (EEM) index, which has a 32% weighting to Chinese stocks, fell 0.75% to 40.86. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was 0.2% lower, giving up an earlier gain.
The initial reaction was skepticism. “China accounts for one-third of globe economic growth, larger than the combined shares of the U.S., Europe and Japan,” Andy Rothman, strategist at Matthews Asia, said via email. “Decoupling from that engine of global growth is not in our self-interest.”
But interest in taking a closer look at not just the goods moving between the two countries, but the flow of capital, has been growing. The U.S. has increased scrutiny of investments and acquisitions by Chinese investors and companies. Foreign direct investment by China in the U.S. plummeted 80% last year from the previous year to just $5 billion, according to the Rhodium Group.
A bipartisan group of senators, including Rubio, introduced a bill last week that said foreign companies could be delisted from U.S. exchanges unless they grant American inspectors full access to their audit reports , with enforcement beginning in 2025. Rubio has been arguing that U.S.-listed companies must comply with U.S. accountability and financial transparency rules .
He has also pressed for public pensions to not use a global benchmark that includes Chinese stocks, arguing that there are no truly private Chinese companies in China. To some extent, they are all instruments of state power, Rubio says.
For now, China watchers say, the latest developments may be more bark than bite. “The White House is trying to pre-empt meaningful Congressional action with symbolic action,” said Derek Scissors, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute who focuses on China’s economy. The news isn’t necessarily as scary for investors as it might seem, he said.
Caroline Atkinson, a senior advisor at Rock Creek Group and former deputy national security advisor for international economics in the Obama administration, says she can’t think of a similar precedent, other than sanctions and emergency actions on national security.
Any action on portfolio flows would require legislation, which she said wouldn’t pass. In addition, Atkinson said, such a move would run counter to the push by U.S. companies, especially financial firms, to get China to be more open to their investments in the world’s second-largest economy. It also would tend to strengthen the dollar—likely boosting it against the renminbi and worsening the trade deficit, which Trump has sought to reduce.
Still, Atkinson said, the administration has pushed efforts in the past that would undermine the U.S. economy and U.S. companies. “It is possible that anti-China sentiment is sufficient to make this seem a politically winning strategy,” Atkinson said. “The other point to note is that this has grabbed headlines away from impeachment.”
News of the deliberations about portfolio flows—investments in shares and other securities, as opposed to direct investing for projects such as building factories—comes within a stream of sometimes contradictory signals on the U.S.-China relationship. The two sides this week set Oct. 10 for their next trade negotiations, yet earlier, at the United Nations General Assembly, President Donald Trump rebuked China for economic abuses.
He stressed the need for structural changes, only to say a day later, as the administration contended with an impeachment inquiry, that a deal may happen sooner than people expect .
The most likely scenario is that the mixed signals will continue, leaving companies—and investors—in limbo.
The latest potential move in the U.
