People attend the signing ceremony of the first batch of companies on STAR Market, China's new Nasdaq-style tech board, at Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) in Shanghai, China July 21, 2019. Picture taken July 21, 2019. REUTERS/Stringer
Hong Kong protests. Due to China’s existing set of capital controls, foreign
tightly regulated by Chinese officials. The Shanghai-London Stock Connect
to issue depositary receipts in China. By contrast, Hong Kong’s links with
Mainland shares with no new issuance required.
such, the Shanghai-London Stock Connect has attracted little interest thus far,
with only one Chinese firm, Huatai Securities, currently making use of the
platform. Symbolically, the move is a major escalatory move, as Beijing has
Taiwan in the same geographic region as the Mainland on their websites. Later,
whether additional policy moves targeting large British firms will follow. In
terms of tangible effects, this event causes little economic disruption, but is
could be consequential, especially for the British financial sector. The
streams has lured global asset managers to the Mainland. Further, China’s new
loan benchmark, the Loan Prime Rate, includes Standard Chartered and Citigroup,
both major global lenders with expansionist aims in China. Last year, despite
the political pressure of Brexit, London overtook Singapore as the largest
Renminbi (RMB) clearing hub outside of the Mainland and Hong Kong.
particular firm to watch may be HSBC, Europe’s largest lender, which fell into
a Mainland listing, with rumors circulating in late 2018 that the firm, along
with British luxury brand Burberry, could be the first to issue Chinese
investigation, providing details on Huawei’s potential financial misdeeds.
Despite its expansive corporate presence in China, HSBC was also excluded from
the Loan Prime Rate’s eighteen participating banks, which includes smaller
foreign lenders and domestic lenders such as Standard Chartered, Citigroup, and
world with a more activist Chinese sanctions policy, HSBC’s delicate balance
between the East and West is already endangered. In November, HSBC shuttered an
account belonging to Spark Alliance Fund, a key fundraiser for the city’s
laundering charges, earned the firm the distrust of the city’s protestors, many
of whom allege the bank cooperated with police to punish protestors. Though
Washington has policed firms’ dollar-clearing access, many banks have resorted
to withdrawing altogether from risky jurisdictions, rather than going through
the effort to clear transactions through established compliance processes.
While these have produced a psychological effect, whereby uncertainty over
Iranian markets for fear of a snapback of sanctions. In the future, the lack of
China’s case, de-risking may very well favor its short-term interests, as it
partially does with the United States today. Were China to threaten even
economist’s comments on the African swine fever outbreak. Given China’s
plethora of state-owned enterprises and control over state-run media outlets,
services. After being targeted over the Hong Kong protests, Cathay Pacific
faced boycotts from some of China’s financial firms, like CITIC and Huarong
Asset Management, which banned their employees from using the airline. Such
restrictions could be particularly damaging for financial firms, which are
uniquely exposed to reputational risk.
should be wary of its newfound financial power in the sanctions arena, as the
country manages a future of declining growth. With an emboldened sanctions
agenda abroad, authorities’ steps towards financial openness could ring hollow,
especially if future action targets financial firms. Though de-risking could
favor China if it targets its rivals, an activist approach could reduce the
effects of the ongoing trade war.
importantly though, Beijing risks a harsh response from Washington, which
controls the global spigot of dollars. Despite China’s ambitious campaign to
of its comparably small investment banks.
is clear that China’s sanctions policy has escalated, as its provocations have
the World Trade Organization in 2016, owing to the political economy of China’s
landscape. After geographic changes were forced on global airliners, Washington
financial market access is a privilege, not a right.
Michael B. Greenwald is a fellow at Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. He is also a senior adviser to Atlantic Council President and Chief Executive Officer Frederick Kempe and North America Deputy Director of the Trilateral Commission. From 2015-2017, Greenwald served as the US Treasury attaché to Qatar and Kuwait.
At the beginning of 2020, what are the global risks and growth prospects for the Euro Area?
After the high real growth of the EA in 2015 (averaging slightly more than 2% per year), growth in 2019-20 has been downgraded as several risks materialized. Furthermore, the balance of persistent global or domestic risks remain negative even if less than last year.
