Perhaps mindful of the US reaction if they allowed the renminbi to depreciate further – US Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin has warned China against any competitive devaluation - they have, however, been actively trying to slow its fall.
Last month they used up $US32 billion of their foreign exchange reserves, the most in two years, to prop up its value.
At present the exchange rate is 6.96 renminbi to the US dollar. The market believes seven renminbi to the dollar is a threshold that could inflame the US and, as importantly from China’s perspective, trigger a surge of capital outflows.
The Australian dollar, which was trading around 81 US cents in March, has fallen sharply since then, touching 71 US cents last month before stabilising just below US 72 cents.
Given that China is our largest trading partner – its weighting in the trade-weighted index of the currencies of our major trading partners is about 30 per cent greater than the next two currencies (Japan and the US) combined – it isn’t surprising our dollar has been hit, although it should be noted that the US dollar has strengthened against all the major currencies.
Apart from the fundamentals, moderated somewhat by the fact that our resource exports have mainly Australian dollar cost bases but generate US dollar revenues, there is a speculative overlay to the relationship between our dollar and the renminbi.
Bloomberg published a report on Monday in which it said China "bears’’ were shorting the Australian and New Zealand dollars, as well as some Asian currencies, as proxies for the renminbi.
The renminbi is a tightly-managed currency and China has the ability to intervene to prop it up through the mechanisms it uses to set its value, its $US3.05 trillion of foreign exchange reserves and through exchange controls.
It is possible Xi Jinping will offer sufficient concessions that there could be a pause in the trade conflict.
The Australian dollar, by contrast, floats freely and without material intervention by the Reserve Bank.
The market for the dollar, the fifth most traded currency in the world, is deep and very liquid. It’s an easy market to buy into, or sell out of and the costs of funding positions are lower than they would be in a direct trade in the renminbi.
A big moment for China, and the Australian dollar, will arise late this month on the sidelines of the G20 meeting in Buenos Aires, when Donald Trump is scheduled to meet Xi Jinping . Trade issues will obviously be a significant element of that discussion.
It is possible Xi Jinping will offer sufficient concessions that there could be a pause in the trade conflict. The US demands, however, are so damaging to China’s industrial and technological ambitions that it is hard to see how China could accede to them.
There is, therefore, a lot of potential downside for, not just China’s economy and currency, but the Australian economy and dollar if the rate and coverage of the US tariffs does increase in 2019.
