For our free coronavirus pandemic coverage, learn more here.
As the Trump administration seeks to hold China responsible for the spread of the coronavirus and deflect attention from its own shortcomings, it is widening its search for sanctions and adding financial dimensions to the retribution it is pursuing.
If Trump’s protectionist trade policies risked dividing the world into two trading blocs, there is a very real risk that adding a financial facet would cement that outcome, severing the most globalised aspect of the global economy - the global financial system.
US President Donald Trump risks severing the most globalised aspect of the global economy - the global financial system.
The administration took a small step along that path last week when the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board, a $US600 billion ($932 billion) pension fund for past and present US federal government employees, froze plans to shift some of its investments into stocks included in a new international shares index.
Last week, having previously threatened to sack the board if it pressed ahead with its plans, the White House nominated three new members to the fund’s board to replace three existing directors whose terms have expired, cementing its control of the world’s largest defined benefit fund.
The index concerned – the MSCI All Country World ex-US Investable Market Index – includes Chinese companies. The fund had planned to shift about $US50 billion into the index investments, of which about 8 per cent, or $US4 billion, are Chinese companies.
The proposed transfer (from another international index that excludes Chinese companies) was abandoned after the US labour secretary, Eugene Scalia, and other administration officials said investing against the index would expose the fund to significant and unnecessary risk by investing in Chinese companies that posed national security and humanitarian concerns and violated US sanctions.
With many of America’s largest companies invested in the same index that is causing the administration so much angst, there is concern in China that the White House move is part of a larger ambition to cut off the flow of US capital into China’s markets.
Those concerns would be exacerbated by the administration’s revival of another issue that appeared dormant after the signing of the US trade deal with China in January ended the trade war.
There has long been disquiet within the administration and among US regulators about the quality of the financial information that Chinese companies listed in the US provide investors. There have been several very substantial accounting frauds involving Chinese companies listed in the US.
The companies, citing national security laws and directives from their own government, refuse US inspectors access to their audits; access that could involve US inspectors operating within China.
If Trump’s protectionist trade policies risked dividing the world into two trading blocs, there is a very real risk that adding a financial facet would cement that outcome, severing the most globalised aspect of the global economy - the global financial system.
Trump said last week he was looking very strongly at forcing the companies to comply, although he also appears aware that doing so might cause the companies to de-list in the US and shift their listings to Hong Kong, or London, or some other exchange.
The large list of Chinese companies listed on US exchanges includes giants like Alibaba, Baidu, PetroChina, China Life, China Telecom, Aluminium Corp of China and the China Eastern and China Southern airlines.
While there are legitimate arguments for allowing the US Securities and Exchange Commission to check the veracity of the companies’ accounts, action that cuts off access to US capital for of China’s largest companies – including a number of key state-controlled enterprises – would be consistent with the administration’s efforts to punish China for the coronavirus outbreak.
White House officials have been talking about financial sanctions, confiscation of some of China’s $US1.1 trillion of US Treasury bonds, the removal of China’s sovereign immunity so that it can be sued in the US, a new round of tariffs on China’s exports, banning Chinese students from studying at US universities and removing Chinese companies from US supply chains.
It’s not clear where that number came from or what he meant by the "whole relationship" but it is apparent that criticism of China for its handling of the outbreak and spread of the virus is a key element of the administration’s attempt to shift blame for its own bungling of the management of the virus to China.
With Trump’s much-vaunted trade deal already faltering - China has, for instance, bought only about $US3 billion of the $US36 billion of agricultural products it was supposed to buy this year, while buying record amounts of soy beans from Brazil - there is a prospect that the trade war could flare up again.
