USD/CNY trading in a range (7.05-7.10) but could head modestly lower through H2 as a gradual economic recovery and a modest easing in monetary and fiscal policies will support the CNY, according to economists at ANZ Bank.
“Fears of a second wave of infection in China, heightened virus worries in the US, and bouts of US-China tensions have kept USD/CNY in a 7.05- 7.10 range for most of June. We expect USD/CNY to continue to fluctuate within a range, as concerns over the pandemic continue and US election-related rhetoric picks up in coming months.”
“Amid volatility , we see a modest downside risk in USD/CNY through H2 2020. Principally, on the economic front, we expect a gradual recovery of the Chinese economy. Monetary and fiscal policies will remain supportive but measured. We continue to expect the PBoC to ease monetary policy modestly, with a further 20bp cut to 2.00% in the 7-day reverse repo rate and a 100bp cut in the reserve requirement ratio for large banks in H2. On the fiscal front, we do not expect deficit monetization in China.”
“We expect the ‘unlimited’ quantitative easing of the US Federal Reserve, more so than in the aftermath of the GFC, to eventually take the USD down in the next two to three years. We expect USD/CNY to end this year at 7.00.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
