According to the Research Department at BBVA, argue that the recent depreciation of the Chinese renminbi (RMB), albeit pushed USD/CNY above the psychological level of 7, is unlikely to lead to financial turmoil like what happened in four years ago.
“The recent sharp depreciation of the RMB is unlikely to lead to financial turmoil like in 2015: the authorities kept the currency’s pricing mechanism intact and have accumulated valuable experience over the past few years; moreover, the PBoC still maintain a tight grip of the country’s capital account.”
“We believe that the current depreciation of the RMB won’t repeat the history of the currency devaluation in 2015 to plunge the country’s financial system into turmoil. For the moment, China’s authorities have no intention to initiate a bout of deep depreciation. That being said, the prospect of China-US trade talks will dictate the evolution of the RMB exchange rate in the short term.”
“We define two scenarios for the RMB exchange rate at end-2019: in the first scenario, if China-US trade war maintains the current situation, particularly, 10% tariff on the USD 300 billion goods without further escalation, the RMB exchange rate is expected to fluctuate around the level of 7.15 at end of this year; in the second scenario, the RMB exchange rate could further plunged to 7.4-7.5 if both sides further escalate the trade war in the second half of the year, such as to raise the tariff to 25% for all the Chinese exports to the US.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
