HSBC's analysts point out that China is adopting an enlightened “crisis mode” foreign exchange policy. They argue the RMB’s effective appreciation has slowed, probably due to importers’ USD purchases, financial flows and the recent PBOC’s monetary easing.
“The renminbi has underperformed the reference basket of currencies. The China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) RMB index (which reflects the RMB exchange rate against 24 currencies) fell to 94.38 on 10 April from 95.73 on 20 March (source: CFETS) despite the pullback in the US dollar index (DXY) since mid- March. This is consistent with what we described as an enlightened “crisis mode” FX policy: allowing flexibility in USD-RMB but also keeping RMB overvaluation in check. Such a policy is feasible as long as the EUR-USD holds its range around 1.10, in our view.”
“The underperformance of the RMB against the basket of currencies is driven by a combination of stronger USD demand from importers and locals, and a temporary weaker RMB demand from foreigners, in our view. Importers are buying USD-RMB on dips, while locals are buying more overseas assets, and there has been a temporary slowdown in foreign inflows to the onshore market. The recent catch-up of the People’s Bank of China’s (PBOC) monetary easing, by cutting the interest rate on excess reserves (IOER rate), is also helping to slow the RMB’s effective appreciation.”
“If the USD is soft in the near term, USD-RMB may drop below 7.0 sooner rather than later. But a two-way FX market is likely to be the new normal, as it best serves China’s current macro-economic conditions, in our view.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
