Voting soars in CNY school budget votes; mail-in voting increases turnout by as much as 450%
This year people across Central New York had to vote on school budgets by absentee ballots. Above, voting at Jamesville-Dewitt High School several years ago. Syracuse.com | File photo
The number of people who cast ballots in school budget votes across Central New York rose as much as 450 percent — underscoring that mail-in voting increases voter participation significantly.
"When you make it easier for people to vote, they will do it more,'' said Dustin Czarny, Onondaga County Board of Elections commissioner.
Voters normally would have to go to schools to cast a vote in person on the school budgets, school board members and propositions. This year, New York state switched to all-mail balloting due to the coronavirus pandemic.
Many school districts in Central New York saw increases of nearly 100 percent to 454 percent according to results from some school districts.
Liverpool had 1,305 votes cast for or against the school budget last year. This year 6,822 votes were cast - an increase of 423%. North Syracuse had 1,833 voters last year; 6,491 votes this year, a 254% increase.
Baldwsinville, Fayetteville-Manlius, East Syracuse Minoa and Jamesville-DeWitt all also reported hefty increases in the number of people voting.
The huge rise in voting on school budgets happened statewide too, according to officials at the New York State School Boards Association. More than 670 school districts held votes that were counted this week.
"It’s just so much easier and more convenient for people to vote,'' said David Albert, a spokesman for the school board association.
Voter turnout has skyrocketed in many states because people are being allowed to vote by mail due to the pandemic. Turnout in 15 states and Washington, D.C. has risen, sometimes near record levels, according to the New York Times.
In Central New York, more mail-in voting has helped cause a rise in voting in the primary next Tuesday, Czarny said. Voting is up 10 to 30 times when compared to a typical Congressional primary, he said.
In addition to the Democratic presidential race, Francis Conole and Dana Balter are running for the Democratic spot on the ballot in the 24th Congressional District. The winner will challenge Rep. John Katko, R-Camillus, in November. There are other races on the primary ballot, too.
The state eased restrictions on absentee ballots for the primary election, giving all eligible voters the option to vote by mail during the coronavirus pandemic.
In all, 30,000 absentee ballots were requested in Onondaga County and 18,000 have been returned so far, Czarny said. That compares with the last Congressional primary in 2018, when 2,931 absentee ballots were requested and 1,681 returned.
In the school budget vote this year people had to vote by absentee ballots that were mailed in or dropped off at district offices.
The primary next week is a combination of absentee voting, early voting and voting on Tuesday in the polls.
Voters have a 10-day window to vote at designated polling places through Sunday. Polling places will be open from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. on Tuesday, June 23.
Mail-in voting has caused some logistical problems and delays getting results in other states.
That also happened with school budget votes — delays in printing and mailing out ballots in some districts prompted Gov. Cuomo to delay the mail-in deadline by a week.
Some larger districts — like Liverpool and North Syracuse — won’t start tallying the results until Wednesday, school officials said Tuesday.
What does it mean for the results on school budgets? Besides delaying the results, officials said they aren’t sure if it means more support or opposition — or just more participation because it’s convenient.
Czarny said it shows there’s a definite place and demand for more mail-in voting — but it won’t replace in-person voting entirely. Instead he sees a combination.
There are people who are eligible to vote but don’t have addresses on file, and some people living with disabilities prefer to vote in person, as do others.
Editor’s note: Percentage increases were updated on Thursday after final vote totals came in.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
