As the U.S.-China trade battle moves into its final rounds, Washington has demanded a “stable” yuan to be part of any final agreement, according to a report by Bloomberg.
In short, such a move be intended to counteract any efforts by Chinese authorities to depreciate its currency to ward off the pain of U.S. trade tariffs.
From another angle, the U.S. is asking the second largest economy in the world to both open its doors to foreign investors and to shackle its currency, presumably to that of the largest economy in the world. To many analysts, it sounds like having your cake and eating it too.
“This is a loaded request,” said Win Thin, global head of currency strategy at Brown Brothers Harriman. “If China is to introduce greater market forces in its economy, it can’t pledge to keep the yuan stable.”
To be sure, details of what exactly the U.S. means by stability aren’t available. It could concern management of the real or nominal value of the currency in relation to a basket of currencies or just one, like the U.S. dollar DXY,
Much of the U.S. trade rhetoric has had to do with China opening up its economy for foreign investors and companies. For decades, U.S. politicians had complained that China maintained the yuan at an artificially low value versus the dollar to the detriment of U.S. exporters, prompting demands that Beijing let market forces determine the value of the yuan.
As the world’s second largest economy, with a population of nearly 1.4 billion that is rapidly climbing the discretionary income ladder, China is the consumer market of the future — with restricted access. Meanwhile, China has been pledging to open up its economy, including its financial markets, to foreign investors. Part of this effort was also to let its yuan USDCNY,
, the value of which is managed by Chinese authorities, be more market-driven.
The yuan has been pegged against the U.S. dollar for much of its life since its inception in 1948. The peg was abandoned in 2005 and briefly taken up again during the global financial crisis in 2008. As of now, the yuan is a managed floating currency that moves in a defined band around a reference rate that is set daily.
The “first thing that strikes us as odd about this is the inconsistency with the White House’s ‘carrot and stick’ approach,” wrote Stephen Gallo, European head of FX strategy at BMO. “How can the U.S. expect the yuan to avoid depreciation if the threat of further tariffs and other trade barriers are hanging over the trade discussions?”
Additional punitive measures would likely lead the yuan to weaken. Some made this point in a more colorful way:
Since the trade spat between Beijing and Washington has erupted, the yuan sold off, along with the rest of emerging market currencies. Nonetheless this invited criticism of alleged currency manipulation from President Donald Trump himself, even though the yuan remains rather expensive compared with other emerging market currencies and above its long-run average, said Gallo.
After weakening in 2019, the yuan has actually strengthened against the dollar since the start of the year. The greenback is down some 2.3% against the Chinese currency so far, according to FactSet.
All this leads some to reckon that any demand for currency stabilization is just another negotiating tactic.
There is no clear consensus, in part because details are still so sparse.
On the one hand are the likes of Thin, who believe that “when push comes to shove, we just don’t think it’s something that China can commit to.”
“Policy makers there are already juggling so many balls right now that it would be foolhardy to try and target the exchange rate too. Pegging or quasi-pegging the yuan while the external balances are rapidly shifting would lead to more problems later, in our view,” he said.
On the other hand, China is transitioning away from its investment-driven growth model, which thrived on a weaker yuan, to a debt capital-importing and consumption-driven growth model, that would support a stronger yuan, wrote Morgan Stanley strategists led by Hans W. Redeker.
“Hence, China agreeing to U.S. demands of a stronger yuan exchange rate is not too big a sacrifice to make by its authorities. The opposite may even be true. Yuan strength may support the necessary restructuring of China’s economy,” they wrote.
It is set to be a subdued start to the quarter on Wednesday, after U.S. stocks wrapped up their best quarter in decades.
