What CNY schools could look like in fall: Fewer in classes, staggered days, temp checks
Students, wearing face masks and paying attention to social distancing, study at Les Magnolias primary school during the partial lifting of coronavirus, COVID-19, lockdown regulations in Brussels, Monday, May 18, 2020. Belgium is taking the next step in its relaxation of the coronavirus lockdown on Monday, with more students going to school, markets and museums reopening and the snip of a barber's scissors filling the air again.AP Photo/Francisco Seco
Syracuse, N.Y. — What will school look like if districts in Central New York reopen buildings in the fall?
School district officials are preparing for all sorts of scenarios, but one thing is clear: Schools will look dramatically different than they did before they closed because of the coronavirus pandemic in March.
“It will be a year like we have never seen before,‘' said Dan Domenech, executive director of The School Superintendents Association, which represents 14,000 superintendents across the country. “There are just so many challenges and issues, and so much uncertainty.”
Experts agree that unless there’s a big spike in coronavirus cases, schools will likely reopen classrooms in the fall with a blended approach — some online learning combined with some in-class instruction.
The biggest challenge will be space to socially distance in schools, classrooms and buses.
A typically classroom has about 25 students. If students sit six feet apart, that room can fit 12 students, said Liverpool Superintendent Mark Potter.
That means for most districts, it wouldn’t be feasible for all students to attend at once — unless a school has a lot of empty classrooms or an empty building.
Here’s what experts and some Central New York school district officials envision:
Staggered school days, weeks. It could be elementary students come to school Monday, Wednesday, Friday and work digitally the other days while the older kids come to school. Then it switches the next week so older kids come three days.
Or for half the year one group of kids is in school and the other half of the year the other group is in school.
Or everyone attends school half a day every day.
When students are not able to be in a classroom, they would be taught remotely.
Much emptier buses. Buses typically carry up to 40 or 45 kids, but social distancing would only allow for about 10 kids — and there just aren’t enough buses to do that. The Syracuse City School District provides transportation for about 12,000 students a day. Syracuse City Schools Superintendent Jaime Alicea said busing will be one of the district’s biggest challenges.
Staying in one classroom. Students may be confined to a classroom, so they don’t pass each other in the hall. Instead, the teachers may change classes. Movement is a risk factor because it can expose people to each other, experts say.
No lunches in the cafeteria. Students may eat lunch in the classrooms, instead of in the cafeteria because it will not be practical to stay apart there. Or schools may try to eat in more shifts.
School children have their lunch during thier lunch break at the Korshoejskolen Public school in Randers, Denmark on, April 15, 2020. - Ritzau Scanpix/AFP via Getty ImagesRitzau Scanpix/AFP via Getty Ima
Temperature checks: This may be required for students, although one expert said it’s not really indicative of whether or not someone has the virus. But it may be done as a symbol to instill confidence, experts said
Masks for students. This may be required, although Alicea said younger children ages 5 to 7 would likely only have to wear them all the time on the buses. Liverpool’s Potter said it will be a challenge for students to wear masks.
No visitors: It’s unlikely schools will allow parents, guardians or others to visit school buildings.
Music, sports, after-school activities limited or dropped. Group activities after school and contact sports will likely be the last to come back. Track and baseball can work, football and wrestling likely won’t. Chorus and singing groups may not work.
Highest need students may get more class time. That would mean elementary students, who need more in-person instruction to learn. Or it could be special-needs students, or a blend of elementary and special needs.
Districts can look at what other countries have done when reopening.
In Europe, only younger students returned to classrooms and in Israel only special-needs students returned to the classroom.
Domenech, the head of the national school superintendents’ group, said there will be a lot of added costs as schools redesign. They’ll have to provide masks and hand sanitizer, and disinfect the schools and buses more frequently. He estimates it will cost an extra $500 a student per year.
For a district with 2,000 kids (the average in CNY), that’s an added $1 million. For a district the size of Syracuse (19,300 students), that’s $9.65 million.
Experts also agree that families who are worried about children returning to a classroom who have an immune issue or other reason will likely have the option of continuing remote learning. But those details have to be worked out.
One school district in Florida is giving the parents the option to decide if their children return to the classroom or continue remote learning.
Syracuse’s Alicea is part of New York’s Reimagine Task Force set up by Gov. Andrew Cuomo. The group has met for the past three weeks to discuss what the fall would look like and has met with state education officials.
They are still awaiting specific reopening guidelines.
“Our priority is the health and safety of our students, our staff and our families,‘' Alicea said. “Until there’s a vaccine, it’s going to be very difficult to put a plan in place that meets everyone’s needs.”
Students need schools to reopen, if possible, said Douglas Harris, director of the Education Research Alliance for New Orleans and Schlieder Foundation Chair in Public Education at Tulane University, where he also teaches economics.
“We have seen that even though many did well, it is almost impossible to replicate in-person instruction,‘' he said.
The fact that school had progressed in a traditional fashion for two-thirds of the 2019-2020 year helped, he said. That’s partly because kids had forged a relationship with their teachers by then, he said.
What would happen if students didn’t get that chance this fall, he asked.
In addition, Harris said society can’t really reopen entirely if schools aren’t open — and that’s mainly because schools provide a form of child care for many.
Harris believes school in the fall will be a mix of classroom and distance learning.
“I really don’t see everyone coming back at once anywhere unless a school has tons of space,‘' he said.
New York State Board of Regents Chancellor Betty Rosa said at Wednesday’s task force meeting they need to “get it right” when designing school for the fall.
She stressed educational equity for all students, but experts say that will be hard when schools have to stagger who is physically at school.
Parents with their children stand in queue keeping a proper social distance from each other waiting to get inside Stengaard School north of Copenhagen, Denmark, on April 15, 2020, Ritzau Scanpix/AFP via Getty ImagesRitzau Scanpix/AFP via Getty Ima
Schools will have to follow CDC guidelines, which include wearing face coverings, separating out desks in classrooms and making sure they face forward, discouraging sharing of items, closing many cafeterias and possibly playgrounds, spreading out seating on buses and staggered schedules.
If kids are sick, there will be more emphasis on staying home.
“The safety and welfare of students and staff is our top priority,‘' Domenech said. “There’s not a single superintendent that wants to be the one with an epidemic in their building.”
Education Week reported other nations doing the following to deal with the coronavirus:
New South Wales, Australia: Schools resumed in-person instruction one day a week starting May 11. Different groups of kids attended each day, grouped by last name or grade level.
Denmark: Students stayed in their classroom all day, even eating individually packaged lunches there. They did not wear masks.
Taiwan: All students wore masks, except to eat lunch, and everyone had their temperature checked before walking into school or getting on the bus. Tents were placed outdoors to expand the lunch area.
Israel: Two weeks after schools fully reopened, they closed again due to an outbreak.
