What is the mid-market rate of USD (US Dollar) / CNY (Chinese renminbi) on Saturday June 27, 2020
Get the latest mid-market rate for USD (US Dollar) / CNY (Chinese renminbi) for Saturday June 27, 2020 right here.
The latest rates for USD (US Dollar) / CNY (Chinese renminbi) are available below. As a leading finance news site the team at Born2Invest collates and analyses the latest Forex Market data to bring you live information to help you make the right forex trading decisions.
Remember to always trade with a reputable broker. It’s also possible to apply forex concepts to cryptocurrency trading.
Forex trading is inherently risky and there are countless forex pairs to choose from. The only way to make a profit from forex trading is to understand how the market works. Luckily for you the Born2Invest forex team has collated some forex trading tips to get you started.
Forex trades are always made using currency pairs. Whenever you buy one currency you are selling another. In every pair there is a base currency, for example USD (US Dollar) and a quote currency, which would be CNY (Chinese renminbi).
The price of a currency pair represents the amount of quote currency, or CNY (Chinese renminbi), that you will need to spend in order to purchase a single unit of USD (US Dollar), the base currency. So using the current example you would need to spend 7.078404 of CNY (Chinese renminbi) in order to purchase 1 USD (US Dollar).
Forex pairs can be broadly separated into three categories; the majors, the commodity currencies, and the cross currencies:
Major currencies are the most traded currencies on the market. Which currencies make the cut will vary, but almost all lists will include EUR/USD, USD/JPY, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF
Commodity currencies are currency pairs where their value is closely tied to a commodity such as oil, coal, or iron ore. Examples include AUD/USD and USD/CAD
Cross currencies are currency pairs which don’t include USD. Examples include EUR/GBP and EUR/JPY.
What are the most traded forex pairs in the world?
