Subscribe to get the Good Morning, CNY newsletter (brought to you by Kinney Drugs) delivered to your email inbox weekday mornings.
DRESSED TO IMPRESS: The coronavirus pandemic robbed the high school Class of 2020 of many traditional senior year memories. No spring sports. No class trips. No traditional graduation. And, of course — no senior ball or prom. Many students already had the perfect dress or tux not just picked out, but purchased and hanging in their closet just waiting for the big night. We figured they should at least have one chance to get all dressed up. So we offered to take pictures of seniors across Central New York — such as Alyssa Ciciriello, Taylor McFadden and Hannah Jones of West Genesee High School in the photo above — in the outfit they planned to wear. We also asked them to share the most meaningful parts of their senior year, along with where they’re headed to next. Check out more photos and read more about these seniors from around CNY . (Dennis Nett photo)
An explosion of fireworks: You might have heard them recently; the booms of fireworks going off at night. With most communities cancelling their traditional Fourth of July fireworks shows due to the coronavirus pandemic, many people have decided to put on their own shows. In Syracuse, police have received more than 1,500 complaints about fireworks so far this year, up from 133 this time last year. Where are these fireworks — many of them illegal in New York state — coming from?
Are you tired of fireworks going off every night? (poll)
City officials to meet with protesters, talk police reform: Top officials from City Hall and the Syracuse City School District will sit down this week with protesters who are demanding reforms to local policing. The meeting will be a public forum and the city plans to stream it live online .
Why is Liverpool closing Nate Perry Elementary? Why did Liverpool Central School District officials pick Nate Perry Elementary School as the building to close as part of the district’s grade realignment? The decision to close the school — and sell it — was made for several reasons, according to Liverpool School superintendent Mark Potter .
2 urgent-care centers to close; layoffs expected: St. Joseph’s Health is closing its money-losing urgent care centers in Liverpool and Fayetteville in a move expected to result in some layoffs .
Amazon warehouse starting to take shape: Steel is going up at the site of the giant Amazon distribution center in Clay that will employ 1,000 people when it opens in 2021. A portion of the five-story, 3.8-million-square-foot building’s foundation has been built and cranes are putting steel beams in place. Take a look at video of the site .
CNY’s top high school athletes honored: The third annual All-Central New York High School Sports Awards winners were announced during a virtual event on Tuesday. The ESPY’s-inspired event, hosted by Brent Axe, went digital this year because of the coronavirus pandemic. Here is the complete list of this year’s individual and team winners, plus video of the event .
For Mets and Doubledays, season over before it starts: The 2020 baseball season for both the Syracuse Mets and Auburn Doubledays has been officially washed away by the coronavirus. Major League Baseball announced on Tuesday that it will not be providing players to its affiliated minor league teams, so there will be no minor league baseball this year.
The Barking Orange owner Sara Edsall, Syracuse, N.Y., Thursday June 25, 2020Scott Schild | sschild@syracuse.com
SMALL BUSINESSES COPE WITH “AFTERMATH OF THE STORM”: For 86 days, the play yards at The Barking Orange doggy daycare — usually aflutter with perky tails and canine excitement — remained quiet. June 15 brought joy and relief as Edsall finally was able to reopen her doors to furry friends. “It’s really good to be back,” she said. “We love what we do.” Yet reopening hasn’t been all floppy ears and wagging tongues. Edsall said she’s doing about 50% of the business she was before the shutdown. She’s not alone. With Central New York in phase four, many small business owners are at a new juncture — with worries about longevity, profitability and consumer behavior as the pandemic continues . (Scott Schild photo)
More states added to NY’s travel quarantine list: New York will require 14-day self-quarantines for travelers from another eight states where the coronavirus is still spreading rapidly, Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s office said Tuesday, bringing the total number of states on the quarantine list to 17 .
Are in-person classes safer than remote learning? Cornell University will bring students back for the opening of the fall semester despite the coronavirus pandemic, school president Martha Pollack announced Tuesday. The school will use a combination of in-person and remote learning and said that it believed resuming in-person classes is actually safer than a semester of remote learning, a point it acknowledged was counter-intuitive .
