Chris Giancarlo: The Project sees a digital dollar as a true central bank digital currency that will be a public good and have a myriad of use cases. These include modernizing financial infrastructure for the dollar-based domestic and international economy of the future. A digital dollar is far more than a federal benefits distribution mechanism, it is core digital architecture for our financial system.
We define a digital dollar as a digital form of central bank fiat money that enjoys the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. It is tokenized, meaning that each unit is unique and self-validating. It would not replace, but sit alongside paper currency and bank money. It is recorded on a new accounts infrastructure that may well be distributed ledger technology infrastructure. And, it is distributed through the existing two-tier banking system.
We do not envision changes in the current role of the Federal Reserve System or commercial banking, nor do we envision Federal Reserve retail bank accounts. We also do not call for any restrictions on other forms of cryptocurrency, including commercial offerings. The digital dollar will offer its own value proposition just as other cryptocurrencies will offer theirs.
Jason Brett: For my readers that may not understand the concept of a digital dollar or confuse it with crypto, can you explain it?
Chris Giancarlo: Picture a lazy Saturday afternoon five years from now and you go out to do Saturday shopping. You have a few quarters, nickels, and dimes in your front pocket. In your back pocket, you have a few 10s and 20s in dollar bills. You have $400 in digital dollars in your mobile phone’s digital wallet, as well as a credit card with a $10,000 limit and a debit card.
The Project views the digital dollar as part of this blend of payment modalities available in a U.S. dollar economy. How would digital dollars work? With your mobile phone, you go into a shop to make a direct peer-to-peer payment for goods. The result would be immediate, just as if you used the cash and coins in your pocket.
On the other hand, you may prefer to use your credit card to benefit from short term credit and a degree of purchase price protection if the goods are not what you thought you purchased or are defective. Or, you may have money in your bank account and wish to use a debit card for the purchase. All of those modalities would be available as a digital dollar is rolled out. Over time, we may well see the use of cash continue to decrease and use of digital dollars increase.
Jason Brett: What about for folks who like that credit cards protect my purchase – wouldn’t that be a disincentive to use a digital dollar?
Chris Giancarlo: Credit cards still make sense. Choice is important in a sophisticated modern society. If I am donating at my church or synagogue I might want to make a direct payment because I know the recipient well and wish to avoid transaction fees. On the other hand, for recipients with whom I am unfamiliar, I may want the protection of a credit card. There is a rich texture of choice on the retail side. On the institutional side, digital dollars offer a lot of speed and reduced cost to international payments.
Jason Brett: What about making payments online?
Chris Giancarlo: In the online world, the digital dollar gets more interesting. Basically, if you shop online today, you can’t use fiat currency for peer-to-peer payments. You must go through intermediaries. A digital dollar, however, would give you the same ability to make direct peer-to-peer payments online with digital dollars that you can in the physical world with paper currency. And not just for online shopping.
Take a grandmother working in Philadelphia who has a granddaughter in the Philippines for example. The granddaughter back in the Philippines sends her grandmother a text message with pictures of her birthday party blowing out birthday candles. That photo is received by the grandmother in an instant. But when the grandmother wants to send $100 back to her granddaughter as a birthday gift, it takes days and costs anywhere between $7 to $17 dollars in transaction fees. With a digital dollar, the transfer would be the same as a text or a photo, all in an instant of time. And when the money arrives, it is $100 worth of immediately spendable U.S. money and no intermediary is needed to verify the funds or charge processing fees. A digital dollar would be very effective as a means of greater inclusiveness for communities whose needs historically have been under served by retail banks and financial service providers.
J. Christopher Giancarlo, chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), arrives to a ... [+] Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Development Committee hearing in Washington, D.C., U.S., on Tuesday, Feb. 6, 2018. Photographer: Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg
Jason Brett: How do you explain to Americans how the dollar’s role in the global economy is important?
Chris Giancarlo: As someone who has spent the last 35 years of my professional life with the dollar as the world’s premier reserve currency, I strongly believe that the dollar’s role in the global economy is not just good for the U.S. but good for the global economy.  Over the last several generations of the dollar’s global preeminence, the world has become a global marketplace. During that period, more people have risen out of poverty into middle class than ever before in human history. With that has come improved living standards, better nutrition and healthcare, and improved literacy and education. These benefits are the underpinnings of greater human liberty and free expression. This is a net good for humankind. On balance, I believe the dollar has been a plus for the global economy.
With the second wave of the Internet – the Internet of Value - we will see things of value such as contracts, legal titles and commodities increasingly rendered into unique digital instruments that are described as tokens. In the analog world of the turn of the last century, most of those things of global value, say agricultural commodities like soybeans and cotton, energy commodities like oil and natural gas, and important investment contracts like debt and equity securities, are accounted for in U.S. dollars. However, the next wave of the Internet will increasingly render those items into digital formats. Thus, we have to ask ourselves in a world of digital assets, how can the U.S. dollar continue to be the preeminent unit of account, if it is not in a digital format and integrated into a digital world economy? With China’s focus on 5G and its Belt & Road initiative, it envisions a world that uses its critical digital infrastructure in all applications within its allied states around the world. China’s infrastructure will operate using a digital yuan as part of its integration, bypassing the rest of the world’s traditional banking system.
Imagine, for example, a water purification plant built and run by a Chinese firm in a large African city. Using 5G technology and sensors to alert when the plant is running low on chlorine, the plant will send a signal to the Chinese supplier for resupply, which it will pay for directly with digital Renminbi. The transaction will thereby bypass the current global banking infrastructure. I don’t fault the Chinese for pursuing this. But against that kind of innovation, how can we say there is no need to also digitize the dollar? Should not the dollar also play a role in digitized systems?
Jason Brett: So, as when you were the CFTC Commissioner and wanted your agency to move from analog to digital, you are now asking the U.S. to move from analog to digital on global scale to preserve the U.S. dollar as the global reserve currency in the digital economy of the future?
Chris Giancarlo:  Creating the digital dollar is not just about China, nor is it just about federal benefits, as important as are those issues. It is much bigger than that. It is about who owns the future. The U.S. went to the moon fifty years ago because it believed it was critically important that U.S. leadership be exhibited and for benefits to flow to the world from the innovation and technology brought to bear in the effort. The quintessential value proposition of U.S. leadership is the benefits that derive from the public and private sector partnerships formed to achieve the objective. Think of all the innovation and entrepreneurship that came from the space program as well as, more recently, the Internet, with the U.S. promoting its values of private enterprise, personal privacy and national law on the world. What values are going to be brought to this next wave of digitization? Will they be values of democracy or of authoritarianism? Will they be values of individual liberty and pluralism or state surveillance and control? The future is coming – what role do Americans plan to play in it?
I point to China only because its leaders clearly view this technological development as something to dominate in order to bring their values to bear. The Chamber of Digital Commerce has revealed that China has 120 patents on blockchain innovation, including for digital currency. These are indicators of Chinese seriousness. Will the U.S. allow China to provide the dominant wave of innovation? Or will it step into this wave and bring U.S. values to bear?
Chris Giancarlo: In October 2019, Daniel Gorfine and I penned an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal asserting that China’s development of a central bank digital currency creates a ‘Sputnik’ moment, using that very analogy. Whether it is COVID-19 or a Chinese currency system, either way it is time for the U.S. to realize it needs to play a bigger role in the digitization of money.
I don’t think the U.S. needs to be first to introduce a digital dollar. The dollar is currently so dominant that the U.S. has more to lose by rushing than it has to gain. Early movers will likely make mistakes. Something as important as the U.S. dollar and worthy of its global stature, should not be rushed or cobbled together in a legislative drafting session. Rather, the U.S. should move forward carefully, thoughtfully, iteratively and deliberately. It should learn from others and from its own experiments. Still, now is indeed the time to get started in exploring a digital dollar.
Jason Brett: Current legislation that includes the digital dollar is also based on a specific type of modern monetary theory that seeks to reinvent how monetary policy is conducted in the U.S. during COVID-19. Modern Monetary Theory (MMT) has become popular by former Presidential Candidate Senator Bernie Sanders campaign (D-VT) and the recent movement to ‘Mint The Coin’, where two $1 trillion dollar platinum coins would be minted to fund stimulus payments. The idea shifts fiscal policy to the U.S. Treasury from the Federal Reserve - any opinion on this?
Chris Giancarlo: The Digital Dollar Project takes no view on monetary policy. We propose a roll out of digital dollars in a way that is money-supply neutral. Ultimately, the determination of monetary policy is made at the highest levels of public sector leadership. Nevertheless, the digital dollar offers speed, efficiency, and effectiveness in any application and in any given scenario and situation. It is about providing more effective tools - whatever one’s personal monetary policy theory may be.
Jason Brett: Are you having fun in your new role?
Chris Giancarlo: From my five years at the CFTC, and the perspective of working with global bodies such as IOSCO (International Organization of Securities Commissions) and the FSB (Financial Stability Board), I have a couple of core observations about the global financial system. Sadly, just as U.S. bridges, tunnels, airports and mass transportation systems that were once state-of-the-art have been allowed to decay and deteriorate and, in some cases, become obsolete, the same is true of some of our financial infrastructure. The current financial infrastructure in the U.S., once state-of-the-art, is some cases out-of-date and obsolete and this extends over to our regulatory structures as well.
The Internet of things and the digitization of assets is coming. At the CFTC, we saw the beginning of this with Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) increasingly being applied to movement of large commodities. We also saw it with the first bitcoin futures and peer-to-peer decentralized finance-based currencies. I am concerned that our western financial and regulatory systems may be slow to respond and adapt to this new wave of digitization of assets. We must give our attention to our financial market infrastructure to prepare it for a wave of digitization. So much of history tells us we can lose that quickly. After WWII, the dollar came out ahead of the British pound, that had been so dominant before. If you are not prepared for the future, you will fail to adapt to it.
Jason Brett: If the digital dollar does get introduced to the U.S. financial system, what President would you want ‘pictured’ on the digital dollar and why?
Chris Giancarlo: Teddy Roosevelt! He came of age in the 19th Century, yet his inquisitive mind very much anticipated the 20th century. He wanted to explore the world around him, including the global stage. He never stopped looking forward. Even late in life, he explored an uncharted river in the Amazon which is named after him. We Americans must always be looking forward to the future. The digital dollar is just about that, moving firmly and self-confidently into a new 21st century. I would want the digital dollar to exhibit a digital imprint or hologram of Teddy Roosevelt to urge us to go into the future with confidence, curiosity, a can do attitude, and the willingness to pursue limitless possibilities.
I am a former U.S. Regulator with the FDIC, compliance examiner for the Making Home Affordable Program (HAMP) with the Treasury, and have been active in bitcoin and
I am a former U.S. Regulator with the FDIC, compliance examiner for the Making Home Affordable Program (HAMP) with the Treasury, and have been active in bitcoin and blockchain since 2016. I served in in the FDIC’s Capital Markets and Finance Divisions during the Global Financial Crisis of 2008-2009 working on qualitative, quantitative issues covering IndyMac Bank, Washington Mutual, Wachovia, Lehman Brothers, AIG, Citigroup, Merrill Lynch and Bank of America.  I supported the FDIC’s Board at IndyMac bank with deposit run analysis, researched and explained synthetic collateralized debt obligations, credit default swaps, compiled the exposure of net notional derivatives in the financial system, and analyzed new programs by the Federal Reserve Board to stabilize the economy. I became interested in the importance of trust in the financial system and how the U.S. government manages the concept of trust.  With the introduction of bitcoin and blockchain technology by a colleague in 2016, I entered into the blockchain industry, first with the Chamber of Digital Commerce as Director of Operations for Policy and then as the Policy Ambassador for ConsenSys. I am currently the founding CEO and President of a new non-profit called the Value Technology Foundation, with the purpose to conduct exclusively educational and charitable activities with regard to digital assets, blockchain, distributed ledger technologies and other relevant “value” technologies for the public welfare and economic benefits of the citizens of the United States. I hold a degree from Cornell University in Government (BA, 1997) and the Kogod School of Business (MBA, 2009).
