Will Yuan drive the Rupee?
Rupee now appears to be heading to its record low against the dollar amid escalating trade tensions.
The currency fell to its weakest against the dollar in four months on Monday, while the offshore yuan breached the 6.9 level for the first time since December.
MUMBAI: With Wall Street turning bearish on the Chinese yuan , it is bad news for the rupee, which now appears to be heading to its record low against the dollar amid escalating trade tensions.
Traditionally, New Delhi's currency follows its rival in Beijing as both countries aim to remain export competitive. Under similar circumstances last year, the Renminbi lost about 10% between May 11 & October 31, triggering a similar plunge in the rupee's value against the greenback.
A sense of deja vu has crept in among investors betting on India. The rupee had hit record low of 74.48 to a dollar on October 11 last year.
“Exports are the key linkage between yuan and the rupee," said KN Dey, founder at United Financials. “The rupee cannot remain immune to yuan moves as Indian exporters would be hit if the local unit does not fall against the dollar. I see the rupee heading to its record low levels as long as the Renminbi extends its losses against the greenback.”
Importers should cover their offshore liabilities as swings in the exchange rate may be wild in the next four to eight weeks," he said.
The rupee closed at 70.44 on Tuesday, a tad lower than its closing the previous day.
The rupee has fallen nearly 2% since the beginning of May during which period the Renminbi too lost a little more than that quantum, show data from Bloomberg.
“India’s rupee is likely to be affected by China’s estimated economic slowdown leading to competitive devaluation,” said Ashhish Vaidya, head of Trading and ALM for India at Singapore's DBS Bank. “This time too, like last year, the rupee may come under stress due to global factors unless we have positive legal macro headwinds in addition to a stable government.”
The currency fell to its weakest against the dollar in four months on Monday, while the offshore yuan breached the 6.9 level for the first time since December, Bloomberg reported earlier on Monday.
Earlier this month, US President Donald Trump decided to raise duties on $200 billion Chinese products to 25% from 10%. Last year too, it had increased the tariff rates, sparking trade tensions.
“We are going to see a turbulent currency market amid US-China trade war ,” said Anindya Banerjee, currency analyst at Kotak Securities. “The local unit is slowly inching towards the record low levels. The election uncertainties too are weighing on with foreign investors exiting domestic investments.”
Foreign portfolio investors have collectively sold a net of Rs 2,555 crore worth of domestic securities this month compared with Rs 16,728 crore net bought a month earlier, show data from the National Securities Depository.
