Will all CNY colleges open this fall? Here’s a quick look at their plans
Syracuse, N.Y. — One of the final parts of New York’s reopening during the coronavirus pandemic will be the colleges.
Colleges are part of phase four because they are a place with significant potential for spreading the virus. Colleges bring in students from communities across the country and house them in dense areas, potentially exposing both students and communities to the virus. Colleges are also important economic engines to the communities that surround them.
Those two realities make the return of college both complicated and critical for students, families and local businesses.
Colleges across the country have put forth plans on how to navigate the pandemic. Some California schools are offering online-only classes for the fall. In New York, some schools are bringing students back early. Some are bringing students back late. And some haven’t announced plans.
Private schools have generally been more forthcoming with their plans, likely because public schools are waiting on approval from Gov. Andrew Cuomo. The private schools have largely acknowledged that their plans could change based on governmental and public health guidance. Two public schools, SUNY Cortland and SUNY Oswego have announced within the past week that they have crafted plans for in-person instruction.
Here’s a list of where many of Central New York’s colleges and universities stand for the fall.
Cazenovia College: Classes will be held on campus and the start date was moved up one week to Aug. 18. That will allow the school to conclude in-person classes by Thanksgiving.
Colgate University: Classes will begin on Aug. 27 but the school has not announced if they will be held in-person or remotely. The school has said it will make that decision by June 30.
Ithaca College: The school has taken an unusual approach and has delayed its opening until Oct. 5. Ithaca said that the extra time will allow it to prepare the campus to conduct classes as safely as possible.
Cornell University: The school has not made a determination on the fall semester. It hopes to make an announcement by early July.
Hamilton College: The school is planning to start in-person instruction on Aug. 24 and will conclude in-person instruction on Nov. 24. It will hold classes on weekday evenings and weekends to help speed up the semester.
Le Moyne College: Le Moyne plans to hold in-person classes starting on Aug. 31, its traditional starting date. One of the interesting adjustments the college will make is bringing freshman to campus early for an introductory course , allowing them to meet each other, professors and explore campus in a low-density environment.
Onondaga Community College: The school has not made an announcement on the fall semester at this point.
SUNY Cortland: While most of the SUNY schools have not announced their intention for the fall, SUNY Cortland has said that it has submitted a plan to return to on-campus instruction at the end of August. It has not announced the details of that plan.
SUNY ESF: The school has not made an announcement about the fall semester at this point.
SUNY Oswego: The school told Syracuse.com on Wednesday night that it has a plan to welcome students back to campus for in-person instruction in late August. Dubbed “Oswego Forward,” it is waiting for approval from the SUNY system and the state. It did not provide further details of the plan.
Syracuse University: Syracuse plans to start classes early on Aug. 24, which will allow it to end in-person instruction before Thanksgiving. That change will help avoid any coronavirus spread caused by holiday travel. Among the recommendations made by the committee that is guiding Syracuse’s re-opening plan is an effort to test every student for coronavirus when they arrive on campus, after two weeks and then randomly during the semester. The committee has made 127 recommendations on changes for the coming semester.
