The recent comments by the US Fed have already made emerging markets jittery.
Mutual funds equity buying is proving insufficient these days, as FPI outflow have intensified.
NEW DELHI: Friday’s rebound in stocks proved short-lived, as the benchmark indices resumed their downtrend and plunged in opening trade on Monday, with the BSE Sensex falling 418 points.
Sensex ended at 36,699.84 , down 418.38 points, or 1.13 per cent. The Nifty50 settled at 10,862.60, down 134.75 or 1.23 per cent.
Monday’s selloff was to an extent a reaction to the selloff seen in Asian markets, after trade war concerns sent the Chinese yuan below a politically sensitive 7 a dollar level and PMI readings showed deeper weakness in the Chinese economy. Last week's comments by the US Fed had already depressed sentiments across emerging markets.
On top of this, an evolving security situation in Kashmir hurt investor sentiment as the Union Cabinet met at PM's residence to discuss a possible withdrawal of the special provisions under Article 35A for the state.
Meanwhile, June quarter corporate earnings had nothing to write home about. Here are key factors weighing in on the market:
Asia selloff: Asian shares took a beating with Hong Kong and Japan markets leading the fall. While Hong Kong market fell 3 per cent partly on civil unrest, Japan’s Nikkei declined 2.6 per cent on concerns that a weak yuan and ongoing trade tensions between the US and China will hurt exports. South Korea’s Kospi declined 2.41 per cent; China’s Shanghai Composite index fell 0.8 per cent.
RS debate over Kashmir: Home Minister Amit Shah on Monday moved a bill in the Upper House to reconstitute the state of Jammu & Kashmir. Shah proposed the revocation of most sections of Article 370. Article 370 provides special status to the state of Jammu & Kashmir.
Yuan at 11-year low: China’s yuan tumbled more than 1 per cent on Monday to hit an 11-year low amid mounting fears of an escalation in the US-China trade war, which sparked off a selloff in other currencies in the region, Reuters reported. It does not look like China is trying to use a weaker yuan to counter US trade pressure. The yuan’s fall seems to be stemming from panic selling, an analyst told Reuters. The rupee, meanwhile, breached the 70-mark by depreciating over 80 paise against the dollar. A fall in the rupee hurts foreign inflows.
Earning downgrades: Nifty consensus EPS has been seeing repeated cuts, with the momentum of downgrades spreading across stocks. Earnings of Nifty companies so far (two-thirds of the index weight) indicated Q1FY20 EPS growth of only 5 per cent YoY, Emkay Global said in a note. “This contrasts with the steep 20-30 per cent growth rates built into consensus expectations for FY20/FY21. Despite the recent correction, we see Nifty valuations (17.5 times one-year forward) not factoring in further earnings risks. Our cautious stance on the Nifty is reflected in 4 per cent cash position in our Nifty EAP,” the brokerage said.
Foreign outflows: Mutual funds' equity buying is proving insufficient these days, as FPI outflow has intensified. On Friday, FPIs were sellers of domestic stocks to the tune of Rs 2,888 crore against Rs 2,812 crore inflows from DIIs. FPIs offloaded stocks worth more than Rs 15,000 crore in July, wiping out two-third of the gains made from the lows of this calendar year. This, despite DIIs being net buyer of stocks to the tune Rs 18,000 crore during the month, Kotak Securities said in a note. "There were no big bang reforms or any major stimulus in the Union Budget. On the contrary, an increase in income tax surcharge and the proposal to raise public shareholding dampened investor sentiment and led to a sharp correction post Budget,” the brokerage said.
