Try these home remedies to easily flaunt your beautiful arms.
The fear of anyone catching a glimpse of your underarms shouldn't have you wrapping yourself in layers constantly. Bought a new sleeveless or off-shoulder top, but scared to flaunt it in public? Want to get your groove on at an upcoming function, but afraid to lift your arms in front of people? Kind of glad that winters are here so you can easily hide those dark underarms beneath your clothes? It's about time you stopped worrying about it.
Dark, discoloured underarms aren't a medical condition and can be caused due to shaving, accumulation of dead cells, excessive sweating, improper ventilation, usage of certain medications or deodorants, etc. But being cautious all the time demands you to sacrifice your freedom and we don't want you to do that. Hence try these natural, safe and cost-effective remedies to lighten your dark underarms without any side effects.
1. Apple Cider Vinegar - Hello, Best Friend
An all-rounder, ACV has rich content of amino and lactic acid that helps clear dead skin cells and lessen scars. Its astringent properties unclog the pores and reduce skin darkness. You can simply pour some organic ACV on a cotton pad, pat it into the armpit area and leave it until it dries completely before washing it off. Repeat daily for quick and effective results.
Known as the natural sunscreen, aloe vera's antibacterial nature soothes inflamed skin and lightens discoloured armpits. Just cut open a fresh leaf (from a plant in your balcony or the nearby garden) and extract some fresh aloe vera gel. Apply a layer of this gel on your underarms and let it dry for about 10-15 minutes. Rinse with water and use this therapy every alternate day for good results. You can always use the organic aloe vera gel available in the market if you can't find a plant.
Baking soda is an incredible exfoliator that unclogs the pores and lightens dark underarms. Lemon, on the other hand, is a powerful antiseptic and a natural bleaching agent. Mix 1 tablespoon of baking soda and lemon each to make a paste. Scrub it over your underarms for about 5 minutes, wash it off using lukewarm water, and finish up by moisturising your skin. Repeat this method 3 or 4 times a week for effective results.
Add 2 tablespoons each of olive oil and sugar in a bowl and mix together. Dampen the armpit area and scrub the mixture for a minute or two, then leave it for another 5 -10 mins and rinse with water. Sugar acts as an excellent exfoliating agent and when mixed with hydrating and nourishing olive oil, it can work miracles. Apply this mixture on the affected area to lighten your dark underarms.
Along with its excellent bleaching properties, cucumbers are also filled with a number of vitamins and minerals. Simply rub a few cucumber slices on your dark armpits for minute or two and let its juice remain on your skin another 10 mins, then rinse off with water. It is an excellent choice for reducing skin darkness if you repeat the method daily.
Renowned for reducing dark circles, potatoes are also great for pigmentation and discolouration in the underarms. All you have to do is peel a potato and grate it, squeeze its juice out, apply it directly on the armpits and rinse it off after 10-15 minutes. You can repeat it until the desired results are obtained, as its properties will also help in smoothening and softening the skin. Alternatively, you can also rub the potato slices on your armpits like the cucumber.
Instead of using an expensive skin care product, ask your mother for the age-old magic product, fuller's earth (a.k.a multani mitti) to lighten your underarms. Just mix 2 tablespoons of multani mitti with 1 teaspoon of lemon juice and a few drops of water to make a paste. Apply it on your armpits, let it dry for 10-15 minutes and rinse with lukewarm water. This natural clay will exfoliate and lighten the dark armpits effectively, if you apply it regularly.
