More: Burgh House a hidden gem for great burgers, sandwiches
He and Becky also market their own seasoning mix called Becky Sue’s Rub, which is available at local shops.
With it being grilling season, we wanted to find out more about the rub — after 23 years as a very award-winning competition pitmaster and eight further years as a traveling barbecue guru, how does one settle on a single mixture with the perfect proportions of salt, sugar and spices?
The rub is named after Becky Johnson, and the story of Jim and Becky’s barbecue-based romance is a fun story in itself.
Johnson is from Memphis, and Becky grew up here in Evansville.
In 1998, two friends of Becky's were judges at the Smoke on the Water state championship barbecue contest downtown, and she was hanging out with them.
“All the big-name teams were here,” Jim said. “We had had a top-rated team out of Memphis, and I wanted to see how many state championships I could win that year. I’d been up cooking most of the night before the contest, and I always feed the police and people in uniform at cooks.”
The fun began when some off-duty new friends came by and escorted Jim to a downtown drinking establishment featuring dancers.
“I kept saying I needed to get back to the cook site, but they were having a good time so they called someone to come give me a ride back in a squad car," Jim said. "So, we left and he gets a call there was a shooting, and there I was locked into the back seat of a squad car while he talked to people; and I had two whole hogs, two whole shoulders and I don’t know how many racks of ribs back on the smoker.”
Jim barely got back to his meat in time to safely finish it and present it for judging… at which time he met Becky, while still unshowered, unshaven and in yesterday’s clothes.
“If I could bottle how I smelled, I could make a million,” he said.
“I thought Jim kept talking to us because my friend was a judge,” Becky said. “He was charming and had the Southern accent, and then a car pulls up and two dancers got out and ran up saying ‘Hey Jim, Jim!’ He ushered them into the booth to eat barbecue, and then he came back and asked if I’d sit with him during the awards ceremony. I said I guessed I would.”
The couple dated long distance for a while — luckily Becky was a travel agent — and eventually married. Becky moved to Memphis for a time, and then they returned here.
When Jim started teaching for the Kansas City Barbecue Society about eight years ago, he decided to quit competing. Becky missed the thrill of competition, however, and led Becky Sue’s Barbecue team until the couple began spending so much time out of the country she just wasn’t around to do it. But the Becky Sue’s Rub lives on.
The Johnsons aren’t totally secretive about the ingredients. Johnson explained that most barbecue rubs for chicken and pork start with roughly equal amounts of sugar and salt and add paprika for color, and this is true for Becky Sue’s Rub.
“There are 18 ingredients in there,” Jim said. “The majority is paprika, salt and sugar and after that is how you tweak it. It has some pepper, some garlic, some onion powder, a little chili. When I do a competition, I take this rub and add some cayenne pepper and citrus peel to it."
Oh, and the barbecue contest back in 1998? Jim’s team won it. It was a good day.
The Old Fashioned Butcher Shoppe, 2130 Stringtown Road
