‘There is lots of active insect life at the moment. It’s one of the best times of year to be out for a walk ...’ Photograph: Catherine Falls Commercial/Getty
If you are in the park or on a footpath, turn over a stone or bit of fallen branch. “You could look for the number of different types of tiny creatures you can see,” says Lewthwaite. “Are they long with lots of legs? Are there worms? How many different kinds of invertebrates can you spot?” She recommends looking for birds who are doing the same – turning leaves over to hunt for insects. Once you’ve finished looking under a stone, turn it back over. “There is lots of active insect life at the moment. It’s one of the best times of year to be out for a walk.”
Look out for bees, says Andy Beer, the author of Every Day Nature , and the National Trust’s director of the Midlands. “The queen bees and early bees are out and about, and diving into blossom. They’re collecting nectar to feed themselves up after a winter of hibernation. Spending a little time watching the bees is a lovely thing to do.”
“You can adapt it to wherever you are, whether the city or the country,” says Isaac. “Make a list of things to spot – it may be a stone with a hole, moss, a feather, a rose petal. Children can gather the things as they go, but if you don’t want them touching stuff you can do more of a list to tick off. It may be a bird flying in the sky or things they hear, such as birdsong. My kids are awful at walks, so I’ve had to bribe them [with activities and challenges] for years.”
If it has been wet and there is a bit of mud, it can be exciting to spot tracks and try to work out what animal made them. “Even if it’s a dog’s paw print,” says Lewthwaite. Look for clues – was it a big dog or a small one? You can also spot bird footprints. If you’re lucky enough to live close to some woods, “you might see some deer tracks”, says Lewthwaite. “There is guidance online to tell badger, fox and dog prints apart.”
Collect twigs, leaves and flowers “as you go along, to make a collage when you get home, bearing in mind wildflower-collecting rules”, says Lewthwaite. (Don’t uproot the plant or pick any part of any flower if it’s in a special conservation area.) You could do some bark rubbings. Hold a piece of paper against the bark of a tree and rub over it with the side of a crayon. Back at home, says Isaac, “try to identify the bark, then cut those bark rubbings into the shape of the leaf of that tree”. Or do leaf printing: cover the surface of a leaf with paint, then stamp it on a sheet of paper.
