Not even the loss of two key midfielders could dampen Chris Wilder's mood after his side belatedly got their season up and running again with a 3-1 win over Tottenham Hotspur.
Wilder had sympathy for opposite number Jose Mourinho after Spurs had a possible Harry Kane equaliser harshly ruled out by video assistant referee Michael Oliver, but whereas the visitors felt sorry for themselves in the eyes of their manager, the Blades powered on and claimed their first win in the fifth match of the post-coronavirus resumption.
Wilder admitted his team had got lucky, but was rightly pleased with one of their best performances of the season.
Sander Berge had scored his first goal for the club when Kane quickly responded by putting the ball in the Blades' net. After the goal was given by referee Chris Kavanagh it was reviewed by video assistant referee Michael Oliver, who decided it should not stand because the ball had hit Lucas Moura's hand as he fell after being caught by Jack Robinson. John Egan kicked it against the winger, which is how it reached Kane.
Sorry, there seem to be some issues. Please try again later.
“I've got a back catalogue of decisions that have gone against us,” said Wilder, whose side had a David McGoldrick equaliser chalked off in the reverse fixture. “We're the unofficial champions of Europe when it comes to VAR decisions against us.
“We have had the rub of the green on that. It was overdue but we will take it.”
Spurs lost heart after that, and the Blades went on to add to their lead with second-half goals from substitute Lys Mousset and the outstanding Oli McBurnie.
Asked if he thought it was one of his side's best performances of the season, Wilder replied: “It had to be under the circumstances – the players we were missing, the run we were on, it has been difficult for everybody to get back to playing.
“I saw signs on Sunday (in the FA Cup quarter-final defeat to Arsenal) that we were getting back to ourselves, more dominant, more aggressive and freer in our play.
“When you play teams like this you have to bring close to your best on a lot of fronts.
“It was a big night for us and I thought we showed what we were about.
“The movement was excellent, Oli McBurnie was outstanding considering the team he played against. Pound for pound it was his best performance for the football club.
“Mousset was good, he needs to show that more often. There's a reason he's not in the team every week but when he stretches a game like that he's excellent.”
The only disappointment is that the Blades' injury list is growing. Despite suggestions before the game he might be in contention to feature, central defender Jack O'Connell is yet to play since the resumption and Wilder named only seven of the nine permitted substitutes against Tottenham, with attacking central midfielders John Lundstram and John Fleck injured, along with Luke Freeman, who might otherwise have deputised. I t meant a first Premier League start for Ben Osborn, who acquitted himself well.
“Fleck, Lundstram and (Luke) Freeman will be out for a couple of weeks,” said Wilder.
Opposite number Mourinho was critical of the way his side wilted after Kane's disallowed goal.
“We cannot mentally die after Michael Oliver's decision,” he complained. “With 50 minutes to go, we have to be stronger.
Editor’s note: first and foremost - and rarely have I written down these words with more sincerity - I hope this finds you well.
Almost certainly you are here because you value the quality and the integrity of the journalism produced by The Yorkshire Post’s journalists - almost all of which live alongside you in Yorkshire, spending the wages they earn with Yorkshire businesses - who last year took this title to the industry watchdog’s Most Trusted Newspaper in Britain accolade.
And that is why I must make an urgent request of you: as advertising revenue declines, your support becomes evermore crucial to the maintenance of the journalistic standards expected of The Yorkshire Post. If you can, safely, please buy a paper or take up a subscription. We want to continue to make you proud of Yorkshire’s National Newspaper but we are going to need your help.
Postal subscription copies can be ordered by calling 0330 4030066 or by emailing subscriptions@jpimedia.co.uk . Vouchers, to be exchanged at retail sales outlets - our newsagents need you, too - can be subscribed to by contacting subscriptions on 0330 1235950 or by visiting www.localsubsplus.co.uk where you should select  The Yorkshire Post from the list of titles available.
If you want to help right now, download our tablet app from the App / Play Stores. Every contribution you make helps to provide this county with the best regional journalism in the country.
