Deer going buck wild on trunks? How to save a tree after antler rub damage
If bucks strip too much bark when rubbing their antlers on a tree, it can cause irreparable damage. (Chicago Botanic Garden)
I just discovered some damage from deer rubs to the trunks of a couple of my trees. Will the trees be OK, and what can I do to protect them in the future?
Bucks can cause significant damage to young trees in the fall by rubbing their antlers on trunks. Male deer clean their antlers of summer velvet from early September through November while also marking their territory during the breeding season. The bucks repeatedly strike trees for noise effect to show dominance and intimidate other bucks. They also coat the twigs and bark with scent from glands in their faces and underbodies to mark their territory.
Young trees that are 1 to 6 inches in diameter with smooth bark — such as maples, lindens, birches and magnolias — are most likely to be damaged by deer rubs. Larger trees with smooth bark, as well as clump-form trees, can also be damaged. I have seen aspen trees in Winnetka that are more than 10 inches in diameter incur major damage from buck rubs — buck territory includes many home gardens in this area.
The damage to trees from buck rubs comes from the shredding of bark from a foot or so above the ground to 3 to 5 feet up the trunk. Young trees have very thin bark that is easily damaged. Usually, the damage is done over a 24-hour period.
The tree’s vascular system — which is just below the bark and transports water, nutrients and food between the roots and leaves — gets damaged, and the underlying wood is exposed. If rubbed all the way around, the trunk will be girdled, resulting in the eventual death of the tree in one to three years. If the damage is mostly located vertically on the trunk and does not go all around it, the tree can survive, although it may die on the side where the damage occurred. The small tree in your photo shows significant damage that appears to go all around the trunk, so you should plan on replacing that tree. There is nothing you can do to help it survive.
If bucks strip too much bark when rubbing their antlers on a tree, it can cause irreparable damage. (Chicago Botanic Garden)
Trees can heal after a surprisingly large amount of damage. Trim off any loose, shredded bark where it’s not connected tightly to the trunk. If possible, cut the wounds into an elliptical or football shape to help the tree recover more quickly, but do not dramatically enlarge the wound to do this. There is no need to use a wound dressing or wrap the damage. Smooth edges heal better than the ragged edges left from the deer rubbing, but be sure to prune back broken branches as needed.
Small clump-form trees can be ruined if too many branches are broken. Clump-form birches and magnolias may re-sprout and establish new trunks if they are cut back to stubs a few inches above the ground. The large tree in the photo has more localized damage, so I would expect it to recover.
You will need to protect the trunks of your trees from the ground to about 6 feet up the trunk next fall; no need to take action this winter. It is a good idea to install this protection in late August.
Wrapping with burlap or paper tree wrap will likely not provide enough protection for deer rubs. Try using a sturdy hardware wire mesh (hardware cloth) with ½-inch or smaller openings. This kind of mesh is available at hardware stores to wrap your tree trunks. Chicken wire usually works, although in one garden the deer were so aggressive that the chicken wire was mostly torn off the tree with heavy damage to the bark.
