Emerging market stocks and currencies traded sideways on Friday, as investors waited to see how the U.S. would respond to China’s security law on Hong Kong, and also digested GDP figures from across the developing world.
U.S. President Donald Trump is scheduled to hold a press conference later in the day and traders fear he could revoke Hong Kong’s special status under U.S. law allowing it to function as a global financial hub.
“(The U.S.) rhetoric is set to evolve into actual policies, potentially in the form of sanctions, which could shatter the stability that the world sorely needs in these early days of the post-pandemic era,” said Han Tan, market analyst at FXTM.
Hong Kong stocks were down 0.7% while mainland China shares  closed up about 0.2% on stimulus hopes.
The Chinese yuan and the Hong Kong dollar were little changed.
“Should (Hong Kong’s) special status be removed, there would likely be a pickup in outflows and pressure on the HKD in the near term, although we expect such pressures to be contained,” said Mitul Kotecha, senior EM strategist at TD Securities.
MSCI’s index of emerging market shares traded flat, with the Philippines bourse outperforming on plans to ease the lockdown in the capital city of Manila.
The benchmark EM index is also on track to end the month little changed as gains made on optimism from bumper global stimulus and an early pickup in business activity were countered by fears of a second wave of coronavirus infections and the escalation in U.S.-China tensions.
Latest macroeconomic figures continue to underline the damage from the near shutdown in global activity, with Russia’s economy contracting 12% in April and Turkish GDP growing less than expected in the first quarter.
India’s March quarter GDP is expected to grow at its slowest pace in at least two years, and analysts expect the slowdown to worsen in the second half even as the country begins to relax one of the most stringent global lockdowns.
Declining oil prices weighed on crude producer Russia’s rouble, while Turkey’s lira traded slightly lower against a dented dollar. Still, the lira is on track to end a four-month losing streak, up about 2.4% in May as it recovers from all-time lows hit earlier this month.
Gains in commodity prices helped South Africa’s rand gain over 5%, up for the first month in five.
For GRAPHIC on emerging market FX performance 2020, see http://tmsnrt.rs/2egbfVh For GRAPHIC on MSCI emerging index performance 2020, see https://tmsnrt.rs/2OusNdX
For CENTRAL EUROPE market report, see
For RUSSIAN market report, see (Reporting by Susan Mathew in Bengaluru; Editing by Kirsten Donovan)
