In the case of coronavirus, it needs to get to your respiratory system via your mouth, nose or eyes.
"While most children know to keep their hands away from their mouths, it's your eyes that are a major pathway for respiratory viruses," Professor Bill Rawlinson said.
"Your eyes are full of blood vessels. If you put viruses into your eye they just leap immediately into your blood vessels."
So it's simple, right? Stop touching your face and wash your hands.
Problem is, most of us are not great at either of these things.
It's also important to note, evidence suggests there are other ways people become infected with coronavirus , including close contact with infected people and direct contact with droplets when an infected person coughs or sneezes. (That's where social distancing comes in.)
How often do we touch our faces?
While experts agree we touch our faces a lot, there is no clear answer on exactly how often we touch our faces.
We instinctively scratch, rub and generally touch our own faces all the time.
Professor Nigel McMillan, the director of infectious diseases and immunology at the Menzies Health Institute in Queensland, has a novel approach to helping students understand how frequently people touch their face.
As he begins a lecture, he announces he will shake the hand of the next person who enters the room. He then asks his students to time how long it takes that person to touch their face.
"I think the longest it has taken is five minutes," he said.
His point is that nearly everyone regularly touches their face, usually without knowing it.
In his view, a benefit of using facemasks, even if they won't necessarily protect you from catching the coronavirus , is that it helps remind people not to touch their face.
While some experts are encouraging us to try and break the face-touching habit, it's easier said than done.
"But if your hands are clean, then touching your face is OK," Professor McMillan said.
Handwashing is the cheapest and most effective form of infection control we have.
In its advice on protective measures for COVID-19 , the World Health Organisation has handwashing at the top of the list.
"Regularly and thoroughly clean your hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or wash them with soap and water," it advises.
Research shows hand washing significantly helps to prevent illness and the spread of infection.
And hand washing shouldn't just follow toilet use. You should also wash your hands:
Your handwashing technique is also important — so here's a quick rundown on the things that matter.
Don't rush: A quick splash under the tap isn't enough. For germ-free hands you'll need to do a thorough wash under clean running water, lasting 20 seconds, with lots of rubbing together of the hands (front, back and between the fingers). Children can be encouraged to sing the entire "Happy Birthday" song twice to make sure they wash their hands for long enough.
Soap up: If you're at a tap and there's some soap nearby, use it. Any germs on your hands will be attached to the layer of acidic fats, oils and cellular debris on the surface of the skin. Soap dissolves this layer and so does a better job of dislodging the bugs than merely rubbing your hands under water alone.
Liquid versus bar soap: While liquid soap is less likely to be contaminated than a cake of soap, this is more of an issue in public places than at home.
Antibacterial isn't any better: It may be tempting to use antibacterial soaps to be sure you get rid of all the nasties, but there's no proof these products work any better than regular soap and water. Rather there are fears these products may actually cause harm by encouraging bacteria to become resistant to their active ingredients.
Running water is best: It's best to use running water if you can, as clean hands are likely to become contaminated again if you wash them in a sink or bowl of water. If there's no running water then make do with what is available.
Water temperature: Very hot water may kill disease-causing microbes, but the temperature needed (80 degrees Celsius) would leave you with significant burns. Soap lathers better in warm water, which is also less likely to strip away the natural oils in your skin than either hot or cold water.
Remember to rinse: Once the soap and the friction have lifted the dirt and germs from your hands, you want to rinse them down the sink. Again, you want to rinse under clean running water if possible.
When there's no water, a hand sanitiser or gel that contains at least 60 per cent alcohol is your best bet.
What the experts are saying about coronavirus:
