It's easier than you think.
Hand sanitizer is a frontline measure for killing germs, bacteria and other pathogens. It's in short supply in many stores, but you can make your own -- if you can find the ingredients.
Hand sanitizer is a frontline measure for killing germs, bacteria and other pathogens. It's in short supply in many stores, but you can make your own -- if you can find the ingredients.
Hand sanitizer is a frontline measure for killing germs, bacteria and other pathogens. It's in short supply in many stores, but you can make your own -- if you can find the ingredients.
Hand sanitizer is a frontline measure for killing germs, bacteria and other pathogens. It's in short supply in many stores, but you can make your own -- if you can find the ingredients.
This post has been updated to say that hand sanitizer should be made with 91 percent or 99 percent isopropyl alcohol.
As the threat from coronavirus grows , stores across the nation have been selling out of  hand sanitizer . Luckily, there's a quick, easy DIY fix for this.
There are a number of hand sanitizer recipes out there, including those by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization. To keep it simple, we're going with one endorsed by the CDC, which says that hand sanitizers should be at least 60 percent alcohol to be effective.
To make your own hand sanitizer, you only need two ingredients: Aloe vera gel, and 91 percent or 99 percent isopropyl alcohol (also called rubbing alcohol). You'll combine two parts alcohol to one part aloe vera. Rubbing alcohol at that high percentage is trickier to find. You can find it online, of course, but you may have to ask your pharmacist for it at your local drug store. (The stuff on drug store shelves is likely 70 percent alcohol; check the label.)
A third ingredient, essential oils, will help tame the alcohol-forward smell. Use a few drops of lavender or a citrus scent. When you use the hand sanitizer, you'll smell that oil after the alcohol evaporates.
Your finished product will be runnier than thick, gel-like hand sanitizers you buy at a store because of the quantity of rubbing alcohol it takes to make them effective.  When you use it, be sure to completely coat your hands and then let them air dry. (That's the CDC-approved method for effective hand disinfecting.)
Health organizations promote washing your hands with soap as your first defense against germs, bacteria and other pathogens. Hand sanitizer can be used after hand washing; you can also use hand sanitizer alone when soap and water are not available.
If you've seen internet rumors about replacing the rubbing alcohol with vodka, don't try it. In fact, Texas-based vodka maker Tito’s has been painstakingly responding to tweets and other social media posts, reminding them of advice from the CDC. Vodka is not an effective substitute for rubbing alcohol; trying it is a waste of good liquor.
One quick safety note: Use and store hand sanitizer safely when children are around. U.S. poison control centers received nearly 85,000 calls about hand sanitizer ingestion by children from 2011 to 2015, the CDC says.
Here's how to make it:
In a bowl, mix one-third cup aloe vera gel with two-thirds cup (91 or 99 percent) rubbing alcohol until blended. Then add a few drops of essential oils to make it smell better.
