Want the best food, film, music, arts and culture news sent straight to your inbox?
When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
This Morning fans have been calling for more of Alison Hammond after another hilarious appearance on the show.
The Birmingham presenter was on a tour of sunny Bordeaux in France alongside celebrity chef, Jean-Christophe Novelli.
Alison's 'Brummie in Bordeaux' segment didn't fail to live up to her past appearances on the show as she visited the beauty spot to discover typical French food and wine.
Almost immediately, Alison broke out the French as Jean-Christophe took her to the chocolate store in a nearby food hall: "Chocolate, my favourite! Ooh la la!"
The combination of the French language and Alison's Brummie twang turned out to be nothing but comedy gold as they moved onto the next stall.
The clip of her attempting some more complex French can be seen in the video above.
Jean-Christophe went on to give Alison a tour of a Bordeaux vineyard, which involved more laughs:
"Look at this vineyard, you're such a gentlemen...", she said to Jean-Christophe before slipping over.
"Alison's already drunk, just by the fumes of the grapes!", joked the Jean-Christophe.
The duo then went to the kitchen where the conversation between Alison and Jean-Christophe turned to food.
Alison Hammond tells Jean-Christophe she 'Likes a bit of a rub' during the This Morning 'Brummie in Bordeaux' segment (Image: This Morning | ITV)
As Jean-Christophe prepared a French leg of lamb, garnished with potatoes, the conversation quickly took a funny turn when Alison asked if he was going to rub in the marinade from the potatoes:
"Are you gonna rub it in?", asked Alison before Jean-Christophe said: "No, it will just... I will rub it in if you want to?"
Queue Alison Hammond who said: "I like a bit of a rub.", which left the duo laughing.
Fans of the Brummie flocked to Twitter calling for This Morning to get her on more often after the segment finished.
One Tweeted: "Simply love ms Hammond and JC Novelli Both very funny made me laugh, made my day. Thank you."
Another added: "I love Alison she deserves her own show. She cracks me up every time she is on This Morning."
A third went on to say: "Loved watching your French jaunt..so typically English..can’t speak French...and love a tin of corned beef! Hahaha."
This Morning returns at 10am tomorrow.
