Good hand hygiene is crucial to help prevent healthcare-associated infections. This article, the second in a six-part series , discusses the principles of hand hygiene and the procedure for cleaning the hands with an alcohol-based hand rub
Hand hygiene is one of the most effective methods of preventing healthcare-associated infections. However, prevention depends on hand hygiene being performed when necessary, and the appropriate cleansing agent and technique being used. This article, part 2 in a six-part series , explains the importance of hand hygiene, when it should be performed and which cleansing agent to use. It also outlines the procedure for decontaminating the hands using alcohol-based hand rub.
Citation: Wigglesworth N (2019) Infection control 2: hand hygiene using alcohol-based hand rub. Nursing Times [online]; 115, 5: 24-26.
Author: Neil Wigglesworth is director, infection prevention and control, Guy’s and St Thomas’ Foundation Trust, London and immediate past president, Infection Prevention Society.
Healthcare-associated infections (HCAIs) are a serious risk to patients, staff and visitors and are estimated to cost the NHS £1bn a year. National surveys have identified the prevalence of HCAIs in hospital patients of 6.4% in England in 2011 (Health Protection Agency, 2012), 4.6% in Scotland in 2016 (NHS Scotland, 2017), 4.0% in Wales in 2011 (Public Health Wales, 2012), and 4.2% in Northern Ireland in 2011/12 (Public Health Agency, 2012).
Both resident and transient bacteria will be present on hands; if transferred from the hands of a health professional to susceptible sites such as wounds or invasive devices they can cause life-threatening infections, while transfer to non-vulnerable sites can leave patients colonised with bacteria that could cause a future infection in the patient or expose staff and visitors to the risk of infection (Loveday et al, 2014).
Why is hand hygiene important?
The most common mode of transmission of pathogens associated with HCAIs in care settings is via the contaminated hands of health professionals (World Health Organization, 2009). Transmission from a health professional’s hands to a patient takes place in sequential steps:
Organisms are transferred to the health professional’s hands from a patient or the environment;
The health professional fails to perform effective hand hygiene;
The health professional’s hands come into contact with a patient, or a vulnerable site such as the entry point for an invasive device.
Hand hygiene is the primary measure proven to be effective in preventing HCAIs and is the cornerstone of good infection prevention and control (IPC) practice (WHO, 2009). Current national and international guidance has consistently identified that effective hand decontamination results in significant reductions in potential pathogens on the hands. Loveday et al (2014) say it is therefore logical that effective decontamination decreases the incidence of preventable HCAIs, leading to a reduction in patient morbidity and mortality.
Hand decontamination can be achieved using alcohol-based hand rub (ABHR) or liquid soap and water. Staff should receive regular training on how to undertake the correct hand hygiene technique.
This article, the second in a six-part series on infection prevention and control , discusses when hand hygiene should be performed, which hand hygiene procedure to use in different situations, and the procedure for cleansing the hands with ABHR.
Part 6 in this series will discuss how to clean the hands using soap and water, and how to protect skin integrity.
The WHO (2009) advises that health professionals’ hands should be decontaminated at five critical points before, during and after patient care activity; these are known as My Five Moments for Hand Hygiene:
