As the City of Edmonton reconsiders its licensing of body rub centres, I hope city officials will talk directly, and frankly, to the women who are employed at the centres.
That’s not because those women will offer up unequivocal solutions to problems associated with body rub centres. But rather, talking to real women about their real experiences makes it clear this is a complex issue.
We apologize, but this video has failed to load.
Back in November, I spoke to a former body rub worker named Sophia about the proposed phasing-out of the city’s licensing of Edmonton’s 32 centres. A report from city administration, requested by councillor Bev Esslinger, is due in the spring and will discuss the pros and cons of ending the licensing process over a five-year period.
Sophia, who worked at the centres and even owned one herself, thought it was imperative that the city stop licensing. Buying sexual services is illegal, she said, and turning a blind eye to that activity, even in the name of harm reduction, is plain wrong.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
But in December, I talked to another former body rub worker who took the opposite position.
We’ll call her Julie. She quit working in the centres this past fall after toiling within that system, on and off, for nearly 30 years. A foster child who lived on the streets as a teenager and never finished high school, Julie worked in a “rub and tug” (as she calls the centres) because her options for employment were few.
An unplanned pregnancy made things more complex still. Despite efforts to find other work to pay the bills, Julie found herself “constantly being dragged back into that lifestyle to support myself and this kid.”
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Without the city’s licensing system, she might be there still. But a city employee who visits body rub centres as part of the licensing process ended up being a lifeline for Julie.
“She introduced me to CEASE,” says Julie.
CEASE is the Centre to End All Sexual Exploitation, a non-profit agency that has worked with sex trade workers in Edmonton for more than 20 years. The organization offers an impressive and creative number of options to people, mostly women, wanting to leave the sex trade.
With a budget of $700,000 a year, six full-time and two part-time staff, CEASE does everything from offering bursaries for education programs, to supplementing rent, daycare or food bills to support the journey to a better place. It’s incredibly hands-on; CEASE workers will make a meal, offer a shoulder to cry on, or drive a client to the doctor’s office. In 2019, CEASE helped 269 women in the sex trade overall, about half of whom were in the body rub business.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Julie was one of them. The compassionate counsellors at CEASE helped her with a resume, and she got a job. They supplied $1,100 for a technical education program to boost her career prospects long-term.
“They want you to succeed, and whatever you need to do to succeed, they’re willing to help you with,” says Julie.
Without the link to CEASE provided by the city, Julie would still be in a body rub centre. So while it’s true that municipal licensing of body rub centres dances around the fact that the service is illegal, it’s also true that city staff monitoring the centres provide a point of contact to women with precious few supports.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
“Who is coming for them? No one is coming for them,” says Julie of her former co-workers.
I sat down recently with five CEASE staffers, including executive director Kate Quinn. Talking to them was eye-opening. While women are drawn to body rub centres with the promise of high wages (one I interviewed earlier said she made $300 an hour during boom times), CEASE research notes the average wage is $30,000 a year.
The research I’ve done so far (and there is another column to come on this topic) indicates the city licensing program has done good work for women who find themselves in a bad situation. For instance, licensing rules that insist on security cameras and buttons in the centres are helpful. But still, the work is degrading and dangerous.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
In 2018, the licensing program budget was $420,000, a figure that covers three city employees and other costs, such as training sessions for body rub practitioners that provide, among other things, a point of contact between the city and vulnerable workers, many of whom do not speak English.
Here are some questions I have for the city. Is a licensing program the most effective way to help body rub workers? What other tools does the city have at its disposal to help women avoid or escape the trade? I requested an interview with license program officials to ask these questions, but the request was denied. The reason given was that the city is in the midst of its own research on this issue.
I am anxious to see their results.
