| TNN | Jun 16, 2020, 05:02 IST
Nagpur: Manish Nagar railway underbridge (RUB) being built by MahaMetro is nearing completion and will be opened soon. Residents of Manish Nagar, Besa, Beltarodi, etc will no longer have to wait at the railway crossing to reach Wardha Road.
The length of the RUB is 600 metres and it’s a two-lane structure having width between 6.5m and 8.5m. MahaMetro is constructing a railway overbridge (ROB) near the RUB. The cost of the two structures is Rs90 crore.
Work on the RUB had started in 2017. Now, only work of installing signages remains.
The length of the ROB is 800m. The length of the portion above the railway track is 60m. The approach on Manish Nagar side is 80m long. The girder launching of the ROB remains to be done. It is expected to be complete in two months. The double decker flyover will also be ready.
A Mahajan, a resident of Manish Nagar, expressed happiness over completion of the structure. “However, traffic flow will not be smooth unless the cement roads connecting the RUB to Manish Nagar are complete. Right now, no work is going on due to the lockdown, so I guess it will take over a year. Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) should complete the road fast after the lockdown is lifted so that we get relief,” he said.
Naresh Borkar, another resident, said that the ROB should also be completed fast. “We will not get complete relief until the two structures are open for traffic. The RUB is too narrow for handling a large volume of traffic,” he added.
A MahaMetro official told TOI that the Manish Nagar railway crossing could be closed if an RUB was built under it. “However, Central Railway will have to take a call. There is a formula for funding such structures,” he added.
When the RUB was planned, fourteen houses were to be acquired as per the design. However, due to intervention of incumbent mayor Sandip Joshi, these houses were saved. MahaMetro did shoring for the two structures to strengthen the foundation of the adjacent houses. The top floor of the houses are now very close to the ROB.
Start Your Daily Mornings with Times of India Newspaper! Order Now
