Emerging market shares suffered their biggest drop in almost three weeks on Friday as China’s move to impose a new security law on Hong Kong threatened to escalate Sino-U.S. tensions.
Hong Kong shares tumbled 5.5% in their sharpest one-day drop in almost 5 years after pro-democracy activists called protests and U.S. President Donald Trump pledged to respond if China tightened control of the former British colony.
MSCI’s index of emerging market shares slid 2.2%, with Chinese blue-chips down 2.3% and South African shares almost 3% lower, while Poland’s index slipped 0.8%.
“Geopolitical risks are threatening to gatecrash an already-tense ‘risk party’ among global investors,” said Han Tan, Market Analyst at FXTM.
“The recent gains in risk assets could be unwound should U.S.-China capital flows be restricted” or new tariffs be imposed, he said.
Friday’s moves shaved weekly gains for the EM index, now looking to end up about 1% this week as easing of pandemic-induced restrictions and a potential COVID-19 vaccine had raised recovery hopes.
EM currencies weakened as the dollar gained momentum.
Sinking oil prices saw crude exporter Russia’s rouble end a six-session winning streak, down 1.2%. Finance Minister Anton Siluanov dismissed media speculation that Russia will suspend its fiscal rule in selling foreign exchange – a contingency plan during periods of low oil prices.
India’s rupee slipped 0.4% after the central bank delivered a surprise, off-cycle 50 basis point cut in its key interest rate, aimed at aiding the economy as it battles the impact of the pandemic.
Despite being on a nationwide lockdown since late March, India has seen a continuing rise in cases, with some easing in restrictions taking the total number of infections in the country to 118,000 with 3,583 deaths.
“We believe more policy rate cuts remain on the cards given that there is no change to the central bank’s accommodative policy stance just yet. We don’t rule out another 25-50bp rate cut at the next scheduled meeting in early August, or even earlier if the situation continues to worsen,’ said ING Asia Economist, Prakash Sakpal.
Elsewhere, the Turkish lira traded flat with geopolitical tensions in Libya also simmering, while the South African rand fell for the first time in four sessions, down 1.4%.
Central banks of both countries had delivered half a percentage point interest rate cuts on Thursday.
For GRAPHIC on emerging market FX performance 2020, see http://tmsnrt.rs/2egbfVh For GRAPHIC on MSCI emerging index performance 2020, see https://tmsnrt.rs/2OusNdX
For CENTRAL EUROPE market report, see
For RUSSIAN market report, see (Reporting by Susan Mathew in Bengaluru; editing by Philippa Fletcher)
