MOSCOW, may 12 (Reuters) – the Largest oil company – Rosneft (MCX:ROSN) will reduce the investment program in 2020 compared with last year by about 200 billion to 750 billion rubles, said Tuesday the head of Rosneft, Igor Sechin at a meeting with President Vladimir Putin.
“Given the, shall we say, dramatic state of the overall global oil market and in connection with the decisions on the reduction of production we will have, of course, part of the capital cost to optimize. We will try to keep our investment program at the level of approximately 750 billion,” – said Sechin.
Sechin also asked Putin about the mitigation banking policy and tax incentives for exploration.
“The key thing for us, where we desperately need help from the state, is the mitigation banking policy relating to availability of credit, availability of working capital… If there was a possibility of increasing the limits on the creditor, it would help to support our investment programs, including even new start, meaning that in the future two to three years we will overcome the crisis, and it will be necessary to provide the market with new volumes of hydrocarbons,” – said Sechin.
“If it was possible to defer tax payments to future periods for works related to geological exploration, it would help us in future to be more ready to exit from the crisis”.
The head of Rosneft also proposed to harmonise the tariffs of transport monopolies to the current prices on market:
“In 2008, for example, the price of oil in rubles was about 1100 rubles, now 1200 is comparable quantities. But before the rate was 822 rubles per ton of bleeding, and today more than two thousand: 2100 rubles.”
In response, the Russian President said that he understands the concerns of the head of Rosneft, and promised to discuss this issue. Monopoly in the oil pumping is a state-owned company Transneft (MCX:TRNF_p).
Earlier Tuesday, the energy company Inter (MCX:IRAO) reported that it will build gas-fired power plants of 2.5 GW for the Arctic project of Vostok ojjl, which are Rosneft and the former head of Rosneft Eduard khudainatov and his company Neftegazkholding. Arctic cluster East oil, according to Rosneft estimates, may require more than 10 trillion roubles of investments.
On Tuesday, Sechin told Putin that the resource potential East oil amounts to 5 billion tons of light sweet crude whose quality is better than that of North sea Brent crude.
According to Sechin, the potential supply of raw materials from this project in 2024 is 25 million tons in 2027 – 50 million tons by 2030, to 115 million tons, according to the website of Rosneft.
The company also stated that the expected economic effect of the project East oil is 9.3 per ruble for every ruble invested investment. The project will provide up to an additional 2% increase in GDP annually, said Rosneft.
Natasha Kumar has been a reporter on the news desk since 2018. Before that she wrote about young adolescence and family dynamics for Styles and was the legal affairs correspondent for the Metro desk. Before joining The Times Hub, Natasha Kumar worked as a staff writer at the Village Voice and a freelancer for Newsday, The Wall Street Journal, GQ and Mirabella. To get in touch, contact me through my natasha@thetimeshub.in 1-800-268-7116
