Russia's central bank effectively abandoned the trading corridor for the ruble on Wednesday, halting big  interventions that had seen it spend billions a day to prop up a currency driven lower  by sanctions and falling oil prices .
The bank announced it would limit daily  interventions to just $350 million a day, saying this would mean the currency's price would now  largely be set by the market, although it stopped short of formally abolishing the  trading corridor.
The ruble, which has already lost almost a quarter  of its value since the middle of this year, promptly fell by around 1.5 percent against  the dollar on Wednesday.
Plunging oil prices and Western sanctions over the  Ukraine crisis have shriveled Russia's exports and investment  inflows, driving the currency down.
Moscow had already officially planned to float its currency at  the end of this year, but now appears to have been forced by its  worsening finances to unmoor the currency sooner than  planned.
Russia still has some $440 billion in reserves,  having spent around $70 billion this year, but with great  uncertainty over how long external economic stresses will last it  is reluctant to spend them at the hectic pace of recent  weeks.
It spent $29 billion last month, often spending  around 2.5 billion a day.
A rapid fall in the ruble could be a political  setback for President Vladimir Putin, who remains hugely popular  despite the imposition of Western sanctions over his policy of  seizing territory from neighboring Ukraine and supporting rebels  there.
Read More Russian    troops closer to Ukraine border: NATO chief
Until this year, a stable rouble exchange rate was  one of the signature achievements of Putin's 14 years in power,  in a country where memories are still raw of catastrophic  hyperinflation and currency collapse in the 1990s.
On Friday, the bank announced an unexpectedly large  150 basis point increase in its main lending rate in an attempt  to support the ruble and control high inflation.
Although the bank said on Wednesday it would still  formally retain the trading corridor, economists said the $350  million limit on daily interventions made the corridor  meaningless.
"The move is an effective move to a free float from  now on," Vladimir Osakovsky, chief Russia economist at Bank of  America Merrill Lynch.
ING economist Dmitry Polevoy said: "By doing this  the central bank makes the current corridor nearly irrelevant for  the exchange rate dynamics of the ruble."
"Clearly the idea is that the upper boundary of the  corridor is not the cap on the exchange rate, so in reality it  can move freely and therefore it's flexible."
In the afternoon, the ruble was down 1.5 percent to 44.26 against  the dollar and down 1.5 percent to 55.32 against the euro,  already pushing it outside the most recent corridor, announced on  Friday.
In its statement, the bank said the move to limit  daily interventions would significantly increase the flexibility  of the exchange rate, meaning the rate will now largely be  determined be market factors.
The bank would keep the ruble's corridor against a  dollar-euro basket for now and spend up to $350 million a day  when the ruble is outside the corridor.
Commenting later on Wednesday, the bank's Deputy  Governor Ksenia Yudayeva said that the bank had not abolished the  corridor to avoid "a serious shock" to the market.
ING's Polevoy said that the decision to leave the  corridor in place, even though it now has limited relevance, may  be aimed at reassuring the general population rather than  markets.
He also said the continued small interventions of  $350 million a day could add up to around $14 billion by  year-end, providing an injection of some foreign exchange into  the market that would be welcome given heavy demand for  dollars.
The central bank has been planning for years to  float the ruble by the beginning of 2015 as part of its shift to  a monetary regime that would target inflation rather than the  exchange rate.
Most economists endorse the float, arguing that a  flexible currency shields Russia from external shocks such as a  fall in the price of oil, Russia's main export. But the bank had  always intended to carefully manage the transition, rather than  have its hand forced by a currency fall draining its reserves.
Global prices for oil have fallen by almost a  quarter since the summer. The plunge has coincided with the  imposition of financial sanctions by Western governments against  major Russian companies, limiting their access to foreign  currency.
By artificially slowing the rouble's decline,  critics argued, the central bank's multi-billion dollar daily  interventions encouraged speculation against it.
"This is a step in the right direction," Neil  Shearing, chief emerging market economist at Capital Economics,  said in a note. "The ruble is likely to weaken further over the  coming days, but should find a floor more quickly than would have  been the case under the old framework."
The bank said that it was ready to carry out  additional interventions in the event of a threat to financial  stability. Analysts said that such ad hoc interventions are  unlikely barring more serious financial turmoil. However,  uncertainty over the frequency and size of these one-off  interventions could deter speculators.
In a move to ensure that Russian banks have access  to foreign currency despite sanctions, the central bank also said  on Wednesday that it would extend a program to provide short and  medium term foreign currency financing to banks, through  agreements known as repo loans.
Such loans would now be offered for up to a year  and at better interest rates than instruments launched last  month, which were offered only for up to 28 days. The previous  loans saw little demand from banks dissuaded by unattractive  borrowing terms.
The central bank said that the interest rate on all  its forex repos would now be set at 1.5 percentage points above  the London Interbank Rate (LIBOR), lower than previously  announced.
Analysts said that the new terms and maturity would  encourage more banks to take up the new repo facilities, but  there were mixed views on how significant they would be.
Banks may be reluctant to use the repos as a way of  financing heavy foreign debt repayments falling due over the  coming months, a major factor behind pressure on the ruble.
"The main point of this (instrument) is to create a  liquidity window for banks with short-term liquidity mismatches,"  said Osakovsky. "The main purpose is to remove that concern  rather than actually to support the ruble."
