The Russian rouble gained in early trade on Tuesday, heading away from the lowest levels since 2016 it reached earlier this month, as oil prices inched higher and other emerging-market currencies pared losses.
At 0751 GMT, the rouble was 1.2% stronger against the dollar 73.73 up from last week's 75.49, its weakest since late February 2016.
Versus the euro, the rouble gained 1.7% to 81.96 , up from the 85.00 it touched a week ago, its weakest since early 2016.
The rouble has lost around 15% of its value against the dollar so far this year, taking a double hit from a slump in oil prices and a global sell-off related to the coronavirus outbreak.
Russian authorities pledged to ensure financial stability despite external shocks, but the Bank of Russia is not expected to follow other global central banks and slash interest rates.
A Reuters poll showed the central bank is likely to hold its key rate unchanged at 6% at the board meeting on Friday.
Central Bank Governor Elvira Nabiullina will hold an unscheduled online press conference after the meeting to explain the rate move and the position regarding the impact of the coronavirus on monetary policy, the bank said on Tuesday.
Brent crude oil, a global benchmark for Russia's main export, was up 3.4% at $31.07 a barrel after a massive drop on the previous day.
Higher oil prices propped up Russian stock indexes.
The dollar-denominated RTS index was up 1.1% to 978,3 points. The rouble-based MOEX Russian index was 0.8% higher at 2,284.3 points.
"Russian stocks are expected to edge higher today in a relief rally after yesterday's rout in the U.S.," Alfa Bank said in a note to clients.
ALSO WATCH | Cost of waiting 1 day equals increase in 40% of coronavirus cases, says Silicon Valley entrepreneur
IndiaToday.in has plenty of useful resources that can help you better understand the coronavirus pandemic and protect yourself. Read our comprehensive guide (with information on how the virus spreads, precautions and symptoms), watch an expert debunk myths , and access our dedicated coronavirus page .
Get real-time alerts and all the news on your phone with the all-new India Today app. Download from
Do You Like This Story?
