That had “only negligible effect on the Ruble as such a move still left RUB with an attractive carry,” according to leading Nordic bank SEB’s latest "Russian Weekly" dated Friday, May 5.
Russian ruble banknotes folded against the background of US dollar bills. (Image: Shutterstock).
A press statement from the central bank following its  action read: “In making its decision on the key rate, moving forward, the Bank of Russia will assess the probability of the baseline scenario implementation (where oil prices drop to $40 per barrel) and the scenario with rising oil prices, alongside with assessing inflation and the economy dynamics relative to the forecast.”
Its communique added: “The Bank of Russia’s assessment of the overall potential of the key rate reduction before the end of 2017 is unchanged.” Further it noted: “Given the moderately tight monetary policy, the 4% inflation target will be achieved before the end of 2017 and will be maintained close to this level in 2018-2019.”
Tod Van Name , Bloomberg’s Global Head of Electronic Trading for Foreign Exchange and Commodities , explaining the broad rationale for the FX17 summit taking place in the Russian capital, said: “The Ruble regained some of the ground it lost over the last three years as oil prices firmed. We brought the leaders of the Moscow FX community together to hear their thoughts and share the latest technology and industry best practices.”
The former senior options trader at Fortis Bank who hails from the greater New York City area, added: “FX professionals in Russia and around the world need the accuracy, speed and ease of electronic trading technology. They need one platform where they can trade spots, forwards, swaps, deposits, non-deliverable forwards and options.”
On that score by way of example in Bloomberg’s case, its FXGO offering that can be accessed via the Bloomberg Terminal, and provides solutions touted to “increase efficiency and reduce operational risk.”
The survey initiated at the summit by Bloomberg canvassed over 85 leading practitioners in the FX space - analysts, traders and technology professionals.
Key points from its survey found that a touch over half (51%) of respondents said oil prices will have the “biggest effect” on the Russian currency in 2017. And, 83% of the executives sample indicated that the ruble will be “more correlated to oil than emerging markets currencies” this year.
When questioned about where they believed the Russian currency will be at the end of this year, just under half (48%) of audience canvassed said they anticipated it will remain between 55 and 60. Around a third (38%) of those asked for their opinion said that ruble will “range from 60 to 65,” while 12% signalled it will “go below 55.”
As to which currency was seen as the safest bet in 2017 by the assembled forex experts, the U.S. dollar (USD) and the Japanese yen (JPY) tied at 34% each. In terms of the safety of other currencies far less confidence was expressed in them, with 13% voting for the Chinese yuan (CNY) and just 6% each voting for the Russian ruble, the euro (EUR) and British pound (GBP).
While just over a fifth (22%) worry about the Russian central bank’s policies and geopolitics, a mere 5% were found to be concerned about U.S. interest rate hikes.
Russian foreign exchange professionals and traders from these Bloomberg findings saw their “biggest challenge” during 2017 as managing currency exposures, with 41% of those polled indicating as such.
Around half (46%) of Russian FX professionals polled have increased their hedging of the ruble, while 22% are naturally hedged and are not adjusting their strategy this year, it was revealed.
Turning back to SEB’s latest ‘Russian Weekly’ titled ‘Bearish Holidays For Ruble’ of Friday from economists Pirozhenko Evgeniy and Ksenia Uralskaya , it was noted: “USD/RUB started from 56.86-56.89 and reached 58.46 top, affected by the oil price fall in the short term.”
SEB’s commentary went further stating: “Both EUR [euro] and USD have ample room for further appreciation versus the RUB: as French Presidential elections remain the key topic for the EUR and Macron’s win seems to be almost a done deal - this supports EUR, which is was trading at 1.09 against USD.”
The SEB economist’s expectations for this coming week stood at the time of writing at 57.50-59.00 versus USD, as RUB is depreciating because of the oil price pressure. “In addition, the CBR rate cut and the long May holidays (Russia has until May 10 and celebrates ‘Victory Day’) are “pushing investors to play against RUB, cutting their long positions in higher-risk assets”, the analysts contended.
With EUR/RUB currency pair having broken the local resistance level of 62.74, thereby renewing almost 2-month lows, they posited further: “The Rouble has all chances for further weakening now, expected ranges for EUR/RUB next week are 63.00-64.75.”
Table 1: EUR/RUB Forward Pricing * (May 5, 2017)
