MOSCOW, April 22 (Reuters) - Russia’s central bank is expected to increase foreign currency sales to support the rouble as oil prices crash, after stepping up selling in the past few days, data showed on Wednesday.
The Bank of Russia began selling foreign exchange from state reserves in March for the first time since early 2015 when the rouble slid to four-year lows as the price of oil, Russia’s main export, tumbled and the coronavirus outbreak spread.
The central bank, which reports its FX sales with a two-day lag, said on Wednesday it sold foreign currency worth 16.8 billion roubles ($221 million) on Monday, up from 14.8 billion roubles on Friday and 12.9 billion roubles on Monday last week.
Sofia Donets, chief economist at RenCap who previously worked at the central bank’s monetary policy department, said the central bank could increase its daily sales on the Moscow Exchange to the equivalent of $350 million this week.
If prices for Urals, Russia’s blend of crude oil URL-E, slide below $10 per barrel from $11.6 on Wednesday, the rouble’s downside is limited by up to 5-7%, Donets added.
“The CBR’s FX sales remain the main supportive factor for the Russian rouble, we believe, supplemented by a sharp decrease in imports under quarantine regime,” Donets said.
RenCap sees the rouble averaging 76 against the dollar in 2020 and at 75 on average in 2021 in the base case scenario, which also envisages Urals recovering to around $40 by end-2020 and $50/bl in 2021.
On Wednesday, the rouble firmed to 76.15 against the dollar thanks to some recovery in oil prices.
The Bank of Russia, which let the rouble float freely in 2014, uses two formulas to determine the level foreign exchange sales, which, it says, are aimed at reducing volatility and the financial risks it bears.
It sells when prices for Urals, Russia’s blend of crude oil URL-E, falls below $42 per barrel, the threshold crossed on March 3.
Another mechanism allows extra selling when Urals prices fall below $25 to compensate for the shortfall of currency conversions from the revenue of export-focused companies. The lower the oil price, the larger the interventions. ($1 = 75.9700 roubles) (Reporting by Elena Fabrichnaya; Writing by Andrey Ostroukh; Editing by Alexander Smith)
