How many minutes if to cook if I put the ribs in the oven? Thanks
Besides my own issue going a bit heavy on the five-spice, these are easy, delicious, and make a great dinner. This is one of those recipes I'll be dreaming about in a week or two. Very memorable.
Ribs were super great. The sauce was delicious and way more unique than any store bought BBQ, although the sauce was quite salty. I would suggest using low-sodium soy sauce and then adding salt later so you have a little more control, I ended up thinning the sauce out with some onion, honey, and butter due to the salt.
These ribs are a w e s o m e . Steaming inside the tin foil produces beautifully tender ribs, and the glaze was delicious. Only thing I'd add is season the ribs a couple hours before cooking. And that you should shoot for ~190 F internal if you want your ribs to have any chew to them.
Ribs were tender but flavors were not good. It sounded good that I made 3 racks o we would have lots of leftovers. Had to get really creative to make the leftovers  palatable. Glad I didn't have guests.
Totally didn’t use the methodology (I did them in the slow cooker to start and then finished then under the broiler), but shout out to the sauce: the real MVP here.
Five spice is pretty intense so I used half in the rub and skipped it in the glaze. I only used about 1/2 cup water on the sheet tray. These turned out great. Definitely gonna make again.
LOVED this recipe and it was so, so easy to make (and a super inexpensive dinner party main course)! The ribs came out tender, juicy and bursting with flavor and we actually had enough leftovers to have two more meals (after serving four, initially). We don't own a grill so this was the perfect recipe for us - actually, it's so maintenance I'd rather use the oven than a grill for ribs anyway. It meant I could join the party vs. standing over a hot grill.
Too salty and the flavors just did not work for me. Meat was tender and almost fall off the bone. Saved the ribs and time by adding BBQ sauce and recooking cold ribs covered the next day.
This recipe knocked it out of the park - no alterations needed.  Served it with some Lyonnaise potatoes and the family devoured them.  A couple of them even liked the sauce on the potatoes!
Made this with 2 teaspoons of five-spice in the dry rub, but would cut that down to 1 teaspoon next time. It is a really strong flavor/smell. I also removed the membrane from the back of the ribs as suggested in a previous post.
These were amazing. First time making ribs and it was a slam dunk. Definitely had to shorten the cooking time (2.7 lbs of ribs were done in 80 minutes) and used 1 tsp salt/lb of meat as directed in the instructions above the recipe, otherwise made everything as written. Wonderful!
Holy smokes these are SO YUMMMY!!! I didn’t have soy sauce (who doesn’t have soy sauce? What the heck?) so I had to use Tamari... they are a tiny bit too salty but SO tender and so yum! Also, Walmart didn’t have fresh ginger so I used a heaping tablespoon of the tube kind. 
100 percent WILL make again!
I did a bit of a mashup with Carla Lalli Music’s Instant Pot Ribs recipe. Used this one for all the ingredients and prep, but pressure-cooked the ribs on high in the IP for 11 minutes (plus 10 minute pressure release time) with mirin as the cooking liquid - and then finished them on the bbq grill. They were awesomely good!
I’m also planning to use half of the five-spice to begin with in the glaze.  Five-Spice is an incredibly potent mix of flavors that can dominate, perhaps ruin a meal if used too heavily.  I plan to taste the sauce with 1/2 tsp and then add more I’d necessary.  I’m less concerned about the rub because much of the rub will most likely leak off the ribs while cooking and also, heat should mitigate the strength of the spice.
I’m trying this tonight but any Texas pitmaster will recommend removing the membrane from the back of the ribs prior to applying the rub.  Otherwise the rub has no affect on the back half of your meat.
Solid recipe -- I made this for a family dinner last night and everyone loved it. They aren't the most adventurous crew when it comes to food, so I didn't tell anyone the twist on the spice rub and sauce until they'd all raved about it and tried guessing what was in it. It's definitely a sweet glaze, but not overly so. The cooking method is also pretty easy; just be super careful with pans coming out of the oven (my dog enjoyed the grease/water combo that sloshed out onto the floor.) That snafu aside, I will definitely use this method in the future with any ribs that I make when I'm not actually grilling them.
