City councillors are mulling the merits of an exit strategy from licensing body rub parlours, but some women who work in these businesses say a harm reduction approach helps them.
Posted: Oct 15, 2019 6:00 AM MT | Last Updated: October 15, 2019
The City of Edmonton currently licenses 32 body rub parlours but councillors have asked for a report on an exit strategy from the practice. (CBC)
Fourteen years ago, Hallie Brooks walked into a city office to apply for a licence to work at a body rub parlour.
"It was so weirdly uncomfortable," said Brooks, which is not her real name. "And even though you had all of the things they required, they would try to deny you the licence. That's just because they simply morally didn't agree with you.
A lot has changed since then, in how the sex trade operates in Edmonton and how it's regulated. For the past four years, the city has taken a harm-reduction approach to body rub parlours — with everything from social services workers who do outreach to women to a designated counter at city offices for those applying for licences.
There is a huge group of us girls who are being assumed to be exploited when that's not true.
There's no judgment, which is important for women who want to trust the system that regulates their work, Brooks said in a recent interview.
But at a committee meeting last month, city councillors supported a motion that would pivot sharply away from that model. The motion asked for a report on "the merits of a five-year exit strategy on licensing body rub centres."
For Brooks, the city's efforts at outreach and regulation have been "amazing," including a course that all practitioners must take in order to acquire a licence.
"I will say I was shocked at how amazing it was. I thought that I was going to be like, 'OK, I just need to get through this.' But it is so informative, and they do so much to keep us girls really safe."
Brooks knows there is a lot of stigma around the work she does — it's why she won't use her real name in this article, and why many women who work in the industry don't come forward at council meetings.
But the end result, she said, is their voices aren't heard.
"So decisions are being made for us and assumptions are being made by people that actually don't have a clear idea," she said. "The intent is goodwill. But there is a huge group of us girls who are being assumed to be exploited, when that's not true."
At times, the discussion at the Sept. 18 community and public services committee meeting was tense. Susan Holtby, an advocate against the sex trade in Edmonton, made one of the most passionate statements to councillors.
"I'm tired of the euphemism of 'adult services,'" she said. "I'm tired of the euphemism of 'erotic services.' I think we need to stop sticking our head in the sand and do something about it.
"We can decrease demand. We can have men ID'd. We can have police go in and charge; we can publish the names like London, Ont., does of men who have been charged with trying to buy sex. I think we'd get a whole lot of societal decrease in acceptance of sex buying."
