People on social media have been remarking about how touching your face is such a hard habit to break. For example, @pattymo and @jakecurrie shared this moment:
And @bkerogers was not willing to face the music:
In fact, it can be difficult to avoid touching your face, even when you are reading a warning about touching your face:
In fact, it can be downright maddening:
So how do you avoid touching your face? Well, one way is to pay attention, and keep track of where your hands are gravitating. You can start observing yourself for a few minutes and note what activities and prompts result in giving yourself a face massage or rub or pick. If you notice a pattern, perhaps you can replace some of these moves with a “faceless” maneuver. For example, instead of rubbing your eyes while thinking maybe you can twerk instead?
Of course, for some, thinking about not rubbing your face can only make things worse:
Another way to avoid sticking your fingers where the sun does shine is to wear something that prevents you from touching your face. For example, donning some boxing gloves can be a deterrent because a face touch could mean knocking yourself out cold. However, the drawback is that you can’t really text or give someone the middle finger with boxing gloves on your hands. Therefore, other types of gloves may work better.
Other possible barrier methods include putting a table edge, an arm of a chair, or some avocado toast between your face and your hands. Keep in mind that some barrier methods may be more or less practical and socially acceptable than others:
Wearing glasses could make you less likely to touch your eyes. Wearing a Deadpool mask could provide even larger broader barrier. Putting your hands in your pockets could help as well.
This raises another possibility: keeping your hands occupied. Your hands can be like really bored kids, getting into things when not kept busy. So a hand-occupying activity like holding onto something, tapping out the lyrics to “All About that Bass” in Morse code repeatedly, squeezing a stress ball, or juggling some chainsaws could do the trick. Make sure you weigh the benefits and risks of each option before trying any of them.
A final option is to address anything that may be goading you into touching your face more often. For example, if your face is itchy, then try to deal with the cause. Maybe your face could use some moisturizer or you are allergic to something. It could be that musk rat strapped to your face, otherwise known as your beard. As another example, if you touch your face because of stress, perhaps some meditation or mindfulness could ease your tension.
Of course, it may be impossible to completely avoid touching your face. The key then is to only touch your face after you’ve thoroughly washed your hands. Thoroughly means using soap and water, lathering up, scrubbing all sides of your fingers and hands including your nails, and not stopping after you’ve recited the alphabet slowly and completely. Remember the alphabet does not just have ten letters. Keep track of where your hands go after you have washed them. If you’ve shaken hands with others or touched anything that someone else touched, wash your hands again.
All of this should apply not just during an infectious disease outbreak but anytime. The end of the COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak shouldn’t mean that you should return to using your fingers to go to third base with your face. There are lots of other respiratory viruses and other disease-causing microbes that are just waiting to enter your eyes, nose, or mouth. Plus why would you want other people’s poop on your face. You just have to face the facts that your face will always be like a gigantic catcher’s mitt for pathogens.
I am a writer, journalist, professor, systems modeler, computational and digital health expert, avocado-eater, and entrepreneur, not always in that order. Currently, I am
I am a writer, journalist, professor, systems modeler, computational and digital health expert, avocado-eater, and entrepreneur, not always in that order. Currently, I am a Professor of Health Policy and Management at the City University of New York (CUNY) School of Public Health, Executive Director of PHICOR (@PHICORteam), Professor By Courtesy at the Johns Hopkins Carey Business School, and founder and CEO of Symsilico. My previous positions include serving as Executive Director of the Global Obesity Prevention Center (GOPC) at Johns Hopkins University, Associate Professor of International Health at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Associate Professor of Medicine and Biomedical Informatics at the University of Pittsburgh, and Senior Manager at Quintiles Transnational, working in biotechnology equity research at Montgomery Securities, and co-founding a biotechnology/bioinformatics company. My work has included developing computational approaches, models, and tools to help health and healthcare decision makers in all continents (except for Antarctica) and has been supported by a wide variety of sponsors such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the NIH, AHRQ, CDC, UNICEF, USAID and the Global Fund. I have authored over 200 scientific publications and three books. Follow me on Twitter (@bruce_y_lee) but don’t ask me if I know martial arts.
