Long days turned to long nights as farmers tried to harvest their 2019 crops during small windows of opportunities. Todd Hubbs, University of Illinois agricultural economist, believes the latest U.S. Department of Agriculture’s average U.S. yield estimate of 167 bushels per acre is high, and he’s going with 165.3 bushels per acre for his outlook balance sheet.
EAST PEORIA, Ill. — A University of Illinois agricultural economist foresees lower yields and a bit stronger demand on his corn balance sheet for the current marketing year.
Todd Hubbs compared his estimates during the Illinois Farm Economics Summit Dec. 18 to those released early this month by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
“A big uncertainty is the size of the 2019 corn crop. Right now, USDA has yield at 167 bushels per acre which is slightly below long-term trend. If we actually did 167, that’s quite impressive considering the year we had. I’m still lower than 165.3. There’s still a lot of corn standing out there in the Dakotas,” Hubbs said.
“From what I’ve heard, corn planted in early June was slightly better than what most people expected. A significant amount of corn was planted after June 10 and I’ve only heard a couple of reports and it was not pretty — low test weight, high moisture, high damage. So, that stuff coming out of the Dakotas may be No. 3 corn and we’re going to have to blend that stuff. The market for good quality corn here in the eastern Corn Belt and across the Corn Belt could be pretty good. So, we’ll see what this yield ends up being.”
Hubbs is optimistic on feed and residual, “and I’m a little bit more optimistic on exports and that’s before any China deal,” he said.
USDA has feed and residual at 5.275 billion bushels, and Hubbs’ estimate came in at 5.3 billon bushels. The USDA projects corn exports at 1.85 billion bushels, while Hubbs pegs it at 1.865 billion bushels.
“There are a lot of cattle in lots. There are a lot of hogs on the ground. We’ve seen broiler production running up week over week, all in expectation of these China markets. On top of that, we had weak ethanol production through the first two months of the marketing year, so you figure there is less distillers’ grain out there to move into the ration,” Hubbs said.
“So, I think we might see a pretty strong corn use for feed in the first quarter. The only problem is we had so much corn still out in the field when they started doing the tabulations that they have to make an estimate of bin-worthy corn. So, we might not actually see this feed and residual number until later in the marketing year. We may see another surprise.”
Corn exports got off to a poor start early in the 2019-2020 marketing year, including some of the lowest September and October exports numbers in a decade. It has since picked up.
“Brazil finally ran out of corn. We’ve seen Mexico come into the market pretty strong. We’ve seen Japan come back into the market pretty strong. I think this will continue and there will be real strength in the corn exports in the second half of the marketing year. So, I think we can see some real strength. I’m even higher than this.
“I’m a little bit more optimistic on exports at 1.865 billion bushels compared to USDA’s 1.85 billion and this is without China. We need to do about 40 million bushels a week for the rest of the marketing year to hit that number. I think we can. I think there will be weeks as we move into 2020 where we do 50 million bushels plus.”
USDA has corn for ethanol at 5.375 billion bushels for the 2019-2020 marketing year. Hubbs noted that ethanol production picked up significantly over the last few weeks and production is now well over one million barrels per day.
“This is a recovery from what we saw with ethanol plants going out of business or going idle in September and October under really poor margins. We’ve seen the margins improve. Even with the increase in production, I don’t think we’re going to see this (5.375 billion) go up unless this China trade deal is what I think it might be,” he said.
“We’re going to put 10% of ethanol in gas, but the growth of gasoline demand is relatively flat. There’s always the dream of E15 and E85.
“We could see the ethanol market growth on the export side. During the last marketing year, we were down to about 1.5 billion gallons in exports. We had seen tremendous growth in Brazil, our main ethanol export market, and they’re now pulling back. They had poor sugar prices. They’ve also started their own corn ethanol industry.
“For 2019-2020, we’re a little behind last year’s ethanol export pace, but here’s where the kicker is. Last year, China basically imported no ethanol. If they went back to even 200 million gallons or let’s say they did 300 million gallons, we could be talking about another 100 million bushels of corn for ethanol.”
With lower production and increased demand, Hubbs’ 2019-2020 corn balance sheet has ending stocks of 1.681 billion bushels and an average price of $3.95 per bushel. USDA projects ending stocks of 1.91 billion bushels and season average price of $3.85 per bushel.
Hubbs also plugged in his projections for the 2020-2021 marketing year with a national average yield of 177.4 bushels per acre, planted acres of 92.1 million, usage of 14.295 billion bushels, year-end stocks of 2.426 billion bushels and a season average price of $3.55 per bushel.
Looking ahead, Hubbs urged farmers to pay attention to the events around Jan. 10.
“We’ve got a corn stocks report, we’ve got the production report on Jan. 10, and supposedly the Chinese are going to be signing some kind of trade deal around that time. There’s a lot of information that’s going to set the tone for 2020 prices,” he said.
“I haven’t heard a peep out of the Chinese, and this deal feels as fragile as a baby deer on an icy road. If we get a big rally coming out of January with a trade deal, if you haven’t already priced corn, I think you’re going to have the opportunity to sell old crop corn at a pretty decent price this year if all these things come into play. Try to put a floor under both corn and soybeans for that 2020 crop.
“I also think you’ll see basis continue to strengthen, and it could really pop if on Jan. 10 USDA lowers corn production.”
