Corn Lower, Soybeans Higher Overnight; Money Managers Raise Bearish Bets on Beans.
1. Corn Lower, Beans Higher as Investors Weigh WASDE Vs. Coronavirus
Corn futures were lower in overnight trading while soybeans were higher as investors weight tomorrow’s World Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates (WASDE) Report against news that the coronavirus is still spreading.
Tomorrow’s WASDE Report likely will show declining stocks of corn, beans, and wheat, according to researcher Allendale.
The  USDA likely will show corn inventories down to 1.832 million bushels, soybean stockpiles down to 320 million bushels, and wheat stocks lowered to 958 million bushels, the firm said.
Still, investors have one eye on the spread of the coronavirus and how the disease will affect demand globally.
As of Monday morning, more than 40,000 people have been infected in China and just over 900 have died, according to Chinese health officials. Almost 100 people died on Sunday, the biggest single-day death toll since the outbreak started.
Corn futures for March delivery dropped 3½¢ to $3.80 a bushel in overnight trading on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Wheat futures for March delivery rose ½¢ to $5.59¼ a bushel, while Kansas City futures added 1¼¢ to $4.73¾ a bushel.
Soybean futures for March delivery, however, added 2¼¢ to $8.84¼ a bushel. Soy meal futures rose $1.20 to $290.50 a short ton, and soy oil dropped 0.16¢ to 30.81¢ a pound.
2. Speculators Raise Bean Net-Short Positions to Two-Month High, Extend Bearish Corn Bets
Money managers raised their net-short positions, or bets on lower prices, to the highest level in almost two months while also extending their bearish bets on corn, according to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Investors were net short by 86,996 soybean futures contracts in the seven days that ended on February 4, up from 55,446 contracts a week earlier and the biggest such positions since the week ended December 10, the CFTC said in a report.
Speculators held a net-short position of 52,045 corn futures contracts as of last week, more than double the previous week’s 25,390 contracts.
Hedge funds and other large money managers have become more bearish on beans and corn in recent weeks as the coronavirus spreads. It’s unclear so far how much impact the disease will have on the global economy.
In wheat, investors raised their net-long position, or bets on higher prices, in soft red winter futures to 45,607 contracts as of February 4, the CFTC said. That’s up from 41,817 contracts a week earlier and the largest such position since August 2018.
Investors held 7,884 net-long positions in hard red winter wheat futures as of last week, down from 8,785 contracts a week earlier and the smallest bullish position in three weeks, government data show.
The weekly Commitment of Traders Report from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows trader positions in futures markets.
The report provides positions held by commercial traders, or those using futures to hedge their physical assets; noncommercial traders, or money managers (also called large speculators); and nonreportables, or small speculators.
A net-long position indicates more traders are betting on higher prices, while a net-short position means more are betting futures will decline.
3. As Much as 10 Inches of Snow Expected in New Mexico, Texas, Oklahoma Panhandles
More snow is expected in parts of the Southern Plains as winter weather warnings and advisories are in effect for the region.
A winter storm warning has been issued for counties along the New Mexico border with the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles, according to the National Weather Service.
Heavy snow is expected in the area with as much as 10 inches expected, the NWS said in a report early this morning. The snow is expected to start later this afternoon and continue through tomorrow.
In several counties in the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles, a winter storm watch has been issued starting this evening and lasting through Wednesday.
Accumulations of up to 8 inches are possible with locally higher amounts, the agency said.
Much of western Oklahoma and the rest of the Texas panhandle are facing hazardous weather, of which the severity depends on how well the storms stay together as they head east, the NWS said.
