Soybeans, Corn Higher Overnight; Money Managers Raise Bearish Bets in Corn.
Soybeans were modestly higher in overnight trading on hopes that global demand will pick up eventually despite the spread of the coronavirus, or COVID-19, and after Argentina last week said it would suspend registration of agricultural exports.
Some investors likely bought on speculation that once the coronavirus threat passes, global demand for natural resources including agricultural products will surge.
Prices have been depressed for several weeks due to worries about the spread of the coronavirus, which has now killed more than 3,000 people worldwide.
The U.S. reported its second death from the virus, both in Washington State. New York, Rhode Island, and Florida all reported their first confirmed cases.
China said today that it now has 80,026 confirmed cases and 2,912 deaths.
Meanwhile, Argentina last week said it would suspend the registration of agricultural exports until further notice, portending an increase in export tariffs, according to Reuters.
Soybean futures for May delivery rose 3¼¢ to $8.96 a bushel overnight on the Chicago Board of Trade. Soy meal added 70¢ to $306.30 a short ton, and soy oil gained 0.18¢ to 28.86¢ a pound.
Corn futures rose 1½¢ to $3.69¾ a bushel overnight.
Wheat futures for May delivery dropped 5¢ to $5.20 a bushel, while Kansas City futures declined 4¼¢ to $4.49 a bushel.
Money managers raised their net-short positions, or bets on lower prices, in corn last week to the highest level in more than two months while cutting their bearish bets in soybeans, according to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Investors held a net-short position of 88,157 corn futures contracts as of February 25, the CFTC said in a report.
That’s the largest bearish position since the seven days that ended on December 17, government data show.
In soybeans, speculators were net short by 75,736 futures contracts last week, down from 95,975 contracts the previous week, the smallest bearish position in soybean futures since January 28, the agency said in its report.
Some may consider the decrease in bearish positions in soybeans a surprise amid ongoing concerns about demand due to the spread of the coronavirus, or COVID-19.
Investors lowered their net-long positions, or bets on higher prices, in soft red winter wheat last week to 43,319 futures contracts, down from 59,262 contracts a week earlier, according to the government.
In hard red winter wheat, money managers cut their net-long positions to 8,170 futures contracts, down from 13,687 contracts a week earlier. That’s the smallest such position in three weeks, the CFTC said.
The weekly Commitment of Traders Report from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows trader positions in futures markets.
The report provides positions held by commercial traders, or those using futures to hedge their physical assets; noncommercial traders, or money managers (also called large speculators); and nonreportables, or small speculators.
A net-long position indicates more traders are betting on higher prices, while a net-short position means more are betting futures will decline.
3. Flooding Continues Along the Mississippi River in Parts of Missouri, Arkansas, Illinois, and Mississippi
Flooding remains a concern as flood warnings are in effect for stretches along the Mississippi River and its tributaries in parts of several states, according to the National Weather Service.
The river near Caruthersville, Missouri, was at 35 feet as of late Sunday evening, above its flood stage of 32 feet, the NWS said in a report. Parks along the riverbank are going under water at that level, and across the border in Tennessee, at least one road and farmland near the river are flooded, the agency said.
Farther south along the Arkansas-Mississippi border, the river at Vicksburg was at 48 feet, 5 feet above flood stage.
The good news is that the river is cresting at that level and will continue to fall until it dips below flood stage around March 12, the NWS said. Low-lying businesses in the town usually take on water when the Mississippi River reaches that level.
Storms are possible today in parts of southern Arkansas, northern Louisiana, and central Mississippi that could produce large hail and damaging wind gusts, the agency said. Tornadoes also are a possibility.
