A Fearless Trader Joe's Product Review: 'Hold the Corn!' Appetizers
Not sure what to serve at your next get-together? Try these adorable mini cones filled with a unique corn mixture!
I love appetizers. There are times I go out to dinner, just order a few appetizers, and skip the entree all together. That's one of the reasons I get excited to shop in Trader Joe's frozen food section. They have amazing appetizers! And recently, I tried their new-ish Hold the Corn! Appetizers.
Trader Joe's explains that they were inspired by their Hold the Cone Mini Ice Cream Cones . The difference is these "netted cones” are "rice flour-based and provide a crispy carrier for the savory filling. That filling is a precisely blended mixture of complementary ingredients— including sweet corn, water chestnuts, green onions, and wood ear mushrooms—seasoned with the likes of lemongrass, garlic, cilantro, and chile powder," according to Trader Joes.com .
I first heard about these little cones on TJ's podcast, and knew I had to give them a try. Their Corn and Chile Tomato-Less Salsa is absolutely delicious, so I was hoping this new corn product wouldn't disappoint!
I waited until we had friends over one night and served them with banana bread, so people could choose something sweet or savory (or both!). Let me tell ya, the Hold the Corn! Appetizers were a hit. Our friends were raving about them, wondering what was in them.
The box of 12 for $3.99 was easily devoured. To be honest, I liked them but didn't love them. I have quite the sweet tooth, and these were a little too savory for me. Despite containing sweet corn, I think some of the other ingredients tend to overpower the sweetness. I will say I didn't serve any dip with them, and I think a salsa or sauce might have done the trick for me personally.
Their website does say they're only available during the holiday season, but I know they sometimes keep popular limited-supply items around for a while. If you're interested in trying them, definitely ask your local TJ crew member the next time you're in!
Have you given these corn-filled cones a try? If you have, what did you think? Let us know in the comments!
