During a summer like no other, it turns out nothing is more essential than the backyard grill. So we’ve talked with chefs about the grilling memories that shaped their childhoods and influenced their futures, and asked them to share some of their favorite recipes. We’ve tracked down the latest equipment from local manufacturers. And we’re filling you in on what to grill, how to cook it, and where to buy it. Now all you need is a yard and an ice-cold beer to crack open. Pick up the tongs and court the flame. This could be your most memorable grilling season yet.
Four Dallas chefs share how their culinary paths were lit early on by fire.
Sirisavath grew up in Amarillo and San Antonio, the youngest son of Lao refugee parents and the first born in America. Grilling memories are not just of smoky-sweet Texas barbecue, but a whole pantheon of Laotian flavors.
“Every culture has experience with open-fire charcoal grills. We grill pretty much everything. That was part of our weekends, being a Texan and Lao immigrant. Every weekend or sometimes every other day, we’d be grilling in the backyard—my dad, my uncles, my dad’s friends. They were just around in the backyard, drinking beer, smoking, and grilling.
“My dad and his friends and my uncles would not discard any meat. They would just marinate anything they had and throw it on the grill. Brisket for us was a big slab, and it was cheap. And people are like, ‘What? You don’t slow cook brisket?’ No, we just cut brisket into smaller pieces and grill it and dip it with our jeow dipping sauce. Same with tripe, intestines, duck head, duck feet. That was pretty much my memory of grilling at home: utilizing cheap pieces of meats, utilizing all parts of the animal.
“We had ducks in the backyard and chickens, so when they slaughtered a duck, we had duck heads and duck necks and duck wings and feet. Those things get marinated and grilled with the rest of the proteins. My mom would make [Lao] sausage. And, of course, papaya salad was part of our grilling.
“Part of the marinade would be beer. I remember my uncles drinking Budweiser or Heineken. It adds that fermentation taste and creates a bitterness, too. But sometimes, if we had a fresh slaughtered cow, then they’d add the bile to the marinade or into the sauce we use for dipping. When you’re talking about nothing goes to waste: this is literally nothing goes to waste. It really falls into our culture and flavor profile of sweet, bitter, sour, umami. Every dish we make and everything we do follows that path.
“My parents had a big backyard. That aroma of coal and fire —that’s part of what I love about Southeast Asia. Everyone’s using charcoal, and that smoky smell and smelling the protein or whatever is grilling. When you grill on gas, it’s not the same. It doesn’t create that charredness and that smokiness. It really is another level of flavor.
“Texas barbecue is sweet and smoky, so I blend those flavors. I make mine a little sweeter, a little bit saltier with fish sauce, then finish out with that little bitterness and that smoke flavor from the grill.
“Sometimes we made khao jee, grilled sticky rice: a patty of rice, drizzle a little egg and salt, and then put it on the grill. That would be our sticky rice. And for dessert, my mom would do [bananas] on the grill. And oh, my god, grilling them, opening up that sweetness and then that charredness from the edges.
“I was a little kid running around, but the pestle and mortar was my thing. I would love to pound stuff for my mom. And then, being a little older, my uncle or dad would let me do the grilling every once in a while.
“The main thing for me is coming together. Being one with nature. Food is memory. That’s always been my story. It brings people together. And with barbecuing and grilling, especially outside, it just ties everything else in. We’re Buddhist, so killing an animal, you have to respect that animal. My mom always was the biggest believer in that. Appreciate their life so we can eat.”
Borges grew up between Rio de Janeiro and a small town in the Brazilian countryside in the neighboring state of Espírito Santo. His mother’s side of the family hails from the state of Bahia, which is home to one of the largest concentrations of African diasporas. His grandmother made Bahian fare, and his grandfather the coconut candies that everyone called “very Bahia.” But for Borges, memories swirl around churrasco, a feast that lasts all day and is crowned by the seasoned and scored picanha (sirloin cap with its fat), the most revered churrasco cut.
“Growing up, Brazilian barbecue, churrasco and churrascurias, is a big part of the culture. You always grew up on the weekends throwing a churrasco and inviting people over, birthday parties or whatever. A lot the stuff you see in those restaurants is stuff we grew up eating. The big skewers, the big pieces of meat. My memories of grilling are the big cuts of meat being rubbed with rock salt. And sometimes the rock salt is seasoned with peppercorns or rosemary or thyme. And because the rock salt pebbles are so big, when you grill, you get the crunchy salt crystals. You take a slice and you have the nice ratio of meat and fat and that crunch of salt and the grill.
“You start that in the morning. You wake up, you start putting the meat on the rack on the skewers. You make your fire. Traditionally, people use charcoal in Brazil. Some have really nice grills that might have a motor, like your own rotisserie. Or just a stack of bricks and a pit. From the poor to the rich, everybody does it; it’s a cultural thing.
“The kids would get involved in helping put the meats onto the skewers. And you go almost the whole day, grilling the meats and sausages, like linguiça, a porky style sausage. Having all the chicken, beef, rice and beans, or maybe feijão tropeiro, where you cook the beans with linguiça and chicharrones and collard greens, and it’s thick because you add yucca flour. You eat that with rice and churrasco and vinaigrette and chimichurri. You have garlic bread: you make super intense garlic butter and you make slivers in bread and pack that with garlic butter and you put that on the grill and let that toast and get all caramelized.
“There’s not a lot of dessert. Flan is a big one. Some tapioca cakes. And one egg and coconut custard called quindim. But it’s usually stuff that is there and you can eat it if you want to. My grandmother made a lot of compotes. The favorites were the cashew, made with the untreated cashew fruit, and the guava and green papaya one. The fruit is poached and cooked in sugary syrup with spices. That with a slice of fresh cheese could be dessert.
“It’s a celebration. Growing up, we didn’t even go much to the churrascerias, because this is all the stuff we’re gonna do at home. It was getting people together and taking the whole day.
“And in the perfect-case scenario you have a pool, and it ever ends. There’s usually ice-cold Brazilian beer. Or caipirinhas people make with all sorts of fruits: strawberry, peach, jabuticaba, a Brazilian fruit. People just continue to party, continue to drink and nibble and carry on. I miss that. I miss what it entailed.”
For Quiñones-Pittman, recollections of the holy trinity of grilled meat, fresh tortillas, and salsas in the backyard of her parents’ Knox-Henderson house are like a Proustian madeleine. This was her childhood.
“We grilled the flanken short ribs, called tablita, which translates in English to “little table,” but it’s just a short rib that’s sliced lengthwise so you get, like, three bones. We’d get them at the meat market. It was usually Jerry’s Supermarket, and then it turned into Carnival, and now it’s Fiesta. But more recently, we’ve been going to La Michoacana.
“They’re marinated in this secret marinade that they use at every meat market, and it tenderizes them. They’re just delicious with tortillas and salsa, because they’re fatty, they’re charred, and a little salty. It literally is my childhood.
“My dad would usually grill, and it was always charcoal, so we knew it was gonna take a while. While waiting, my mom would make the guacamole and the pico de gallo. She never made fresh tortillas, but we always got the ones that were in the ice chest right by the register. And they were always handmade and delicious.
“Everything was well done. But these are so fatty and juicy, that you don’t care if they’re well done. The salsa was always made on the grill or the comal. It was salsa molcajete—you toast your tomato and jalapeño and smash it in the mortar and pestle—and always guacamole and a little splash of lime. That was it: you just slap it in a tortilla.
“We didn’t have a radio, but my dad had a ’54 Chevy in the garage, and he would open the door, crank the engine. We were always charged with flipping over the tape or putting in another 8-track, old-school ’50s and ’60s Mexican bands. Just soothing, romantic music that reminded them of when they were dating. The smell of diesel and the smell of charcoal are something that reminds me of when I was little.
“My mom loved Lipton iced tea. She would always make a pitcher of iced tea. Or a soda that my dad would drink, grape soda called Sangria, that we’d have in a fridge in our garage. He would sneak them in, because we weren’t allowed to have soda.
“The person who was helping my dad would always get the first bite. We did skirt steak fajitas from time to time. But tablitas are the thing I grew to appreciate as I got older. I started cooking short ribs on my menu. And I saw the relationship. I could see why my parents would fight about the fatty ones and want to gnaw on the bone.”
Tesar grew with a grandmother who’d owned a candy store on Broadway when it was packed dirt, and a father who came from a background of carpenters and tinkered with building boats. They owned a house on Long Island that his mother ran like an inn, cooking and eating outside.
“My dad bought a small house in East Quogue, right off the beach. We spent every weekend out there. That was my mother’s oasis. Every weekend we’d have guests. You’d wake up in the morning and there would be eight, maybe 10 people around the breakfast table. She made eggs and bacon and biscuits.
“My dad would literally come from the city, take his suit off, put on overalls and his comfortable shoes, and go down to the inlet with a bottle of Scotch and a box of cigars. He and his pals would fillet fish and talk about life and play cards, and then he’d come back with clams and oysters, flounder and fluke and lobsters, and my mother would just throw it all out on the table. Friday nights would be lobster night. We’d have corn right out of the garden, local tomatoes, and lobster right out of the straight. My mother would make pie. There was always pie for dessert.
“Everything else was vegetables from the garden or local farm stand. We didn’t go to the supermarket. We only went to the supermarket to get pastries for the house guests for breakfast, like jelly doughnuts and apple turnovers. All summer long, we would go to the beach during the day and go fishing with my dad, or stay on the beach with my mom and then we would eat whatever we had caught. And we lived that way four or five months out of the year.
“We cooked over open fire. My father would dig for clams every day right outside. You’d just put on waders and go out and bring back clams. We’d put clams on the grill, just to steam them open, and drink the hot clam broth right out of the clam shell.
