Southeast Michigan relies on a vast system of small farms and gardens to supply local restaurants, farmers markets, grocery stores, and florists. However, with the onset of the novel coronavirus pandemic, many of these farmers are having to rethink how they sell to customers or are reinvesting in growing food to prevent hunger in the community.
Many farmers and gardeners are starting up Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) programs this spring for customers who want regular access to fresh produce without having to visit their local grocery store. Buying into one of these programs helps provide financial investment into these farms to carry them through the year. Others are offering prepared meals or selling produce and plant starts online for pickup at farm stands.
Whether your looking to purchase some grass-fed beef, eggs, or a farm box, here are some ways to buy produce and plant starts safely while supporting local agriculture. Have another location to add to this guide? Please reach out at detroit@eater.com .
Fisheye Farms: This Detroit farm will soon be taking orders for a 20-week-long CSA program featuring full-shares ($700) and half-shares ($400) starting in June and running through October. Weekly boxes will contain a mix of veggies and fresh herbs. Members will also receive recipes compiled by the farm and local chefs.
Beaverland Farms: This Brightmoor-area farm is offering small and large-sized farm boxes as well as six-week farm shares for $250 each. The shares can be purchased online and picked up weekly between noon and 2 p.m. on Saturday.
Rising Pheasant Farms: This small farm in Detroit is offering a market-based CSA , meaning members buy credit in the farm and then use the credit to purchase produce at Rising Pheasant’s market stands year-round. Members sign up by filling out a form and paying into the CSA at levels ranging from $100 to $1000, and then receive weekly updates on what’s available at the stand.
Nurturing Our Seeds: This urban farm in Detroit is selling surplus produce in food baskets online for $25 each. Nurturing also offers medicinal herbs for sale and accepts donations towards the community.
Deeply Rooted Produce: Order individual grocery boxes, an “elders special,” or buy into the CSA through Deeply Rooted Produce’s online platform . The service makes deliveries throughout Detroit and metro Detroit.
City Commons: There’s currently a waitlist for produce CSA shares with City Commons, but the farm still has late-season storage shares and flower shares available.
Eastern Market: Food boxes are available for pre-order and pickup on Saturdays and for no-contact, drive-thru pickup on Tuesdays. Online orders open weekly and sell out quickly. The market is also open for regular business on Saturdays with additional social distancing and disinfecting precautions in place. Eastern Market accepts EBT/Bridge Cards and Double Up Food Bucks (DUFB).
Marrow: This local butcher shop is supporting small farms by selling locally grown produce boxes through its online shop for curbside pickup.
Dot’s Market: This online farm stand delivers weekly produce boxes for $25 each to customers as well as Detroiters in need. Order individual boxes or sign up for a subscription online .
Brines Farm: This Washtenaw County farm is offering CSA memberships with weekly distributions from May through October as well as prepaid accounts.
Lake Divide Farm: With several distribution spots around southeast Michigan, Lake Divide Farm is providing produce for pre-order as well as offering prepaid CSA accounts that customers can use as credit throughout the season to purchase the veggies they want.
Frog Holler Farm: Located in Jackson County, Frog Holler Farm offers CSA distribution in Ann Arbor. Customers can purchase CSA box subscriptions, buy market credit, or sign up for a meal kit CSA.
People’s Food Coop: This cooperative market in Ypsilanti sources produce from local farms and growers and offers high-risk shopping hours and curbside pickup.
Argus Farm Stop: This all-local grocery store supports community agriculture and offers a CSA-style weekly produce subscription box . The subscription is purchased in six-week increments for $180 for pickup.
The Farm at St. Joe’s: This farm share program in Ann Arbor is a collaboration between 10 area farms. People can purchase whole or half-shares of fruits and vegetables for curbside pickup. The spring season is currently full, but there are still openings for summer and fall farm shares. They cost $165 to $294.
Radical Roots Community Farm: Purchase full, half, and micro shares for pickup at the farm or in Ypsilanti. The prices range from $180 to $650 per share.
Maple Creek Farm: This farm based in Yale offers farm boxes for pickup Tuesday through Saturday in segments of four weeks for $120. I do what I call Farm box. I don’t do drops any longer. The 11/9 bushels are available at the farm only (No drop offs available).
Blake’s Farm: Based out of Armada, Blake’s is offering a 13-week-long farm share running May 5 through July 28 and August 4 through October 27. A full share is $507 and a half share is $312 for the season. Expect weekly boxes of fresh fruit and vegetables with other treats included occasionally such as apple cider, donuts, and preserves. Shares must be picked up weekly between 1 p.m. and 7 p.m. on Tuesday at Blake’s Orchard and Cider Mill located at 17985 Armada Center Road. Find details on subscriptions online .
Michigan Fields: This delivery service provides consumers with access to produce and other groceries from local farms through a recently launched online ordering platform . It’s partners include Eastern Market, Michigan Farm to Freezer, Guernsey Dairy, and more.
Stella Matutina Farm: This biodynamic farm offers vegetable CSAs for June through October  priced between $380 and $540 depending on the size of the weekly box. Customers can pick up, or the farm offers pickup to Chelsea, Ann Arbor, Detroit, Royal Oak, and Allen Park at specific locations. Find applications and more information online .
Eastern Market remains open for Saturday Market and also offers boxes for curbside pickup.
Fisheye Farms: Fisheye Farms now accepts pre-orders for farm stand boxes and Ochre Bakery bread at its online shop for pick-up at 2234 Buchanan St. between noon and 3 p.m. on Fridays. Walk-ins are also welcome.
Brother Nature: Brother Nature Produce is hosting a weekly farm stand from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. at Temple and Rosa Parks in North Corktown. Customers can purchase salad mix, microgreens, and spinach. The farm accepts cash, Square, and cashapp ($gweg27). Call  313-914-0031 and the farm will deliver orders to your car.
Dulce Diamante Gardens: This garden at 6554 Cadet St. in Southwest Detroit hosts a weekly farm stand from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. every Friday.
Eastern Market: Detroit’s year-round food hub is remaining open for business despite the COVID-19 crisis with extra precautions in place. Saturday Market continues to be hosted from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. at the sheds with local farms selling produce, herbs, meat, dairy, and other products. Food boxes are available for pre-order and pickup on Saturdays and for no-contact, drive-thru pickup on Tuesdays. Online orders open weekly and sell out quickly. Patrons can also support Eastern Market’s COVID-19 operations by donating online . The market will be hosting online sales for Flower Day, starting Sunday, May 24. Retailers are also open within Gratiot Central Market throughout the week.
Royal Oak Farmers Market: Customers can visit the Royal Oak Farmers Market between 7 a.m. and 1 p.m. Saturdays to shop for local food.
White Lotus Farm: Find microgreens, salad mix, breads, pastries, fresh-milled flour, cheese, butter, and eggs in White Lotus’s online store for pickup at the farm stand. The shop also features carryout meals.
Growing Hope: This Ypsilanti-area program offers items for participating local farms who might normally appear at area farmers markets. Customers can place orders online for pickup at several locations around the area. This program also accepts EBT and SNAP benefits.
Washtenaw Organic Collaborative: Three local farms have partnered to offer online ordering for organic produce, eggs, flowers, and plants. There are two pickup farm stand locations available and delivery for a fee.
Argus Farm Stop: This Ann Arbor market mini-chain sells local produce, dairy, meat, eggs, seafood, and baked goods from farms and local producers across the region. Customers can place orders online for pickup , shop in-person, or sign up for a weekly produce subscription box .
Green Things Farm Collective: This group of Ann Arbor-area farms is offering a host of produce for preorder and pickup on Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Place orders online for meat, vegetables, cheese, grains, flowers, and more.
Whitney’s Farmstead: This Washtenaw County farm offers farmstand pickup for online orders of pasture-raised pork, eggs, maple syrup, lamb, beef, stewing chickens, and more. Delivery is available within a 10-mile radius of the farm.
Seeley Farm: Due to the novel coronavirus pandemic and the closure of the Ann Arbor Farmers Market, Seeley Farms is now selling from a farmstand on the property. Check social media for the latest updates on what’s available.
Oakland County Farmers Market: This Waterford Township farmers market remains open with social distancing and disinfecting precautions at 2350 Pontiac Lake Rd. from 7 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. on Saturdays through April and from 7 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday May through December.
Marrow: This local butcher shop is supporting small farms by selling produce CSAs, local dairy products, grains, cheese, and meat. Order online for pickup or for delivery through Mercato .
Farm Field Table: This farm and butcher shop now offers service to multiple locations in metro Detroit as well as Ann Arbor. Purchase a variety of meat and poultry online for local delivery or curbside pickup.
Folk: This restaurant-turned-market’s online shop features local meat, yogurt, eggs, and produce regularly for curbside pickup.
Mongers Provisions: Purchase made-in-Michigan cheese and other provisions through Mongers’ online shop for curbside pickup or delivery.
Farm to Market Ferndale: This pop-up shop inside Treat Dreams in Ferndale features local meat from Polish Heritage Farm and Old World Farms as well as items like local mushrooms.
Achatz Pies: This pie company is now carrying local milk, cream, and beef from Michigan Amish Farms. Place orders online .
Whitney’s Farmstead: This Washtenaw County farm offers farmstand pickup for online orders of pasture-raised pork, eggs, maple syrup, lamb, beef, stewing chickens, and more. Delivery is available within a 10-mile radius of the farm.
Washtenaw Organic Collaborative: Three local farms have partnered to offer online ordering for beef and eggs as well as other products. There are two pickup farm stand locations available and delivery for a fee.
White Lotus Farms: Customers can purchase cheeses, eggs, and butter online from White Lotus Farm for pick up at the farmstand.
Green Things Farm Collective: This group of Ann Arbor-area farms is items like ground beef, mini beef shares, eggs, and goat cheese for preorder and pickup on Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Place orders online .
Seeley Farm: Due to the novel coronavirus pandemic and the closure of the Ann Arbor Farmers Market, Seeley Farms is now selling heritage breed, pasture-raised chicken from a farmstand on the property.
Stella Matutina Farm: In addition to a vegetable CSA, this farm offers herd shares including goat milk and sells eggs. Find more information at the website .
Sheridan Acres: This Michigan farm specializes in heirloom dry beans. Think: calypso beans, cannellini, cranberry beans, and pinto. They’re available for purchase online .
Zingerman’s: Order Michigan whole wheat flour, wheat porridge, and other grains from further afield at this online shop .
White Lotus Farm: This Ann Arbor-area farm offers fresh milled all-purpose and whole wheat flour for sale online . Pick up your order at the farm stand.
Macon Creek Malt House: Purchase individual packages and variety packs of beans, grains, and corn online from Macon Creek Malt House. The company sources its grains from local farms.
Green Things Farm Collective: Pick up cornmeal from Macon Creek Malt House in Saline from this online shop for pickup at several farm stands throughout the Ann Arbor area.
Whitney Farmstead: In addition to meat and dairy, Whitney Farmstead is carrying cornmeal from Macon Creek Malt House.
SheWolf Mercato: This Italian restaurant in Detroit is offering curbside pickup for a variety of items including locally grown and milled all-purpose flour.
Michigan Farm To Freezer: This freezer foods purveyor out of Eastern Market is taking online orders for curbside pickup of its frozen local veggies and fruits.
Flowers in a garden at Detroit Abloom in Jefferson Chalmers.
Keep Growing Detroit: This Detroit-based organization is invested in developing pathways to food sovereignty. Residents of Detroit, Hamtramck, and Highland Park can purchase an affordable membership to the garden resource program and obtain plant starts and seeds throughout the growing season. The program also provides helpful resources on how to maintain a garden. Keep Growing Detroit also provides produce to local food pantries .
Neighbors Building Brightmoor: Purchase plant starts online from Youth Grow Brightmoor. Choose from options like heirloom romanesco, purple Russian tomatoes, and velvet red cherry tomatoes.
Beaverland Farms: This Brightmoor-area farm is selling native tree seedlings and garden transplants through its online shop for pickup at the farm in May.
Folk: Is also selling packs of Beverland Farms herb and vegetable transplants through its online store for curbside pickup. Flower bouquets are also available.
Coriander Kitchen and Farm: Customers can order weekly meals delivered from Coriander Kitchen & Farm. This spot also occasionally sells transplants.
Detroit Abloom: Purchase bouquet CSAs as well as native plant starts, vegetables, and dahlias from Detroit Abloom’s online shop .
Seeley Farm: Due to the novel coronavirus pandemic and the closure of the Ann Arbor Farmers Market, Seeley Farms is now selling flower starts and trees online for pickup at a farmstand on the property.
Green Things Farm Collective: Order Michigan native plants, vegetable starts, and herbs from this online shop for pickup at the farm stand.
Frog Holler Farm: This Washtenaw County farm will be offering online ordering soon for plant starts. Check back soon for more information on what’s available.
Washtenaw Organic Collaborative: Bare root apple, pear, peach, hazelnut, and sugar maples are among the many trees and garden starts available for online ordering through this farm partnership.
Ann Arbor Seed Co.: Purchase seed packs online for a variety of vegetables and flowers to sew in Michigan gardens this year.
Regina Tillman, a resident and urban farmer in Brightmoor, has a farmstead available for rent. She’s also available to connect volunteers with local farms for safe and socially distant farm projects. Call 313-408-1899 for more information.
Detroit Abloom is accepting volunteers to work at a safe social distance. Sign up online to help.
Eater is tracking the impact of the novel coronavirus on the local food industry. Have a story to share? Reach out at detroit@eater.com .
