After 22 years at live events, Cactus Corn turns to online store for survival during pandemic
It’s easy for Chris Levandowski to remember when Cactus Corn, the family business he helms with his parents, Mike and Sharon, started. It shares the same year of the Arizona Diamondbacks’ inaugural season — 1998.
Longtime faithful game attendees are familiar with Cactus Corn and the Levandowskis, from the first years when they were among the original throng of vendors outside what is now Chase Field.
In 2008, the ballpark invited them to get out of the heat and closer to the cooler spotlight with a spot on the main concourse. Another popcorn vendor’s contract ran out and representatives reached out to the Levandowskis, who had been lobbying their case for a while. It finally worked.
Chris believes his family business may be the only vendor to make that transition.
“It was persistence and a little bit of being in the right place at the right time,” he said.
They built up a following over the years of regulars who made buying a bag of kettle corn and a few bottles of water part of their pre-game routines. These people continued to seek them out inside the ballpark.
Sharon had a lot to do with that.
“My mom, she’s very friendly. She has regular customers who became friends of the family. They hang out in life outside of the games. She’s gone to weddings … . It’s kind of cool,” Chris said.
The momentum continued to build beyond baseball. They earned contracts for major sporting, entertainment and recreational events that drew thousands pleased by their flavors that range from traditional kettle corn to lesser common finds like white cheddar jalapeno.
By the end of 2019, Cactus Corn had its best year ever with revenue extending into seven figures, Chris said. With planned ventures and events, at the start of this year they were projecting 40% growth over last year. This included creating a specialty southwest flavor lineup geared toward anticipated partnerships with local hotels and gift shops.
“But that didn’t really happen,” he said.
What did happen was the onset of COVID-19. Chris clearly remembers March 12 as the day everything changed for his business.  The night before, news broke of the NBA cancelling games that evening. The next day, he was at Tempe Diablo Stadium working an Angels spring training game. He saw an unusual amount of media in attendance. The following day, events started getting cancelled quickly.
“It was almost surreal. We were going into the final stretch of spring training and we were in Phoenix festival season. The calendar was completely booked and all of a sudden, it wasn’t,” he said.
That following weekend, only one of 11 booked events happened. The following Monday, Chris got calls from all the spring training stadiums to pick up his equipment. The last time his family experienced something similar was when the baseball season was suspended following the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001. That break lasted six days.
But this one looked to be longer. Cactus Corn had found success at live events with live audiences. It was suddenly taken away and potentially taking their business’ life with it.
After a couple of weeks of shock and disbelief, the family had processed everything and accepted that they were not going to get back to work before the summer.
With the help of local businesses, Levandowski was able find a way to reach customers, some of whom had emailed his family saying they missed their kettle corn. He connected with fellow local companies — Catapult Strategic Design in Tempe and IVIO Agency in Phoenix, which is owned by his former college roommate — for assistance.
And for the first time in its 22 year history, Cactus Corn went the e-commerce route when it launched a virtual storefront selling its eight different varieties of kettle corn and reaching customers beyond Arizona. It allowed customization for events with graduation specials that featured popcorn in the graduate’s school colors, and Father’s Day gift packs. Personalized birthday boxes and a popcorn-of-the-month club are other projects in the works.
The next move is to create consumer packaging that will get Cactus Corn into grocery stores.
In 2018, more than 1.1 billion pounds of popcorn were sold, according to the Popcorn Board, a non-profit organization funded by U.S. popcorn processors. Pre-COVID, approximately 70% of that was eaten in the home. The e-commerce aspect looks to capitalize on what should be a growing pattern.
“We’re trying to do all that we can to rejuvenate this business and keep it going,” he said.
M Culinary Concepts managing partner Doug Janison’s relationship with the Levandowskis dates back 20 years after meeting Mike and Sharon at an LPGA event where Cactus Corn was a subcontractor. Since then, Janison has partnered with them as a kettle corn subcontractor for his Phoenix company that is the largest privately held catering & hospitality service provider in the Southwest.
Janison has worked closely with Chris since 2014, when M Culinary took over food and beverages operations at WestWorld of Scottsdale and he hired Cactus Corn to provide their services.
The quality of the product, honesty and professionalism that includes trying things out of their comfort zone are among the reasons Janison’s relationship with both generations of owners continues. He talked about Chris’ willingness to go up in the stands to sell kettle corn at a circus event when other vendors weren’t as open to it.
“That’s the entrepreneurial spirit. You push your own comfort zone. Everything he said he was going to do he has done, and more,” Janison said.
Janison’s expectations are high and said Chris has always tried to exceed those at every event they’ve partnered on.
“It’s always good to have someone come up with an idea and not be afraid to execute it,” Janison said. “I’m rooting for Chris. He’s in a challenging spot but cream rises to the top. I hope people give him a chance.”
Mike, then a grocery store produce manager, and Sharon, then a x-ray technician, wanted to leave their 9-to-5 jobs. A visit to a Prescott swap meet during a weekend camping trip was the tipping point.
“They saw this kettle corn (vendor), came home … bought a machine and started a popcorn company,” Chris recalled.
They started with the original kettle corn using the recipe that came with the machine. Mike came up with the recipes for the caramel corn and cheddar. Sharon left her job immediately. Mike continued working his day job but left it four years later when the company started to turn a profit. At 14, Chris suddenly found himself working for his new family business on the weekends.
“The work ethic was instilled. It takes a lot of work to get noticed,” he said.
