I think we all know that lemon is officially that girl. What other flavor is found in quite as many products during the summer, from breakfast breads , to Cup Cakes to doughnuts ? It's everywhere, as it should be. But one of the most unexpected (yet delightful!) places lemon has popped up is drizzled on top of this new kettle corn from Aldi.
Instagrammer @aldi.guru posted a photo of this Clancy's Lemon Drizzled Kettle Corn. Yes, we have sweet and salty kettle corn, already a beloved summer treat, but it's topped with a bright pop of lemon drizzle. If the bright bag is any indication, then this is about to be one fun snack.
{{ this.render( "@app/views/shared/embed-accessibility-text.twig", { embedName: "Instagram", })|raw}}
A post shared by All knowing Aldi expert (@aldi.guru) on Jun 28, 2020 at 6:03pm PDT
Even better, it turns out the product is part of Aldi's partnership with the Alex’s Lemonade Stand Foundation (ALSF). Aldi will be donating a portion of the proceeds to ALSF from the purchases of this popcorn—and other adorable lemon-themed products like lemon cake bites—up to a total of $1 million.
In their post, @aldi.guru gave the popcorn rave reviews: "If you like lemon, this is where it’s at! All I can do is urge you to buy a bag. But just 1 bag so there is more for me next week." People in the comments were frankly desperate to get themselves a bag after that ringing endorsement.
You can add this popcorn to your snack shelf during the month of July, as it's an Aldi Find for the month, but after that, it might not be sticking around, so get on it! A bag will run you $1.99, which is a small price to pay for this little bit of sunshine.
Imagine the limoncello cheese with a glass of limoncello!!!!!!!!
Life didn't just give us lemons in 2020, it pelted us with them. And, coincidentally, the sour-fruit print has been trending across more than a few of this season's top-carted items — from lemon-printed inflatable pools to face masks and more.    Whether Refinery29 readers decided to make a big ol' batch of figurative lemonade by shopping patterned versions of the stuff OR the sunny hue simply reminds them of summer, lemons are having a moment. So, we rounded up the most wanted of these buys along with some other fresh finds to help sweeten the sour moments. A preview of what's ahead: lemon-infused beauty products, lemony snacks, lemon fashion, lemon-scented bug repellents, actual lemons, etc.     At Refinery29, we’re here to help you navigate this overwhelming world of stuff. All of our market picks are independently selected and curated by the editorial team. All product details reflect the price and availability at the time of publication. If you buy something we link to on our site, Refinery29 may earn commission.Like what you see? How about some more R29 goodness, right here?Society6's New Face Masks Support Black ArtThe Best Inflatable Pools For Your Backyard SummerUpgrade Your Bedroom Decor With This Design Hack
Can't deal with juicing a ton of lemons? Throw a whole one in the blender and you'll see that laziness has its own rewards.
You can pick up a mini cactus for as little as $2.50!
Get ready to fully embrace summertime vibes with a new collection from Kate Spade New York! The latest drop is filled with lemon wedges, cherries, popsicles, pineapples, wicker baskets, and even some elephants (yes, really). We're especially obsessed with the platform slides inspired by pool floats. Whether you're looking for a standout bag or an extraspecial dress, there are plenty of pretty arrivals that will get you into the summer spirit. Ahead, we've curated a shopping guide of the cutest new designs you should have on your radar. We suggest snatching them up fast, because fun pieces like this never stay in stock for long. Let's shop!  Related:    I Tried Nordstrom Trunk Club, and It Made Me Feel Excited to Shop From Home Again
All mimosas are bottomless in my house.
It’s summertime and the snacking is easy, thanks to a host of new treats coming to Aldi this July. From cherry Kolsch to coconut ice cream and frozen avocados (really!), here are 17 new items to add to your...
This is your new beach BFF.
A woman after my own heart!!!!
