Primark, the low cost fashion chain owned by U.K. listed conglomerate Associated British Foods (ABF), is pushing ahead with expansion in the U.S. sending shares up 5.45% on Thursday to £20.71 ($25.93).
In a trading update ABF said full-year profit at Primark would be around two thirds down from a year earlier at between £300-£350 million ($375-$437 million) due to store closures.
The back story: Primark and other fast fashion firms have ridden high these past few years importing cheap clothes from abroad.
But lockdown and store closures have stopped it in its tracks.
Rivals have relied on a pivot to online sales but Primark has struggled as it doesn’t sell clothes online. It said it lost £650 million ($814 million) worth of sales every month stores were closed.
But ABF has leaned on its other divisions which include sugar and ingredients, areas that have performed well through lockdowns because of a baking boom.
It said its North American food seller ACH, which makes Argo cornstarch and Mazola corn oil saw very strong sales growth thanks to a surge in demand for baking ingredients and corn oil.
What’s new: ABF said it would go ahead with its plan to open new Primark stores, including two in the U.S. taking its total to 11.
“Despite clear challenges, management come across as optimistic about the retail arm’s current trading strength which explains why Associated British Foods’ shares have shot up,” Russ Mould, investment director at broker AJ Bell , said.
ABF’s strong performance outside of Primark also helped the shares rise, he said.
Its stores started reopening on May 4 and in the seven weeks to June 20 like-for-like sales were 12% lower than a year earlier at £322 million. But in the week ending June 20 it had reopened 90% of its retail space and sales were £133 million, higher than the same week in 2019.
Looking ahead: A relatively strong reopening for Primark was unsurprising as its customers have been unable to buy online.
But retail analyst Pippa Stephens of data company GlobalData said the company needed to move some of its business online.
“Primark should rethink its bricks-and-mortar only strategy for the future, in order to mitigate the impact of reduced instore sales densities and capitalise on spend shifting online,” she said.
With clothing and footwear spending forecast to take a hit and unemployment set to rise, Stephens said Primark would perform well after lockdowns because of its-low cost offering.
As it continues to grow its empire and expand in the U.S., sales could continue to grow, assuming cities and states do not lock down again and customers return to stores.
If the growing trend towards online, which accelerated during lockdown,  is maintained, and city centres remain devoid of commuters and tourists, this poses a big threat to Primark in the coming months.
But continued strong performance in the rest of ABF’s portfolio, including an expected increase in profits from its sugar arm, could help ABF shares back to pre-coronavirus levels.
Associated British Foods To Expand Fashion Chain Primark In The U.S. Sending The Shares Up.
Primark, the low cost fashion chain owned by U.
