At nearly $3 a bushel, is Maize finding its feet? Grain Market Daily
Rainfall across the UK, Europe and Black Sea regions have taken the pressure off wheat markets. Unless dry conditions return, wheat looks likely to drift further as production outlooks improve and there remains a large spread to maize. New crop UK feed wheat futures having fallen £8/t from Thursday 23 to Thursday 30 April.
A degree of upward movement has been recorded in Brent crude oil, from closing at $21.33/bbl on Thursday 23 to trade back above $25/bbl by yesterday, closing at $25.27/bbl. This allowed Paris rapeseed futures some more headroom with May-20 Paris rapeseed futures closing at the highest level since February at €379.50/t. New-crop prices have struggled to make ground as global production outlooks improved.
At nearly $3 a bushel, is Maize finding its feet?
With nearby US maize prices touching a significant resistance point of $3/bushel, are there sufficient additional factors to drag US maize lower?
Further reductions in US daily ethanol production has been recorded, falling from over 1,000k barrels a day in March, to just 537k by the week of 24 April. As production has fallen by over 40%, maize demand has fallen at the same rate, leading to Chicago maize futures falling over 17% since the start of March.
However, there are signs that US ethanol demand is now outweighing supply, with a drawdown in weekly ethanol stocks recorded. Falling from 27,689k barrels to 26,337k barrels, US stocks showed a 1,352k barrel reduction ( -5% ) from 17 April to 24 April. Although US ethanol stocks remain at swelled levels, a second consecutive week of similar drawdown would drag ethanol stocks back to levels recorded in February.
With production at 537k barrels a day, and weekly 1,352kt drawdown on stocks, there was an implied demand of 5,111k barrels of ethanol per week, the greatest demand in 4 weeks; this is a 37% week on week rise in demand. However, while implied demand has increased in the last week, there remains an overall 2,000k barrel a week reduction in US demand from pre-pandemic levels.
Yet as there are increasing calls for a re-opening of the economy, fuel demand is likely to recover, with a return for maize demand in US ethanol production.
But, and it’s a big but, even if demand returns, this is still an overall loss in annual usage with an implied build-up of US maize stocks, so while a degree of sort term support is on the cards, maize prices are unlikely to fully recover.
Further, looking to 2020/21, US perspective plantings released a month ago have US maize plantings up 8%. While the current low prices could dissuade some from increasing the area, there is likely to be increased supply in 2020/21, maintaining pressure on all grain markets especially into next season.
You can subscribe to receive Grain Market Daily straight to your inbox. Simply fill in your contact details on our online form and select the information you wish to receive.
The release of the latest AHDB usage data has shown animal feed production down across all sectors in May.
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES) estimates that Australia’s wheat production for 2020/21 will reach 26.6Mt, up 11.5Mt on the year.
UK feed barley prices could face further pressure in 2020/21 after data shows Canadian farmers have planted the most acres to barley since 2009.
Although yields are uncertain, there will be another significant barley crop this year. Prices may see pressure later in harvest from the spring crop, and then may gain slightly as farmer selling slows.
Top global grain supplier Russia are already proposing the imposition an export quota onto the second half (Jan -Jun) of the 2020/21 marketing year, although the volume has not been announced it has potential ramifications for global and UK prices.
UK wheat could receive either a boost or come under additional pressure in the next few weeks from what happens to US maize crops as they’re now at a critical growth stage.
Have you factored these risks into your marketing plan, cash flow and business plan for the next 2 seasons?
Now that the latest WASDE report figures are known, it is important to examine the other factors that could provide sentiment for wheat markets between now and harvest.
In response to the continued dry weather through May, the EU’s Crop Monitoring (MARS) service has further downgraded its forecasts for UK crop yields, including spring barley.
Wheat prices fall as USDA increases stocks: Grain Market Daily
US wheat markets fell to a 3-week low at close yesterday and imposed pressure on global and UK wheat markets to follow. Global wheat season-end stocks and US wheat production estimates were raised in the USDA’s world supply and demand estimates (WASDE) released yesterday.
New crop delivered milling wheat premiums (North West) have recently extended to their widest point over new crop feed futures, in June, since 2011/12.
The latest crop development report released last month does not pose much confidence for UK rapeseed in 2020/21.
UK feed wheat futures prices have been variable over recent weeks, at least in part due to uncertainty over the impact of unfavourable weather on crops in Europe and the Black Sea region.
Barley usage for the brewing, malting and distilling sector in April was just 114.7kt. This is the lowest figure in over a decade.
As we move towards harvest 2020, the value of imported grains and oilseeds will play a key role in setting the price of domestic supplies, the value of imported maize will prove pivotal to setting values in feed markets.
An update to US planting figures: Grain market daily
Planting figures for US maize and soyabean crops were slightly below market pre-release estimates, according to Monday’s US crop progress report. Progress has slowed from the rapid pace seen at the start of the season, but remains above the five-year average (2015-19).
Higher UK wheat supplies due to a large production year and relatively stable demand, combined with our export campaign slowing considerably post October have resulted in a large increase in closing stocks.
During our barley week last week, we highlighted the increase in trade tensions between China and Australia, with the former potentially imposing a $74/t tariff on imports of Australian barley. This offers a high degree of price risk for domestic barley, particularly given the significant export volumes expected from the UK next year.
News of countries beginning to ease lockdown measures has enabled vegetable oil prices to show some signs of recovery. UK rapeseed prices have benefitted from both this rise in Paris futures and a weakening GBP/EUR exchange rate.
In the latest ADAS Crop Condition report, 26% of winter wheat is rated ‘very poor’ or ‘poor’, this is a considerably large increase from last year when it was 5%.
