NORMAL — Dime hot dogs were available for two hours Wednesday at the Corn Crib.
And while the opportunity for gorging on meat in tube form was plentiful, so was the opportunity to immerse oneself in an activity that has been missing from the Bloomington-Normal entertainment scene since its usual May start.
Baseball returned to the Corn Crib with the birth of the Kernels Collegiate League before an estimated crowd of 1,500.
Players and fans alike were thrilled with the development and witnessed a no-hitter as well as the Hoots blanked the Gems, 2-0. Jason Bollman worked the first five innings of the seven-inning masterpiece.
The second game pitting the CornBelters against the Bobcats was not completed at Pantagraph press time. Please see pantagraph.com for details.
“I missed it so much. Incredibly,” said Sharon Zogg of Bloomington, whose son Alex is a Normal Community High School graduate and plays for the Hoots in the KCL.
“And there’s so many townie kids. We’re just excited to see all of them play again. Some of the kids (son) Cooper played against are now playing against Alex. It’s like a little reunion for all of us.”
Sharon’s husband Jason was equally enthused.
“I think it’s amazing,” Jason said. “I think everybody misses major league baseball, college baseball and high school baseball. It’s a chance for all these kids who missed their college seasons to get out and play.
On the field, Bollman struck out six and walked one. Normal West product C.J. Lewis and Erik Kubiatowicz pitched one inning each of the combined no-hitter.
“I felt good. I had all my pitches going. I just had to execute and I did,” said Bollman, who is transferring from Danville Area to Wabash Valley for the fall after decommitting from Toledo. “To get back out there felt awesome. I’m ready for a great summer.”
Bollman allowed just two baserunners and completed the fifth when ISU’s Jeremy Gaines made a sparkling catch in left field on a scorched liner off the bat of Illinois Wesleyan’s Evan Ranneklav.
“I’ve been building up with bullpens,” Bollman said. “I kept my pitch count low and it worked out. I had my slider going. That’s my go-to pitch.”
Lewis struck out one and walked one in his frame. Kubiatowicz hit a batter but also got help from his defense when first baseman Braedon Blackford snared a one-hop drive struck by Reid Rector to end the game.
ISU’s Blackford drove home both runs for the Hoots. Blackford blasted a solo home run in the first inning off future ISU teammate and Gems starter Jared Beck.
“I introduced myself to him before the game. I guess that will be kind of fun to talk about in the fall,” said Blackford. “I was just trying to find a (bat) barrel and was lucky enough it drifted over the left-field wall. He’s 7-foot and has so much potential. I’m glad he’s coming to ISU.”
Beck, who played at Heartland College this spring, struck out three and walked two in 2⅔ innings.
The Hoots tacked on a fifth-inning run when Gaines doubled with two outs and came around to score as Blackford singled to right.
“It’s so much fun,” Blackford said. “They’ve done a great job putting this league together. To be back on the field is a blessing.”
Contact Randy Reinhardt at (309) 820-3403. Follow him on Twitter: pg_reinhardt
