‘Calico’ popcorn and two kinds of pumpkin create a vision of plenty from two of the “Three Sisters” crops.
In these days of cancellations and travel restrictions, we’d all like a little more to look forward to. Gardeners always have something to look forward to. As our tomato plants go into the ground, we imagine slicing the juicy red fruits. As our carrot seedlings spend weeks as tiny green threads, we dream of crunching into fat orange roots. Now, in late spring, I’ve been thinking of fall.
Specifically, I’ve been thinking about corn (especially popcorn), dry beans and winter squash or pumpkin. These are all plants native to the Americas, eaten by native peoples in many parts of what is now the U.S. (though not in California, where indigenous people did not plant food crops).
Most Americans have heard these crops called the “three sisters,” corn, beans and squash, the beans climbing the corn and the squash running on the ground below. While most Bay Area gardeners can grow these crops, the traditional eastern method is generally not well adapted to our regional gardens.
The first consideration is that corn is not well adapted to cool summers. Where summers are too cool for it, the pollen will not fertilize the silks, therefore no corn will form. In somewhat warmer microclimates, corn will form, but the plants will grow slowly. (For example, in San Francisco’s Mission District, where summer is moderately warm, I have successfully grown ‘Early Sunglow,’ a sweet corn that is rated as harvestable 55 days from planting, but it always took 90 days.) Also consider that many early, fast-maturing sweet corn varieties are dwarf types with plants barely 5 feet tall, whereas the flint corn of the traditional “three sisters” was more likely to reach 10-12 feet.
So, if a Bay Area gardener plants sweet corn seed surrounded by pole bean seed, the most likely result is a corn plant disappearing under bean vines and bearing little or no corn. And, if the summer microclimate isn’t warm enough, the corn might have failed anyway. Inland, where summers are quite warm, you might have success using a tall sweet corn variety as a bean pole, but even then, I suggest letting the corn grow to a foot or so tall before you plant bean seeds around it. Always plant corn in a block least 4 feet by 4 feet, which allows for the necessary wind pollination to occur.
One of the most enjoyable garden crops is popcorn, which will probably ripen in any garden that can produce sweet corn. The ‘Calico’ popcorn in the photo grew in the Mission District and ripened in early October from seed sown in May. It bore two ears each on tall plants, popped well and made nice gifts. The dry husks can be used for corn husk dolls or holiday angels, and the fact that some of the ears have purple husks adds variety to these creations. There are also home-gardener popcorn varieties with all-yellow, all-pink or deep maroon kernels. To test for readiness, try popping three kernels in oil. If they don’t pop, they either need to ripen a bit longer on the plant, or, if they are in storage, might have become too dry. If you suspect the latter, add a teaspoon of water per cup of corn, shake in a closed jar and try the test again in one day to a week.
White runner beans are able to ripen to dry beans in cooler microclimates if planted in April or May.
As to the beans, runner bean varieties have the best chance of success in cool-summer microclimates, and some bush-type dry bean varieties are early enough for moderately cool locations. Inland, select any garden bean that was bred for drying. Be sure seeds are in the ground by the end of May. If you are growing a climbing variety, but not using corn as a support, erect a pole teepee or a trellis. Harvest when beans are hard and pods are crisp and dry, but don’t leave pods on the vine until rain and damp days begin in fall, as the beans may decay.
Winter squash or pumpkin is the third sister. Pumpkin is able to mature in a fairly cool summer, but its Achille’s heel is that it is very likely to get powdery mildew, which can kill the plant. If the white spores of the disease appear on a few leaves, remove them. Your goal is to keep some green leaves on a pumpkin plant until the pumpkins are close enough to ripening that they will continue even if the plant is dead. Butternut and other squash in the species Cucurbita moschata do a better job of resisting this disease.
Pumpkin and all winter squash eat up a lot of ground as they grow. Also, the bigger the fruit, the fewer will form on each plant. A variety with big pumpkins might only bear one or two, whereas one that makes mini-pumpkins or small squash might set 10 or 12. Harvest all kinds of pumpkin and winter squash when the stem is brown or the plant is dead, whichever is first.
Pam Peirce is the author of the regional gardening book “Golden Gate Gardening,” for mid- and Northern California locations both coastal and inland. She blogs at goldengategarden.typepad.com, where she lists appearances and often writes more on topics covered in this column.
