Beck’s PFR Insight Research Urges Replacing Planter Closing Wheels, Bumping Up Planting Date.
There are not many silver bullets for boosting corn and soybean yields, but there is one surefire strategy: replace the closing wheels on your planter.
That’s one take-home message from Beck’s Practical Farm Research (PFR) studies, the 2019 version of which was published in January.
Jonathan Perkins and Joe Bolte, PFR location lead and herbicide specialist, respectively, cite 2019 PFR studies that prove using closing wheels with a finger-type edge will improve corn and soybean yields. The company has tested five products over three years, with average bushel-per-acre increase in corn/soybeans over stock wheels:
All of these options paid for themselves within 250 acres, assuming $4 corn and on a 12-row planter. The Yetter Poly Twister and Schaffert Mohawk had the quickest payoff, yet Perkins says “regardless of the wheel tested, anything has to be better than the solid rubber, based on what we’ve seen.”
Beck’s Practical Farm Research program – which since 1964 has evaluated products, practices, and systems – unveiled more results at its Insight Meetings throughout the Corn Belt in January.
Among these are several new “PFR Proven” practices, which are simply products or practices that generated a positive Return on Investment every year for three consecutive years. The company’s on-farm research includes 100 products and 100 studies, spread over 800 acres on 10 sites in five states.
Here are some other corn and soybean tips from Perkins and Bolte, gleaned from a PFR Insight Meeting in O’Fallon, Illinois.
Planting date and new planter closing wheels. Those are 2 things that can boost #coen and #soybean yields, according to Jonathan Perkins, PFR Insight agronomist for @BecksHybrids . He shares more here, from a PFR Insight Meeting in OFallon, IL. @SuccessfulFarm pic.twitter.com/bFhEqFKLyB
— Bill Spiegel (@BillSpiegel) January 10, 2020
Starter on both sides of the row. If putting 30 pounds of N fertilizer 2×2 (2 inches from one side of the row, 2 inches deep at planting) is good, then adding another band 2 inches from the other side of the seed row has to be better, right? Beck’s says that practice – called 2×2×2 – bumps yield nearly 5 bushels per acre compared with putting fertilizer on one side only (220.3 bushels per acre vs. 215.6 bushels per acre). They tested two fertilizer products: a 50/50 blend of 28% and 10-34-0, and straight N. The yield bump appears to come from the N instead of the P.
The company has tested two 2×2×2 products – the Yetter Dual 2968 Series, and Martin-Till Dual UMO. Both boost yield 7 bushels per acre. It takes the Yetter 214 acres to pay off (assuming 12-row planter, and $4-per-bushel corn). The Martin would take 402 acres to pay off.
Fungicide at VT. There are three PFR Proven fungicides for corn: Trivapro, Delaro 325 SC, and Headline AMP. When applied at VT, these products delivered an additional 10.6, 8.2, and 9.4 bushels per acre, respectively, over three years of multilocation testing. The VT application timing is key to protect the plants from late-season foliar diseases and to provide plant health benefits to carry the crop to harvest.
On a side note, PFR is also investigating the influence of the time of day to spray, with promising results. Two years of research in multiple locations indicates applying fungicide at 8 a.m. vs. other times of the day helps fungicide effectiveness. In corn, that early-morning application averaged $7.26 more per acre than a 3 p.m. application. The agronomists believe morning dew can help fungicide spread over the leaf surface area and boost efficacy.
Split-apply N. Corn takes up most of its N between the V8 and VT stages. Thus, split-applying N rather is recommended compared with putting all the N on at planting. A combination of N preplant or with the planter, plus sidedressing at V3 is an optimal way to adhere to the 4R Nutrient Management Strategy (right fertilizer source, right rate, right time, and right place), according to Bolte and Perkins. Putting all the N on up front leads to volatilization and loss, especially during the wet spring of 2019. How much total N to put on? It depends on whether the crop rotation is corn-after-corn, or corn-after-soybeans. If the former, a range of 220 to 230 pounds of total N per acre total is recommended; whereas 190 to 200 pounds of total N is recommended for the latter scenario. That’s based on nine years of data in multiple locations.
Fungicide at R3.There is not a more reliably profitable spray strategy in Beck’s soybean research than applying fungicide at R3, Bolte says. Spraying 13.7 ounces of Syngenta’s Trivapro at R3 bumped yield 3.8 bushels per acre, boosting ROI by $15.35 per acre. Trivapro’s three modes of action (Azoxystrobin, Propiconazole, and Solatenol) protect against rusts, leaf spots, and blights. Beck’s research shows a greater bushel-per-acre response to Quadris at R2 and Trivapro at R3, but the combined cost of two products plus two application passes does not generate more ROI than the single pass of Trivapro.
Strategies for weed control in soybeans include: start clean, use overlapping residuals & narrow row spacing, says Joe Bolte, PFR herbicide specialist @BecksHybrids . Learn more at PFR Insight meetings or check their PFR research online. @SuccessfulFarm pic.twitter.com/51Lib25DY5
— Bill Spiegel (@BillSpiegel) January 11, 2020
Seeding rates: less can be more. Based on a five-year study covering multiple plot locations, fewer soybeans dropped per acre tends to pay off. If planting early (April 16-May 15), maximum economic optimal seeding rate (EOSR) is 100,000 seeds per acre. If planting later (May 16-June 15), the EOSR is 125,000 seeds per acre. Remember that a thin stand early is better than a thick stand late. “Thickening up a thin stand does not pay off,” Perkins says.
Seed treatment. Ten years out of 10, across multiple locations, adding Beck’s Escalate seed treatment (protecting against disease and insects) offers a positive ROI compared with untreated seed, to the tune of an average $50 per acre. In 2019, the all-in-one treatment boosted yield 4.6 bushels per acre over nontreated soybean seed and $33.27 more revenue per acre over nontreated, Bolte says.
Row width. Narrower rows close the canopy faster, meaning that the crop captures more sunlight, and late-emerging weeds will grow more slowly. Over 10 years of multilocation research, 15-inch rows delivered $31.09/ per acre more than 30-inch rows tested across five seeding rates. It is important to note that narrower rows tend to increase yield, but that these studies are planted using planter row units, not drills.
