As the data shows, the correlation between EUR/USD and USD/CHF was almost perfectly negative on this trading day. You could use the negative correlation to hedge your exposure to risk in one of the underlying currency pairs.
For example, you could go long on EUR/USD and on USD/CHF – despite their negative correlation – in order to protect yourself against any short-term volatility in these forex pairs which might see one of them decline in value.
As previously mentioned, this would be effective if the price of EUR/USD fell by a certain amount per point, but USD/CHF increased for a certain amount per point. In this, the gains on the USD/CHF long position would offset the losses on the EUR/USD position.
The value of some currencies is not only correlated to the value of other currencies, but it is also correlated to the price of commodities. This is particularly true if a country is a net exporter of a particular commodity, such as crude oil or gold.
The price of the Canadian dollar is often positively correlated with the price of oil. Typically, an increase in the price of oil will see an increase in the value of the Canadian dollar on the forex market. This is often reflected in the movements the USD/CAD pair because oil is traded in the US dollar, which is generally negatively correlated with the price of oil.
This means that when the price of the US dollar increases, the price of oil tends to decrease. It also means that an increase in the price of oil usually causes a decrease in the value of the US dollar. As a result, traders could use this information to take a long position on the Canadian dollar – such as in the CAD/JPY pair – when oil is rising, or take a short position on the US dollar – such as in the USD/CAD pair – when the same thing happens.
The price of gold is often positively correlated with the price of the Australian dollar, especially in the AUD/USD currency pair. Because Australia is a net exporter of gold, when the price of gold appreciates so does the price of AUD/USD; when gold slumps, AUD/USD also slumps.
If the price of AUD/USD rises, you would need to sell more US dollars in order to buy a single Australian dollar – which means that the Australian dollar is strengthening compared to the US dollar.
Similar to the correlation between the Canadian dollar and crude oil, the value of the Australian dollar and gold are usually positively correlated, and the price of the US dollar is usually negatively correlated to both.
The Australian dollar is known as a commodity currency because its value is tied closely to the value of Australia’s commodity exports such as copper, coal, agricultural products and gold. These exports are also often correlated to the value of the Australian dollar, but gold has arguably the greatest positive correlation with the Australian dollar.
The yen is the third most traded currency in the world, and its value often moves in tandem with the price of gold. One reason for this is that the yen is one of the world’s reserve currencies alongside the US dollar, the euro and the British pound.
The yen is also widely believed to be a safe-haven currency, and gold is known as a safe-haven asset. Because of this, investors will often move their money into yen or gold in times of economic uncertainty, or when the markets are experiencing slow growth. This often means that while the price of one unit of yen and one unit of gold might be quite different, the overall up and down movements of these two assets tend to mirror each other.
Some market commentators state that the reason for the correlation between the value of yen and gold is the similarity of the real interest rates for the two assets. The real interest rate is the rate of interest that a market participant will receive after accounting for inflation.
Currency can also be correlated with the value of commodity exports, such as oil or gold
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Discover the range of markets you can spread bet on - and learn how they work - with IG Academy's online course.
