A National Mask Mandate Could Save The U.S. Economy $1 Trillion, Goldman Sachs Says
The former world heavyweight boxing champion, Mike Tyson once said: “Everyone has a plan until they are punched in the face.”
The fact is the entire planet is getting punched everywhere, every day. Radical plans are needed, as day by day it appears that the accommodation given by the central banks in insufficient. The markets are not satisfied, confidence is shot through.
So, it is quite a step for the EU to announce new measures of permissible state assistance at a time that the scale of devastation caused by the coronavirus is becoming ever clearer.
Companies affected by coronavirus are to be allowed to receive state grants up to €500,000 ($535,000) or subsidized state guarantees on bank loans. Who wants a loan when they have no cash flow?
EU antitrust chief, Margrethe Vestager, said the move would provide liquidity to allow companies to keep operating across the EU.
The decision to ease the state aid rules came has been driven by pleas from EU governments for greater latitude in providing help to ailing companies. Vestager said on Tuesday:
This means national governments will be allowed to provide public and private loans with subsidised interest rates so helping EU banks assist their small and medium-sized enterprise clients.
As this trying week ended, the European Commission (EC) announced that the EU was to suspend its strict rules on public deficits (3% of GDP) and hence debt to GDP  (60%) to allow governments to unleash a wave of liquidity to inject into each national economy to counter the coronavirus pandemic.
This really illustrates the fact that Europe, indeed the world, is living in strange times, and strange is what we must do. Such a move, to invoke the “General Escape Clause,” underlines just how wide and deep the crisis is.
EU chief Ursula von der Leyen said this removal of the requirements would hand countries free rein to "inject spending into the economy as needed." Oh my, that sounds risky in the long run. It is intended to be a temporary measure and it will take the beady eye of Brussels off state spending a country such as Italy—the EU member state worst hit by coronavirus—will have the fiscal latitude to shore up its nation.
The finance ministers of the EU will meet next week, it should be a formality for them to provide their approval. How ironic that just a few weeks ago the EU 27 could not agree a new budget after the U.K had left the EU on January 31.
This move is taken in something of a tandem move as the European Central Bank (ECB) relaxed regulatory controls over banks that call on government established credit guarantees.
In 2009 and 2010 the question of common debt “Eurobonds” was rejected by the wealthier northern European states. Suddenly this is back on the radar screen and is meriting serious consideration.
A range of debt instruments could be used to help the euro zone and EU endure and survive this crisis.
Elsewhere, the European Commission has said it's ready to consider backing common debt issuance in the euro zone to help the bloc weather the massive economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak. I notice the Irish broadcaster, RTE, is calling such instruments “Coronabonds.”
I can see trouble ahead over the key issue of which nations will receive the most benefit from the new mutual bonds and then even more troubling, who is going to be accountable when redemption monies are due.
In 2009, when Greece looked poised to be ejected from the euro zone and threaten the entire fabric of the single currency the arguments about too high a level of debt to GDP raged. The level of debt to GDP for Greece at that time was 126.7%, it now stands at 181.2%. In Italy, the same metric was 112.5% in 2009 and is now 134.8%.
We saw that the ECB will launch the so-called Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP). It will have a size of  €750 billion ($818 billion), equal to 6% of the euro zone GDP. The scope will see purchases conducted until the end of 2020 and it will now buy Greek debt.
The PEPP and the triggering of the Great Escape Clause is going to be a green light for vast swathes of new debt to be launched. This will take the level of debt relative to GDP to eyewatering levels and eventually such debt will fall due.
In, say, five years’ time—maybe longer—there is going to be an almighty row in the euro zone when—even if—we see Eurobonds, sovereign debt is going to balloon and once again sovereign nations in the euro zone are going to face default.
Demonstrators will scuffle with riot police when the repayment of debt issue comes round in five ... [+] years time. AFP PHOTO/ Louisa Gouliamaki (Photo credit should read LOUISA GOULIAMAKI/AFP via Getty Images)
The relaxation more be the strange solution we need now, but I believe it is going need the ECB to become either the buyer or payer of resort. Maybe it has to be both. This may make us smile now as the euro zone will get through the crisis. However, his news is crippling the Euro against the Dollar, 1.0663 as at 18:235 GMT. It traded at 1.1171 at the end of 2019.
The next stop is Dollar parity and within a decade, the end of the euro zone as the pigeons of profligacy come home to roost. There will be no more road down which to kick the rusty can.
Have no doubt, Europe is a region rich in history, great geographic and national variation. However, this complex territory is in a state of flux.
Have no doubt, Europe is a region rich in history, great geographic and national variation. However, this complex territory is in a state of flux.
Europe may be a small continent; however, it is comprised of 50 nations, several of which also claim to be in Asia. The relationship of the United Kingdom with the European Union will be a dominant factor for years to come, however, many aspects of mainland Europe are also undergoing major change as the existing political establishment is challenged from left and right. Therefore, there is scarcely a dull moment within the economies, markets and political arenas of this richly varied region.
led to uncertainty as to its future governance. Following several decades of relative calm, the future of Europe is far from certain. I intend to explain this changing landscape.
