The Armorique arrives in Plymouth for the first time in three months, June 29, 2020 (Image: William Telford)
When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
Cross-Channel ferry operator Brittany Ferries is working on a five-year recovery plan as it restarts passenger services and reveals the coronavirus lockdown has caused it to lose 250million euros.
The French-owned company, which sails to the Continent from Plymouth and Portsmouth, is looking at a 130million loss for this year, as it has had no passenger custom for three months.
But those services are now running again, with vastly reduced numbers on board and special safety measures and social distancing.
Brittany Ferries' chief executive Christophe Mathieu (Image: William Telford)
And the firm has given assurances there are no plans to axe jobs or hike prices, with chief executive Christophe Mathieu saying the firm had a five-year plan to recover from the damage inflicted by three months of inactivity.
He said that will mean stringent cost-cutting by the firm but dismissed the notion of job losses among permanent staff – a welcome boost for workers only just coming back from furlough.
And, in Plymouth to watch the Armorique cruised into Millbay docks for the first time in months, Mr Mathieu said voyages for the next few weeks at least will be on much reduced numbers and he doesn’t expect all of Brittany Ferries’ fleet to be back in action, or for ferries to be full, until September at the earliest.
But he said that despite a belt-tightening exercise being needed, prices will not be rising, and the firm will stay competitive and may even benefit from a reluctance from some people to want to fly once restrictions are gone.
During the lockdown, Brittany Ferries tied up seven of its 12 ships and only ran essential freight services between the Continent and the UK.
It is now bringing back the Armorique and Pont-Aven to connect Plymouth with France and Spain, a further two more will resume in July and the final three vessels in September when “we should be back to normal activity”.
