This is a list of all  Currency ETFs traded in the USA which are currently tagged by ETF Database. Please note that the list may not contain newly issued ETFs. If you’re looking for a more simplified way to browse and compare ETFs, you may want to visit our ETFdb.com Categories , which categorize every ETF in a single “best fit” category.
This page includes historical return information for all  Currency ETFs listed on U.S. exchanges that are currently tracked by ETF Database.
The table below includes fund flow data for all U.S. listed Currency ETFs. Total fund flow is the capital inflow into an ETF minus the capital outflow from the ETF for a particular time period.
Fund Flows in millions of U.S. Dollars.
The following table includes expense data and other descriptive information for all  Currency ETFs listed on U.S. exchanges that are currently tracked by ETF Database. In addition to expense ratio and issuer information, this table displays platforms that offer commission-free trading for certain ETFs.
Clicking on any of the links in the table below will provide additional descriptive and quantitative information on  Currency ETFs.
The following table includes ESG Scores and other descriptive information for all Currency ETFs listed on U.S. exchanges that are currently tracked by ETF Database. Easily browse and evaluate ETFs by visiting our ESG Investing themes section and find ETFs that map to various environmental, social, governance and morality themes.
This page includes historical dividend information for all  Currency ETFs listed on U.S. exchanges that are currently tracked by ETF Database. Note that certain ETPs may not make dividend payments, and as such some of the information below may not be meaningful.
The table below includes basic holdings data for all U.S. listed  Currency ETFs that are currently tagged by ETF Database. The table below includes the number of holdings for each ETF and the percentage of assets that the top ten assets make up, if applicable. For more detailed holdings information for any ETF, click on the link in the right column.
The following table includes certain tax information for all  Currency ETFs listed on U.S. exchanges that are currently tracked by ETF Database, including applicable short-term and long-term capital gains rates and the tax form on which gains or losses in each ETF will be reported.
This page contains certain technical information for all  Currency ETFs that are listed on U.S. exchanges and tracked by ETF Database. Note that the table below only includes limited technical indicators; click on the “View” link in the far right column for each ETF to see an expanded display of the product’s technicals.
This page provides links to various analysis for all  Currency ETFs that are listed on U.S. exchanges and tracked by ETF Database. The links in the table below will guide you to various analytical resources for the relevant ETF, including an X-ray of holdings, official fund fact sheet, or objective analyst report.
This page provides ETFdb Ratings for all  Currency ETFs that are listed on U.S. exchanges and tracked by ETF Database. The ETFdb Ratings are transparent, quant-based evaluations of ETFs relative to other products in the same ETFdb.com Category. As such, it should be noted that this page may include ETFs from multiple ETFdb.com Categories.
