This obvious fact did not deflect the meme that the euro was fundamentally flawed and doomed, and I’m sure you will get the opportunity to read this theory again and again for a long time to come. In a way it’s a kind of economic conspiracy theory worthy of the tin-hat brigade, but unlike Area 51 aliens, many sensible people take it serious.
There is another reason the euro will not fail and that is that even a disunited Europe is a natural environment for a unified currency. Even in the middle ages the silver penny was the same across most of Europe. That is maybe a stretch but in the 19th Century there was an exact monetary union system, called the "Latin Monetary Union," in which Greece, France, Austria, Italy, Belgium, Spain, Switzerland, Romania, Luxembourg, Finland, etc. joined. Even Cambodia, Russia, Venezuela and the Pope signed up to the currency standard. This Monetary Union lasted from, depending when you want to start counting, 1806 but most definitely 1865 and wasn’t completely wrecked until the horrors of the First World War. In fact, the Monetary Union wasn’t completely dead until 1927 and even then some coins were still being minted for general use by the Swiss up to the 1960s.
What is more, as I write, a major member of the EU, Britain, is meant to be seceding from the EU. Is the euro weak? No, it is strong. It is so strong the European Central Bank is setting negative interest rates and as I write has dropped them even further into negative territory. The currency is so strong the EU is having to punish euro holders for hoarding it.
Make no mistake, the euro was, is and will continue to be a strong currency.
So the argument might be: the EU will collapse, even while the euro is strong, because a lot of Europeans will become fed up with the EU in general. What ails the U.K. electorate will come to ail much of Europe’s voters and they will tear Europe apart. The death of the EU will kill the euro not visa versa.
This is plausible until you come to regard the current situation of Brexit. The U.K., it turns out, cannot check out of its membership. Even if the U.K.’s cornered leadership performs a Houdini-like escape, it will be clear to see that the U.K., by far the most euro-skeptic country in the EU, will have had to trash its institutions and economy to do so. If the U.K. stays it will underline there is no leaving the EU and if it leaves, its wreckage will become a salutary example of how leaving the EU is not a palatable option. What is more, forgetting the effect of watching the U.K. swing on the gibbet of Brexit, the EU once rid of perfidious Albion will move ahead with the Federal project and tighten further the ties that already bind European countries inescapably together. As such the EU project has no end in sight.
Short the euro against sterling if you think Brexit is dead or go the other way if you think hard Brexit is coming. However, don’t figure in a euro collapse in any thesis in your lifetime unless you think a near global extinction event is nigh. It will take a proper text book historic catastrophe to break the euro. Despite what the dollar hegemons expound, the euro is going to be a strong currency until further notice.
Get timely investing news and information right in your inbox from Forbes Investing Digest. It's free. Sign up now.
Clem Chambers is the CEO of private investors website ADVFN.com and author of Be Rich , The Game in Wall Street and Trading Cryptocurrencies: A Beginner’s Guide .
Chambers won Journalist of the Year in the Business Market Commentary category in the State Street UK Institutional Press Awards in 2018.
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I wrote a stock column for WIRED – which described me as a ‘Market Maven’ - and am a regular columnist for numerous financial publications around the world. I have written for titles including:  Working Money, Active Trader, SFO and Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities in the US and have written for pretty much every UK national newspaper.  In the last few years I have become a financial thriller writer and have just had my first non-fiction title published: 101 ways to pick stock market winners. Find me here on US Amazon.
You’ll also see me regularly on CNBC, CNN, SKY, Business News Network and the BBC giving my take on the markets.
