THE EUROZONE is at risk of being plunged into crisis due to the economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic, according to the Bruges Group, who revealed to Express.co.uk why Italy, currently one of the worst-hit by the pandemic, was the "one to watch".
Sign up for FREE now and never miss the top politics stories again.
We will use your email address only for sending you newsletters. Please see our Privacy Notice for details of your data protection rights.
Italy's solution to their "severe debt crisis" worsened by the coronavirus could result in the end of the euro currency, according to the Bruges Group. Spokesman Robert Oulds explained to Express.co.uk why the southern European country's only way out of economic turmoil could be to start issuing a "parallel currency". Mr Oulds warned that this could spell danger for the European Union Central Bank, who could ultimately lose the ability to control money in their economic zone.
He told Express.co.uk: "Italy's the one to watch through this crisis.
"They might start issuing what would become a parallel currency, at which point the European Central Bank loses its monopoly to control money within the Eurozone.
"We would see the end of the euro as the single currency within the Eurozone.
End of Euro? How EU bank could 'lose monopoly' to control money in Eurozone (Image: GETTY)
He told Express.co.uk: "Italy's the one to watch through this crisis." (Image: YOUTUBE)
Mr Oulds continued: "Italy's been in a crisis, economically now, for a decade so this is now going to be a severe situation where their debts will absolutely skyrocket.
"The only European Union response will be that they must cut their public spending and raise taxes.
"That will actually make the debt crisis worse because it will just destroy the economy further.
"The only European Union response will be that they must cut their public spending and raise taxes." (Image: GETTY)
The Bruges Group representative added: "However, those countries are not prepared to do that.
"That means countries such as Italy must start going down a route which is effectively an exit from the euro.
"Countries such as Britain, America, Japan, our finances are in less of a state, we can get through this."
