However, there is a vacancy as a back-up with Danny Rose is trying to rebuild his confidence and form at Newcastle and Luke Shaw's inconsistency and injury issues continue to make him a frustrating candidate. It leaves the door wide open for Arsenal youngster Saka, who does not even turn 19 until the start of next season but he has already established himself as an important player for Mikel Arteta at Arsenal.
Saka's career progression is mirroring that of Liverpool's Trent Alexander-Arnold, whose attacking quality has been utilised from full-back while also possessing the learning capacity to improve in his defensive work.
Saka has already shown in his time in the Arsenal first team he has the culture and the guile with his delivery to produce game-changing moments in matches.
His cheeky nutmeg on Newcastle's Valentino Lazaro and precise cross for Nicholas Pepe in the 4-0 victory over the Toon on a Super Sunday showcased to the watching world what Saka was all about.
That is one of nine assists he has racked up across all competitions. That's more than Mesut Ozil, Wilfried Zaha and Paul Pogba have managed this season combined. His data puts him top of the shop when it comes to English left-back assist makers this season. An international call-up surely isn't far away.
"I'd say Mason Greenwood is a better finisher than Marcus Rashford - and that's saying something, he really does look the real deal," said Gary Neville, after Greenwood rescued a point for Manchester United against Everton in December.
If anyone knows a thing or two about progressing through the Manchester United academy, it's Neville. And he believes Greenwood could be among the very best the club has produced.
The 18-year-old has 12 goals in all competitions this season for United with his performances in the Europa League drawing big praise from onlookers. The numbers back up the visuals too. His expected goals data in the Europa League show that he should have scored just over two goals in his 481 minutes of action but he's actually found the net five times. It's that strike-rate and style that has seen his finishing ability likened to that of Robin van Persie, who had the same cultured left-footed method when banging the goals in for United.
Greenwood's task of breaking into the England fold does look a tough one though as he's competing in a special era for talented young attacking players. Harry Kane, Raheem Sterling, Jadon Sancho and Marcus Rashford all look nailed on for a spot in 2021, however, Greenwood is a player capable of providing a genuine match-winning impact, vital for tournament football, and that could edge him ahead of the likes of Tammy Abraham, Danny Ings and Dominic Calvert-Lewin.
Since the World Cup in Russia, Southgate has used 12 different midfielders and has yet to find someone to play in the pivot role at the base. Harry Winks is in the driving seat for that position due to his previous performances, especially in the win over Spain, while Declan Rice also was given his chance in the qualification period but looked raw.
Those that have seen Phillips play for Leeds under Marcelo Bielsa won't need convincing of whether or not he's good enough to compete with the likes of Winks and Rice in this position when, barring no huge collapse, Leeds return to the Premier League next season.
