Euro Millions results Friday 26th June 2020. £46million jackpot.
Euro Millions results Friday 26th June 2020. Tonight a whopping £46 million pound jackpot is on offer.
Will you be a multi-millionaire after the Euro Millions draw takes place? Check the winning EuroMillions numbers to find out!
EuroMillions Results will appear here as soon as they happen, every Tuesday and Friday at around 8.40pm.
Are you one of tonight’s lucky winners? What will you spend your prize on?
The EuroMillions Draw Numbers – published right here at 8.40pm, live.
Check back to find out if you’ll be going to work in the morning. Please note: If the numbers don’t appear here after the draw, please refresh your browser page. You can see Tuesday’s results here .
If you would like to see previous results, check out our Lotto Results Page . You’ll find all of the Lotto and ThunderBall, and EuroMillions numbers from the past 180 days.
When does the draw take place?
The UK Lotto draw takes place every Wednesday and Saturday evening. Wednesday draws are scheduled for 8pm and Saturday draws for 8.30pm. You can see the live results right here!
The EuroMillions draw takes place every Tuesday and Friday at approximately 8pm. Similarly, you can see the live results right here!
The ThunderBall draw takes place every Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday at approximately 8pm. Again, you can see the live results right here!
A full breakdown of prizes will be available not long after the draw is completed and can be found on the official site.
Most smaller prizes will be paid directly into your account (online), or can be claimed at the retailer.
You can claim prizes above £500 (up to and including £50,000) at designated post offices. Just look for ones with a National Lottery terminal.
If you’ve been really lucky and won over £30,000 you’ll need to call the claim line on 0333 234 44 33 (during regular opening hours and during the claim period). Prizes will be paid by cheque, unless they are over £50,000, in which case they need to be collected in person.
If the National Lottery results went your way today, would you:
Quit your job, or go into work the next day?
Move house or stay put?
Go public or keep it quiet?
Carefully plan what you’re going to do with the money, or go absolutely wild?
Give money to friends and family or spend it all on yourself?
Maybe you would even consider donating something to your favourite online newspaper?
Disclaimer: Please note that we retrieve our Lotto, EuroMillions, Set for Life, and ThunderBall numbers via a third party. We aim to bring you the Lottery results instantly after the draw has been made, faster than any other news outlet. However please ensure that you check your numbers at the official National Lottery page.  TheLondonEconomic.com cannot be held responsible for any misprints, typos or inaccuracies that lead to any financial loss or failure to claim winnings.
