The US announced a huge fiscal spending plan to support the economy.
The EU has put in some measures, but has yet to agree a joint funding programme.
With most of the EU in lockdown and no clarity on when the crisis will end, the EU needs to provide more fiscal help and a clearer response.
Wednesday’s session so far is trading a familiar pattern. Equities in Europe are down around -4%, US stock markets are limit down at -5% and the US dollar is breaking higher as the stresses of the crash creates a surge in demand for dollars. Commodities are under pressure too with gold lower and WTI oil breaking through the previous 2016 low. Data releases are light but are likely to be ignored anyway as the real issue for markets is how the coronavirus disruptions will affect economies going forward. This won’t be truly understood for some time but there is little doubt the data will be substantially impaired.
The FOMC rate decision meeting scheduled for Wednesday evening has been cancelled and the Fed will continue to make ad hoc announcements for the foreseeable future. Since QE was re-started and rates are at zero the options for further stimulus are limited. The perception now is that most central banks are more or less ‘all-in’ on stimulus although this may take some time to balance out over currencies. The USD has made new highs against many G7 currencies this week due to a high demand for dollars and it is unclear how far the uptrend will continue.
With central banks ‘all-in’, the real hope for the markets comes from fiscal stimulus. On Tuesday the US unveiled a huge package of benefits worth up to US$1.2 trillion. It needs to be approved by Congress first, but since it is more of a universal package and not just another tax cut, the bill should be passed swiftly. ING explain,
“A general structure appears to be:
Extension of tax payment deadlines, tax credits for paid leave relating to the virus, plus other measures.”
This is a huge package and combined with the measures from the Fed should do a lot of good. The worrying thing is that risk markets such as stocks only rallied for a day on the news and are right back down on Wednesday. The DXY dollar basket has broken to new 2020 highs above 100 and suggests liquidity is still tight.
Meanwhile in the eurozone, the coronavirus continues to spread and most of the region is in lockdown. An equally large package is needed to save an already fragile economy but so far the measures have been underwhelming. The hope is that a joint EU funding operation will be introduced and Tuesday saw rumours of progress in this area.
“Bloomberg yesterday evening quoted German chancellor Angela Merkel for saying that Germany is willing to consider a joint EU funding programme in order to mitigate the fiscal consequences of the current situation, with the BTP-bund spread having widened to levels last seen under the Lega/Five Star coalition. Germany was not willing to consider a joint funding scheme in either 2008, during the financial crisis, or in 2012 during the sovereign debt crisis,” reported Danske Bank.
A cross-EU solution to the financial problems caused by the coronavirus is one thing but there also needs to be co-operation on how to deal with it medically and how to open up from the lockdown. The longer the crisis drags on the more damage will be done and the Euro could start to suffer as a result.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
James Elliott is an entrepreneur and an independent trader. After retiring in his early 30s, James started a...
