Italy will be without Roma star Nicolo Zaniolo, who was laid low by a cruciate ligament (ACL) injury in January during a game against Juventus .
Remarkably, Juve's Merih Demiral suffered an ACL injury in the same game as Zaniolo, meaning he will not play a part in Euro 2020 for Turkey .
Meanwhile, wing-back Jetro Willems' absence from the Oranje squad is set to continue after he sustained a cruciate ligament injury while playing for Newcastle United in January.
Portugal will be unable to call upon Andre Gomes following the midfielder's gruesome ankle dislocation, which was sustained during a game for Everton against Tottenham last November.
Gomes' recovery is expected to take anywhere between six months and a year, meaning he will not be involved in the defence of a title he helped the Selecao win in 2016.
The timeframe for Kane's recovery is set at three months, which would mean an April return, but Spurs boss Jose Mourinho remains pessimistic, suggesting the striker could miss the rest of the season .
“We expect him to be out until mid-April, end of April, May, next season. I don’t know,” Mourinho told reporters in January.
The initial treatment period for the injury, which has been described as "bad" by Ole Gunnar Solskjaer, is six weeks with a period of rehabilitation to follow - so potentially two months out of action at least.
"He’ll be out for a while. He won’t be back until after the mid-season break," said Solskjaer when quizzed about the injury.
"[It's] normally six weeks to heal, but I’m not a doctor, and then he needs rehab after that probably."
Giorgio Chiellini and Davide Zappacosta face a serious fight if they are to return to full fitness in sufficient time to earn their place in Roberto Mancini's plans for Italy at Euro 2020.
The two defenders are both working their way back from knee injuries.
Wales midfielder David Brooks is a long-term injury concern, having gone under the knife in order to treat an ankle injury and would require a slice of luck if he is to make Ryan Giggs' squad.
Should Scotland qualify for the tournament, they could well have to compete without Aston Villa midfielder John McGinn, who suffered a broken ankle in December.
Germany boss Joachim Low will be monitoring the availability of of Leroy Sane and Niklas Sule as they continue to recover from their respective knee injuries.
Both players suffered cruciate ligament injuries, but could be back in action by March and April, which would be a welcome boost for Low.
Sami Khedira is another minor concern for Low, with the Juventus star undergoing keyhole surgery in his knee in December.
Paul Pogba has not played much for Manchester United this season, a trend which, if it continues, could have a detrimental impact on his chances of being selected in the France squad.
The midfielder's desire to leave Old Trafford has played a part in his absences, no doubt, but he has also suffered injury set-backs - most recently a recurrence of an ankle problem .
Another player whose place in Les Bleus panel is a doubt is Bayern Munich 's Kingsley Coman after the winger sustained a knee ligament injury in a Champions League clash against Spurs in December.
Coman, who was not involved in the 2018 World Cup triumph with his country, will no doubt be desperate for a speedy return to action.
Thomas Lemar is another slight concern thanks to a hamstring injury, but the Atletico Madrid star should be back in action well ahead of the tournament.
Portugal, meanwhile, may have to plan for the tournament without William Carvalho as he manages a back problem.
