Euro 2020 has the potential to be a stunning summer of soccer.
We're officially 100 days away from the opening game of Euro 2020 -- watch every game LIVE in the U.S. on ESPN networks from June 12 - July 12 -- and let's face it, it's never too early to look at the big teams and the big questions as they continue their preparations for what should be a superb summer of soccer.
There are still four spots up for grabs in the playoffs at the end of March (more on that later) but we've got your super-early look at the presumed favorites to win this summer as well as a first look at some other pressing matters ahead of the tournament's opening game in Rome on June 12.
Jump to: Front-runners to win | England | France | Spain | Italy | Germany | Coronavirus impact | VAR issues? | Belgium | Portugal | Strongest underdogs | Predicting playoffs
PLAYING THE FIELD: Who are the real front-runners?
Let's take two steps to establish favorites for Euro 2020: Since rosters are impossibly fluid and uncertain three months from the tournament, let's simply look at which teams (1) were the most dominant in qualifying play. Then, (2) let's downgrade the odds of all the teams in this year's "hell group," more familiarly known as Group F (France, Germany, Portugal). So who leads the way?
1. England. Yes, the Three Lions have stepped on all sorts of rakes in major tournaments through the years and yes, Harry Kane 's form will be questionable at best. But they were rampant in qualifying, boasting the best goal difference, third-best expected goal difference and a single, excusable blemish: a 2-1 loss at Czech Republic.
2. Belgium. Caesars lists the Red Devils as betting co-favorites with England, and it's not hard to see why. They were third in the last World Cup, their goal difference in qualifying was only behind England's, and they had the best expected goal difference to boot. They will need a healthy Eden Hazard though, and he's currently rehabbing a season-ending injury.
3. Spain. Granted, La Roja haven't made even the quarterfinals of their last three major tournaments, but the veteran-heavy squad brilliant in qualifying, posting the second-best expected goal margin and showing massive upside in a 3-0 win over Sweden and 5-0 win over Romania. -- Bill Connelly ( @ESPN_BillC )
ENGLAND: Who will play up front?
There are two scenarios for England at Euro 2020. The first revolves around a fit Harry Kane leading the line for Gareth Southgate's team and ensuring they justify their status as one of the pre-tournament favourites. The second is that Kane fails to fully recover from the hamstring injury that has kept him on the sideline since December, and England go into the tournament without their talisman, captain and main source of goals.
To make matters worse, Marcus Rashford , the man most likely to fill any void left by Kane, is also facing his own fitness battle and is rated as doubtful to be fit in time for the finals given his back injury. If Kane and Rashford are fit, England possess the firepower to beat any team, but without them, Southgate will be struggling to find adequate replacements. Leicester's Jamie Vardy is not an option, having retired from international football in August 2018, leaving the likes of Chelsea's Tammy Abraham , Bournemouth's Callum Wilson and Southampton's Danny Ings as potential strikers if Kane and/or Rashford miss out.
England still possess attacking threat with wingers Raheem Sterling , Jadon Sancho and Callum Hudson-Odoi , but their tournament chances rest on Kane being fit. -- Mark Ogden ( @MarkOgden_ )
Of course they are. Les Bleus are currently vice-European champions and World Cup champions. They have reached the final in the past two big tournaments and none of their peers have a better record over the past four years. This generation dreams of imitating (and surpassing) the 1998-2000 version that famously pulled off the World Cup/Euros double. Didier Deschamps was the captain then; leading the team this summer, he will know exactly how to motivate his players.
Stream LIVE games from Serie A, MLS, FA Cup, Carabao Cup, internationals and more (U.S. only)
Equally, the style will not matter and France will be very pragmatic again in their tactics. Deschamps will certainly use the same ideas and mentality than in Russia. However, this will be a better, more mature and more experienced squad than won the World Cup back in 2018. You can expect 80% of the players who were in Russia to be there again two years later, while some possible newcomers ( Kingsley Coman , Wissam Ben Yedder , Anthony Martial , Tanguy Ndombélé, Clément Lenglet for example) will bring a lot to the table and give Deschamps more talented options.
Kylian Mbappe , Hugo Lloris and Antoine Griezmann will still be the leaders. N'Golo Kante and Raphael Varane will be key factors, too, but the key for this team will be Paul Pogba . He needs to not only return to match fitness, but to regain his best form at Man United. But not to worry: he still has three months in which to do it. -- Julien Laurens ( @LaurensJulien )
SPAIN: Are they back in Europe's top tier?
Luis Enrique is aiming to take Spain back to the top and has been projecting nothing but confidence when it comes to that mission.
I spent time with Spain coach Luis Enrique for UEFA.com last week and walked away from our chat much more optimistic about La Roja's chances in Euro 2020 than I was going into it. One conclusion to take from the experience is that to be in this man's presence is to feel the pulse of his remarkable energy, confidence and conviction.
Tournaments are strange beasts and one thing is absolutely clear. A squad needs to be energised. It needs to "believe," needs to feel that it's being "hot-housed" as the key players and bit-part-players all coalesce into a fighting unit after a long, brutal season. Can "Lucho" add all that to his playing group? I imagine he can.
But what about the jigsaw pieces? The picture, for Spain, is confused. It's their coach's first experience in charge at a tournament. His choices are both interesting and testing.
Which goalkeepers join the squad? Right now his main two, Kepa Arrizabalaga and David De Gea, are having their troubles at Chelsea and Man United, respectively. Pau Lopez , at Roma, can step up but will Luis Enrique opt for Unai Simon , Athletic's promising kid? Is Sergio Busquets still playing sufficiently elite football? And regardless of the group Luis Enrique puts together, will they have sufficient killer mentality to emulate their 2008, 2010 and 2012 winning predecessors? The jury is out, but the jury remains slightly doubtful. -- Graham Hunter ( @BumperGraham )
ITALY: Is this a tournament too soon for the Azzurri?
If you're of a superstitious bent and an Italy fan, you don't feel great about Euro 2020. Results have been uncharacteristically good in qualifying and the Azzurri have generally done best when they've had their backs against the wall and barely qualified for tournaments. Fear of failure has been a great motivator.
There's a quiet optimism around this group, and not just for the excellent performances in qualifying. There's a corps of young players -- goalkeeper Gigio Donnarumma, midfielders Nicolo Barella , Stefano Sensi and Sandro Tonali , forward Federico Chiesa -- who have generated tons of excitement, though the most gifted of them all, midfielder Nicolo Zaniolo , may miss out on the tournament because of a cruciate ligament injury suffered in January . And there are veterans like Leo Bonucci at the back, Jorginho and Marco Verratti in midfield and free-scoring striker Ciro Immobile up front that make Italy a tough out. The key will be whether manager Roberto Mancini can bring it all together.
A phenomenally gifted player, Mancini never quite hit the highs his talent warranted while playing for the national team. As a coach, he won silverware at Inter and Manchester City prior to taking the Italy job, mostly with experienced players and a relatively orthodox approach. But with Italy, he's putting his trust in youth and a high-energy, attack-minded ethos, a stark departure from Azzurri sides of yesteryear. -- Gab Marcotti ( @Marcotti )
GERMANY: Are they past their crisis point and ready to contend?
Serge Gnabry is in fantastic form and will form a key part of Germany's core heading into Euro 2020.
Save for recurring public pleas to see Thomas Muller and Mats Hummels return to the squad, Germany have moved on from their 2018 World Cup woes. This is a team that is now in a different cycle to the one that saw them triumph in Brazil and then pay for their complacency in Russia.
While there's no denying some discomfort around World Cup-winning coach Joachim Low still being the man in charge, the 60-year-old deserves credit for starting another cycle. He has reshaped the squad with many young faces and has realised that his beloved heavy possession approach of previous years no long works in isolation and that speed is pivotal. It's a shift has allowed new quality to blossom and some familiar faces to rise higher. Kai Havertz is a player to build a team around and Serge Gnabry has emerged as an explosive attacking option, while Joshua Kimmich , Leon Goretzka and Matthias Ginter are key figures in the leadership of this new Germany.
German FA (DFB) president Fritz Keller's unhelpful belief that Germany have to make the semifinals puts unnecessary pressure on a young group that should treat this tournament as a chance to grow rather than to challenge. -- Jonathan Harding ( @JonBloggs66 )
CORONAVIRUS: How will it affect the tournament?
Fans across Europe will be impacted by the ongoing coronavirus concern, though Euro 2020 has not been reconsidered at this time.
The coronavirus, which was first detected in Chinese city of Wuhan, has been felt most by Italy within Europe. At the time of writing, there have been 79 recorded deaths from coronavirus in Italy, with the northern region of Lombardy the most affected. Several top-flight matches have been postponed -- including the top-of-the-table clash between Juventus and Inter -- with others, including Atalanta's Champions League last-16, second leg, against Valencia , played behind closed doors. The first match of the tournament will take place in Rome and is between Italy and Turkey and so far UEFA have made no plans to change the venue.
"Euro 2020 will kick off on June 12, 2020 in Rome," a UEFA statement read. "UEFA is in touch with the relevant international and local authorities regarding the Coronavirus and its development. For the moment, there is no need to change anything in the planned timetable. The issue will be kept under constant scrutiny."
Other European countries which have been affected by the coronavirus include Switzerland, where the top two tiers of football have been suspended until March 15. Italy has also seen other sports affected, with men's and women's rugby Six Nations matches cancelled. -- Andrew Cesare Richardson ( @AndrewCesare )
