Manchester United have seen two teenage transfer targets slip through the net, while Tottenham have been offered a €25million Roma forward, all in the Euro papers.
Rennes president Nicolas Holveck says that Eduardo Camavinga has agreed to stay with the club for at least one more season.
The 17-year-old broke into Rennes’ first team last January and after making seven appearances before the end of last season and he has only missed five games this term.
As well as Manchester United, Liverpool, Arsenal and Tottenham have all been linked with the France Under-21 international after his impressive rise.
According to the Metro , United’s interest puts them in a strong position to sign Camavinga and they are joined there by LaLiga giants Real Madrid.
Now though Holveck has confirmed in a press conference that the decision has been made for Camavinga to stay at Roazhon Park.
“We are currently in a spectacular crisis,” Holveck said. “When we see the great clubs, I am not sure that there will be great movements. We have not yet set a price for Camavinga but we have decided that he will continue with us next season because we are an ambitious team.
“We have agreed with Eduardo that he will stay with us next season. He is a smart player and he knows where his sporting interest would be best served at the moment. Irrespective of that, we haven’t actually received any offers for him.”
Meanwhile, Borussia Dortmund have won the race to sign United target Jude Bellingham, report ESPN.
The Bundesliga club are expected to announce the Birmingham City midfielder’s arrival for £20million in the coming days.
Arsenal have enquired about Schick, who is on loan at RB Leipzig (Corriere dello Sport)
AC Milan have made an offer to Mario Götze, whose contract expires with Borussia Dortmund this month (TodoFichajes)
Paris Saint-Germain are keen to sign Lucas Hernandez to replace the outgoing Thiago Silva, but Bayern Munich appear reluctant to do business (Le10 Sport)
Paris Saint-Germain have offered a new contract to Layvin Kurzawa, who Atletico de Madrid are considering signing (El Mundo Deportivo)
Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s future will be decided at the end of the season, says AC Milan’s director of football Frederic Massara (Goal)
