UEFA EURO 2020 - EURO 1964: all you need to know - News
The second European Nations' Cup finals were contested in Spain; get all the key info.
Who won the 1964 EURO?
Hosts Spain won their first major title by beating reigning champions Soviet Union 2-1 in the final, Marcelino heading the winner in the final at Madrid's Estádio Santiago Bernabéu on 21 June 1964. Jesús María Pereda gave the Spaniards a sixth-minute lead (the earliest EURO final goal to date), but Galimzyan Khusainov levelled swiftly and there was little to choose between the sides until Marcelino met Pereda's cross for the 84th-minute winner. "We really were a good unit," said Pereda. "We had Luis Suárez to conduct the orchestra. Then we had great players like Amancio and Marcelino, who was a natural goalscorer. It was a fantastic squad really."
Who were the top scorers at the 1964 EURO?
Three players finished the finals level on two goals:
Denmark's Ole Madsen was the top scorer in the competition overall; he netted 11 in qualifying (a record that stood until Croatia's Davor Šuker got 12 in qualifying for EURO '96), but did not score in the finals.
Where was the 1964 EURO held?
Spain was the host nation for the second European Nations' Cup finals; Madrid's Santiago Bernabéu stadium staged Spain's semi-final win against Hungary and their final victory over the Soviet Union, with the other semi-final – and Hungary's third-place play-off win against plucky amateurs Denmark – taking place at Camp Nou in Barcelona. The referees came from Belgium (Arthur Blavier), Italy (Concetto Lo Bello), Switzerland (Daniel Mellet) and England (Arthur Holland).
Who managed the winning team at the 1964 EURO?
José Villalonga coached Spain to their 1964 triumph, and stayed in charge of the national team until the 1966 FIFA World Cup. At club level, Villalonga had coached Real Madrid to their 1956 and 1957 European Cup wins and he got the Spain job after lifting the 1962 European Cup Winners' Cup with Atlético. However, he focused on young talent for his EURO squad and knew how to inspire players; forward Jesús María Pereda remembered his pre-match tactics talk ahead of the final against the USSR: "Villalonga mapped out a football pitch in the sand and used stones to represent us – and pine cones to represent the Soviet Union. He convinced us that stones were stronger than pine cones so we were therefore going to win."
Who was the winning captain at the 1964 EURO?
Central defender Fernando Olivella captained Spain to their first major international success, celebrating the climactic victory over the Soviet Union the day before his 28th birthday. A born-and-bred Catalan, he made 513 appearances for Barcelona from 1956 to 1969. Later becoming a respected PE teacher, he said of his captaincy style: "I have always been a serious person, and I believe there are certain things you always have to take seriously. So if a team-mate was misbehaving, I would tell him so; however it would always be done in private."
What was the format for the 1964 EURO?
As in the first edition, four teams competed at the final tournament in Spain, which took place from 17–21 June 1964. The hosts required extra time to prevail 2-1 against Hungary in the opening semi-final, with the USSR dispatching outsiders Denmark 3-0 in the other semi. It also took extra time for Hungary to overcome the Danes 3-1 in the 20 June third-place play-off in Barcelona. Spain then ousted the USSR in the Madrid final the following day.
How many teams featured in the 1964 EURO?
Four teams figured at the finals, while 29 were in the initial qualifying draw (though Greece withdrew for political reasons after being paired with Albania).
How did 1964 EURO qualifying work?
The first editions of the EURO were knockout competitions, and it needed 13 preliminary round ties to reduce the field to 16 for the first round proper of the 1964 edition, with all ties contested over two legs. The winners of the four second-round ties qualified for the final tournament in Spain.
Who was in the 1964 EURO team of the tournament?
