represents quite a vote of confidence from Roumell, who cited the company’s continuing dominance in smartphone-screen protectors, but also emphasized that Zagg is becoming less reliant on its legacy niche. The company acquired Gear4, which has the largest market share for phone cases in the U.K., in 2018, and acquired Halo in January 2019.
Halo makes portable chargers, including the Bolt, pictured above, which can charge all sorts of portable devices and even jump-start your car in a pinch.
Roumell believes Zagg “stole” both companies, for about $35 million apiece.
“Our channel checks give us confidence that their revenue was up over 50% in 2019,” he said, speaking of both acquired units.
When asked about the possibility that Zagg’s core business of screen protectors may be a dying one, Roumell said this perception was a reason the stock has been weak. But he is pleased that the screen protectors now make up only about 40% of the company’s revenue. He disagrees that the screen-protector business is threatened.
“About five years ago, about 15% of smartphone sales came with screen protectors,” he said. “Now the attachment rate is 25%. One reason is people are spending more for a phone, so they want to put on a screen protector.”
A new phone is still unlikely to come with a screen protector, and if you want one, Zagg is the only company that can manufacture products for brand-new phone designs and get them into stores across the U.S. within a couple of weeks, Roumell said.
“Their two primary competitors, PureGear and BodyGuards, have each about 8% market share, from industry data, with Zagg about 47%,” he added.
Getting back to his “multiple shots on goal,” Roumell cited the 5G replacement cycle for smartphones, Zagg’s leading market position for mophie power packs (including a three-in-one to charge an iPhone, an Apple Watch and Air Pods wirelessly on the same pad), and its strong business-to-business relationships, as reasons he expects the company to continue to be a “mid-single-digit growth business.”
Roumell said Zagg was the first stock making up 10% or more of the Roumell Opportunistic Value Fund in four years.
, an asset manager based in Toronto.
Roumell calls Dundee Corp. “a passive investor in a slimmed-down portfolio with interesting core assets,” anchored by its main holding, a 20% stake in Dundee Precious Metals DPMLF,
And that’s where the value lies: Based on  the  $746 million market cap for Dundee Precious Metals (according to FactSet), Dundee Corp.’s 20% stake is worth much more than Dundee Corp. itself. This means Dundee Corp. shareholders “have access to all of the company’s other assets for free,” according to Roumell.
Dundee Corp., led by CEO Jonathan Goodman (whose family controls the company), has been working to greatly reduce its expenses and the size and complexity of its investment portfolio, after previous investments in commodity businesses were written-down significantly. So now it is pretty much a passive investor in Canada’s beaten-down mining sector.
Roumell said Dundee Corp.’s balance sheet is strong, as the company has no “funded debt,” which means no notes or bonds with coming due dates. The company has perpetual preferred shares  outstanding, with no redemption date.
He expects Dundee Corp.’s operating improvements and dividend payments and buybacks by Dundee Precious Metals to lead to significant gains for Dundee Corp.
The Roumell Opportunistic Value Fund was established in December 2010. It has a mixed long-term track record, which Roumell said reflected a strategic decision in early 2012 to augment Roumell Asset Management’s traditional “focused deep-value” strategy (dating back to 1999) with a GARP (growth at a reasonable price) strategy, as part of an effort to expand Roumell Asset management. After a period of poor performance, this strategy was reversed in July 2015, after which the fund’s performance improved, relative to the Russell 2000 Value Index.
For 2019, the fund was in the top percentile for performers in the Lipper “Mixed-Asset Target Allocation Moderate” fund category, while it was in the sixth percentile for three  years and 82nd for five years.
Here are total return comparisons for one year through Feb.11 and for 2019, with average annual returns for longer periods:
