Another Reminder That Coronavirus Isn’t Going Away: Denny’s Is Selling Stock.
Two guys walk into a bar. One isn’t wearing a mask. The state shuts down all dine-in restaurants.
It sounds like a bad joke, but it isn’t. New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy pushed back the date for reopening eat-in dining in his state partly because of “knucklehead” crowds at bars.
A morning briefing on what you need to know in the day ahead, including exclusive commentary from Barron's and MarketWatch writers.
It’s another blow for restaurants, which have had it tough during the pandemic. The Russell 2000 Restaurant Index is down about 19% year to date. But the pain hasn’t been shared equally. Fast food establishments are dominating dine-in peers.
Domino’s Pizza , for instance, is up about 26% year to date. Denny’s , on the other hand, is down almost 50% as of Tuesday’s close.
Denny’s is down another 13% in premarket trading after the company announced it was selling stock to raise cash . Denny’s has 1,700 restaurants, but just 11 dining rooms were open in April and same-store sales were down about 80%. With little cash on the balance sheet and little cash available in credit lines, a share sale seemed like the way to go.
For investors, it’s another reminder that coronavirus shocks aren’t going away soon.
Dr. Anthony Fauci delivered a stark message to lawmakers in testimony on Tuesday, warning that as bad as America’s coronavirus epidemic is now, it could get much worse. “We are now having forty-plus thousand new cases a day,” the nation’s top infectious disease expert said. “I would not be surprised if we go up to 100,000 a day if this does not turn around.”
Key to turning around the massive surge in cases in the South and West, Dr. Fauci said, is widespread mask-wearing. Americans, he urged, need to “embrace the universal use of face coverings.”
At a separate event Tuesday Joe Biden called for the “very top” of the U.S. government to wear masks in public.
A national mask-wearing mandate, which speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi has proposed, could help the U.S. avoid a 5% hit to GDP without requiring additional lockdown measures, Goldman Sachs economist Jan Hatzius said in a note to clients .
Bars, Dr. Fauci stressed, are simply too dangerous right now and should be avoided. “Congregation at a bar, inside, is bad news,” he said.
What’s Next: A sustained rise in cases will further slow the reopening, hurting the chances of more Americans going back to work. Even the current surge has put a damper on summer travel abroad as the European Union is continuing to bar Americans from visiting even as it allows visitors from other countries.
The ink was barely dry from the passage of China’s national security law, which strips Hong Kong residents of an array of civil and political rights, when the U.S. retaliated. Ajit Pai, head of the Federal Communications Commissions, announced that Chinese telecommunications firms Huawei and ZTE had been designated national security threats .
The new law imposes jail time for any efforts to endanger national security, including espionage and inciting hatred against the government. It also allows a special police force to put people under secret surveillance, which the central government will oversee.
The U.S.’s designation of Huawei and ZTE as security threats means that telecom companies will be prohibited from using any of the $8.3 billion allocated annually to the Universal Service Fund, which helps pay for internet connections in schools, libraries and low-income and rural areas, to buy equipment from the two Chinese companies.
China’s Foreign Ministry also said it would impose new visa restrictions on an unspecified set of “U.S. individuals with egregious conduct on [Hong Kong]-related issues,” likely in retaliation for the U.S. saying it would deny visas to any Chinese official or business executive involved in Beijing’s crackdown on the island.
“So far, U.S. stocks haven’t been rattled, with the S&P 500 up slightly Tuesday. Unless the deteriorating relationship actually leads to concrete measures rather than just heated rhetoric, U.S. stocks may continue to be largely unfazed by the tensions.” – Barron’s Reshma Kapadia
What’s Next: China’s new law should help give President Trump bipartisan support for a range of actions previously considered excessive, such as sanctioning some 20 Chinese companies with close ties to China’s military. Meanwhile, China’s vague visa restrictions give huge latitude to dial back tensions, or ramp them up significantly.
With July 4 observed on Friday, June’s nonfarm payroll numbers will be released Thursday . Economists surveyed by FactSet are expecting an increase of 3 million jobs, better than May’s surprising 2.5 million jobs added. Even that good news may be less than comforting because it won’t necessarily capture the economic pain caused by the recent surge in Covid-19 cases in the South and West.
Certain sectors, including hospitality, leisure, construction, health care, and retail, are expected to show big job gains. It’s hard not to take that news with a dollop of cynicism though, because data in the past few days has shown a sharp drop in activities like restaurant visits.
Hiring in entertainment and recreation remains stalled as people avoid large gatherings, and theme park openings like Disneyland in California have been postponed indefinitely. Disney stock is down 23% for the year.
This will be the first jobs report since the Bureau of Labor Statistics said that a “misclassification” led it to believe that the unemployment rate was higher than it reported in March, April, and May, when it tallied jobless rates of 4.4, 14.7 and 13.3, respectively. “As it turns out, a large number of people—we estimate about 4.9 million in May—were misclassified,” the BLS said in a Monday statement.
The Senate approved an extension of the Paycheck Protection Program Tuesday night until Aug. 8. The measure still needs to be passed in the House and signed by Trump.
What’s Next: The expected increase in payrolls will likely dovetail with a rise in permanent layoffs, says Lydia Boussour, an economist at Oxford Economics. As Barron’s reports , “Companies cutting jobs now are more likely to be doing so out of hardship versus a lockdown order.”
The Barron’s Investing in Tech event series continues today. Kelly Steckelberg, chief financial officer of Zoom , will discuss how the startup managed explosive growth; Bill Gross, the founder and chairman of Idealab, will look at the future of green innovation; and Kim Polese, co-founder and chairman of Crowdsmart, will discuss artificial intelligence’s role in democratizing venture capital funding. Register to join the virtual event, which starts at 1 p.m. ET.
European aerospace group Airbus said it will slash 15,000 jobs within the next year. The plane maker explained that the “commercial aircraft business activity has dropped by close to 40% in recent months as the industry faces an unprecedented crisis” due to the massive fall in air travel.
Two thirds of the job cuts, which amount in total to about 11% of the company’s workforce, will be spread evenly between France and Germany, whose governments each own 11% of the group.
Airbus said it would try to rely on measures such as voluntary departures, early retirement or partial unemployment schemes, but that “compulsory actions cannot be ruled out.”
A source at the French finance ministry said Tuesday night that the number of job cuts planned by Airbus was “excessive.” The French government announced a few weeks ago a multibillion euros bailout plan for the airline and aerospace industry that partly benefited the plane maker.
What’s Next: Both Airbus and its competitor Boeing —which has said that it would slash 10% of its workforce—have been hit by the string of bankruptcies, restructurings or bailouts that have crippled the airline industry. But they are facing pressure from governments eager to limit the employment casualties of the pandemic.
U.S. professional sports are gearing up for a return to action. Just not for everyone.
Ian Desmond of the Colorado Rockies, Ryan Zimmerman and Joe Ross of the Washington Nationals, and Mike Leake of the Arizona Diamondbacks all said they would opt out of the shortened 2020 baseball season, citing Covid-19 concerns.
In the National Basketball Association, which will resume its season in a bubble environment at Walt Disney resorts in Orlando, a number of professional players are sitting out, or are undecided. NBA Commissioner Adam Silver told TIME a significant spread within the complex would force the league to cancel the season.
In both leagues, players are also citing nationwide protests seeking social justice reform. Desmond’s Instagram post announcing the decision to sit out the season discussed his experiences with racism throughout his life and career.
What’s Next: The Tour de France will at least get a virtual treatment. Starting July 4, dozens of professional men’s and women’s teams will race virtually on biking platform Zwift. The races will be broadcast globally, including by NBC Sports in the U.S.
Milton Glaser, the renowned graphic designer , died last week. He was 91. Glaser was best known for his 1967 poster of Bob Dylan crowned by swirling, psychedelic hair, and his I “Heart” New York logo, unveiled a decade later to promote tourism in New York state. At Barron’s, however, he is best remembered for two redesigns of the magazine, unveiled in 1994 and 2005, that marked a notable departure from the gray columns of yore. Glaser worked to make Barron’s more approachable, attractive, and modern, and his efforts paid off for readers and writers alike.
I am asking this question for my friend. He and his wife separated in October 2019. They are trying to represent themselves to avoid costly attorney expenses. They do not have children nor any assets. She kept him in the dark about account numbers and login information. They filed jointly in 2018.
The Covid-19 stimulus payment was deposited into their joint account neither of them use anymore. As he was unable to check online banking, he did not know when this happened. He ended up checking the balance at the ATM only to discover she has withdrawn all of the $2,400 payment, leaving him with nothing.
He has since confronted her and she has admitted it and told him she had already spent it. She refuses to give it back, and declines to even work out a payment plan. When trying to report it to the IRS, everything seems to come down to identity theft as being the reason it was stolen.
What do you think? What does he need to do to obtain the $1,200 stimulus payment she stole from him?
—Newsletter edited by Stacy Ozol, Anita Hamilton, Mary Romano, Matt Bemer, Benjamin Levisohn
Another Reminder That Coronavirus Isn’t Going Away: Denny’s Is Selling Stock.
Two guys walk into a bar.
