Shipping containers are seen on a Cosco Shipping vessel at the Port of Long Beach.
The Dow and S&P 500 closed at fresh records Thursday even after reports emerged of “fierce internal opposition” in Washington over a new agreement with Beijing to cancel tariffs in stages.
The benchmark Russell 2000 index of smaller, domestically-focused companies, which had been more reluctant to join the recent market rally, closed slightly higher.
How did major benchmarks perform?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
added 23.89 points, or 0.28%, to 8,434.52, its second-highest close in history, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
On Tuesday , the Dow lost less than a point to end at 27,492.50, while the S&P 500 index gained 2.16 points, or 0.07%, at 3,076.78. The Nasdaq Composite Index  shed 24.05 points, 0.29%, closing at 8,410.63.
closed up 4.45 points Thursday, or 0.26%, to 1,593.99.
Major U.S. stock indexes have been setting new records in recent sessions, with investors encouraged by reports of progress on an interim trade deal between the U.S. and China.
Some of that optimism faded in afternoon trade amid reports of “fierce internal opposition” within the White House over plans for the U.S. and China to roll back tariffs in an effort to reignite progress on the protracted trade dispute.
Early Thursday, Bloomberg News reported China and the U.S. will cancel planned tariffs on each other’s products in stages , with the first agreement due to be signed in the next few weeks. The amount of tariff relief that’s coming will depend on what’s in that deal, said Ministry of Commerce spokesman Gao Feng, according to the South China Morning Post. But by late afternoon, conflicting reports had emerged about how much ground — if any — the Trump administration had agreed to give up , according to the Wall Street Journal.
Bruce Bittles, chief investment strategist at Robert W. Baird & Co., said that recent positive comments on trade had been a catalyst for propelling stocks to record highs, but that falling Treasury bond yields also have led to an improved view about the U.S. economy.
“Bond yields are up enormously,” he told MarketWatch. “I think that’s bullish and I think that suggests that the U.S. economy is doing better.”
“In addition, perhaps the European economy, Japan and even China, maybe, have bottomed here, in terms of their economies weakening,” he added.
Investors were also eyeing developments in Europe, after the European Central Bank issued an update on economic and monetary developments that predicted sluggish but positive economic growth in the second half of 2019.
In U.S. economic data, the Labor Department estimated that 211,000 Americans filed new unemployment claims in the week ended Nov. 2, a one month-low and below the 215,000 predicted by economists polled by MarketWatch.
“We haven’t seen a list of what products would be impacted,” said Robert Pavlik, chief investment strategist at SlateStone Wealth, but added that industrials, the tech sector, semiconductors and companies doing business overseas were all benefiting from fresh optimism on the trade front.
“What you have is a market that’s essentially at all-time highs,” he told MarketWatch.
