shares jumped 1.12% to close at $7.23. About 127,065 shares traded hands on 1,396 trades for the day, compared with an average daily volume of 
n/a shares out of a total float of 26.34 million. After opening the trading day at $7.10, shares of Genie Energy Ltd. Class B Stock stayed within a range of $7.33 to 
    $190.42 million.  Shares of Genie Energy Ltd. Class B Stock have been trading within a range of $11.98 
and $4.60 over the last year, and it had a 50-day SMA of $n/a and a 200-day SMA of $n/a.
Genie Energy Ltd, through its subsidiaries, operates as a retail energy provider; and an oil and gas exploration company. Its segments are Genie Retail Energy (GRE) which is the key revenue generator, GRE International, Genie Energy Services (GES), and Genie Oil and Gas (GOGAS). GRE owns and operates retail energy providers (REPs), including IDT Energy, Residents Energy, Town Square Energy, and Mirabito. Its REP businesses resell electricity and natural gas to residential and small business in Eastern and Midwestern United States. GES designs, manufactures and distributes solar panels and also offers energy brokerage and advisory services. GOGAS is an oil and gas exploration company that owns an interest in a contracted drilling services operation and interest in Afek Oil and Gas (Afek).
Genie Energy Ltd. Class B Stock is based out of Newark, NJ and has some 163 employees. Its CEO is Michael M Stein.
For a complete fundamental analysis of Genie Energy Ltd. Class B Stock, check out Equities.com’s Stock Valuation Analysis report for 
Still paying commissions on stock trades? Equities.com now offers $7.99/month unlimited trading and flat-fee options trading for $89.99/month! Get started today by https://www.equities.com/trading-start
Genie Energy Ltd. Class B Stock is also a component of the Russell 2000. The Russell 2000 is one of the leading indices tracking small-cap companies in the United States. It's maintained by  Russell 
Investments, an industry leader in creating and maintaining indices, and consists of the smallest 2000 stocks from the broader Russell 3000 index.
Russell's indices differ from traditional indices like the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or S&P 500, whose members are selected by committee, because they base membership entirely on an 
objective, rules based methodology. The 3,000 largest companies by market cap make up the Russell 3000, with the 2,000 smaller companies making up the Russell 2000. It's a simple approach that gives 
a broad, unbiased look at the small-cap market as a whole.
To get more information on Genie Energy Ltd. Class B Stock and to follow the company’s latest updates, you can visit the company’s profile page here: GNE’s Profile . For more news on the financial markets and emerging growth companies, be sure to visit Equities.com’s 
email newsletter to ensure you don’t miss out on any of our best stories.
All data provided by QuoteMedia and was accurate as of 4:30PM ET.
DISCLOSURE: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not represent the views of equities.com . Readers should not consider statements made by the author as formal recommendations and should consult their financial advisor before making any investment decisions. To read our full disclosure, please go to: http://www.equities.com/disclaimer
