Ten Times More People Have Covid-19 Antibodies Than Are Diagnosed, CDC Reports
Think of it this way: global stock markets and investors command more computing power, better software, faster networks, and the intense focus of tens of millions of individuals betting their own money. Most investors are highly accomplished, numerate and analytical, representing in their aggregate a vast and virtual supercomputer. This supercomputer likes nothing more than to bulldoze those acting on bad data or their own confirmation biases.
My friend, the one with the fund, likes to say, “Mr. Market is the Great Humiliator of us all.” The market rewards good decisions and punishes bad ones harshly. Can we say the same of most health services, research foundations, and governments?
Covid-19 is a global crisis, first spotted in China, then the rest of Asia and Europe. Now it is surging in the Americas. The global stock markets—around $60 trillion in size as of April 1—respond daily to news about Covid-19 whether awful or promising. That includes policy responses, whether good or bad. While global stocks have seen dramatic declines so far in 2020, China’s stock markets are down by comparatively modest percentages this year—Shanghai down 7%, Shenzhen up 2% and Hong Kong 15% lower—reflecting China’s first-to-suffer, first-to-recover status.
Now let’s look at the U.S. stock markets. The S&P 500, Russell 2000 and Nasdaq 100 are down 15%, 29% and 4% respectively. What does that tell us? The sagging Russell 2000 says small companies will suffer the most over the next several months; many small companies will cease to exist. On the other hand, Nasdaq 100 says big tech companies are in the best shape. They have the cash. They are not dependent on physical labor or foot traffic.
Tech’s expanding role in all industries hints at why the Nasdaq 100 has fallen less than the S&P 500 and Russell 2000 since markets turned bearish. Precisely because Covid-19 has pushed all other stories off the front page, it’s easy to forget the huge digital transformation wave in front of us. Don’t make that mistake.
Rich Karlgaard is editor at large at Forbes. As an author and global futurist, he has published several books, the latest of which is Late Bloomers, a groundbreaking exploration of what it means to be a late bloomer in a culture obsessed with SAT scores and early success. For his past columns and blogs visit our website at www.forbes.com/sites/richkarlgaard.
I'm the publisher of Forbes magazine, where I write a biweekly column called Innovation Rules. I'm also a regular panelist on cable news' popular business show, Forbes on
I'm the publisher of Forbes magazine, where I write a biweekly column called Innovation Rules. I'm also a regular panelist on cable news' popular business show, Forbes on FOX (with an average viewership of 1.2 million households per show in 2012), and frequent guest analyst on CNBC's The Kudlow Report. My 2004 book, Life 2.0, was a Wall Street Journal business bestseller. I'm also an entrepreneur, an active angel investor, and sit on three outside boards. For co-founding Silicon Valley's largest public affairs organization, the 6,500-member Churchill Club, I'm a past Northern California winner of Ernst & Young's prestigious "Entrepreneur of the Year Award." I earned a B.A. from Stanford University. I lecture up to 50 to 60 times a year on the innovation economy.
