Based on the early price action and the current price at $1525.60, the direction of the February Comex gold market on Tuesday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the Fibonacci level at $1526.40.
Gold futures hit their highest level in more than three months early Tuesday, helping to put the market in a position to post its best yearly performance in nearly a decade. Traders are saying the catalysts behind the rally are a weakening U.S. Dollar and year-end buying tied to position-squaring and thin-volume.
At 05:51 GMT, February Comex gold futures are trading $1525.60, up $6.90 or +0.45%.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. The uptrend was reaffirmed early Tuesday when buyers took out the previous main top at $1525.20.
A trade through $1463.00 will change the main trend to down. This is highly unlikely, but due to the prolonged move up in terms of price and time, short-term traders should start watching for a closing price reversal top. The chart pattern won’t change the main trend to down, but it could signal the start of a 2 to 3 day correction.
The main range is $1571.70 to $1453.10. Gold is currently testing its 50% to 61.8% retracement zone at $1512.40 to $1526.40. This zone is controlling the near-term direction of the market.
Based on the early price action and the current price at $1525.60, the direction of the February Comex gold market on Tuesday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the Fibonacci level at $1526.40.
A sustained move over $1526.40 will indicate the presence of buyers. This is a potential trigger point for an acceleration to the upside. The first targets are main tops at $1532.40 and $1549.90. The major target is the 2019 main top at $1571.70.
A sustained move under $1526.40 will signal the presence of sellers. If this move creates enough downside momentum then look for a test of the main 50% level at $1512.40. This is a potential trigger point for an acceleration to the downside.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
