Late June brings the end of the school year—and one of the highest trading-volume days on U.S. stock markets. It’s when FTSE Russell rebalances its U.S. equity indexes. Thanks to the coronavirus pandemic, both annual traditions will look very different this year.
Some $9 trillion is benchmarked to FTSE Russell’s U.S. indexes by both passive instruments and active managers. The best-known indexes are the large-cap Russell 1000 and the small-cap Russell 2000.
This year’s reshuffle will feature particularly high turnover and changes in index weights because it follows a steep selloff and a rapid-but-uneven bounce off the market bottom.
Tech stocks are expected to claim a greater presence in large-cap growth and value indexes, while industrials will shift to value from growth across market caps. The smallest companies in the Russell 2000 index, meanwhile, will get smaller—and could bottom out below $100 million in market value, which would be the lowest since the financial crisis.
For investors, the run-up to the rebalancing presents an opportunity to get ahead of some of the fund flows into and out of stocks that are joining or leaving the indexes.
Russell will release its preliminary indexes on June 5. They are based on May 8 prices, which allows analysts and investors to approximate the lists ahead of time. The actual rebalancing will take place after the market closes on Friday, June 26. Tens of billions of dollars of shares will be traded in the closing minutes to align with the new indexes.
Bank of America Securities anticipates that more than 200 stocks will move in and out of Russell’s indexes, with more shifting between their growth and value subindexes.
Those will be determined based on May 31 data including price-to-book ratios, five-year sales growth, and forward earnings estimates. But because FTSE Russell aims to keep the total market cap of growth and value indexes the same, the number of stocks in each can differ.
The Russell 1000 growth index will have its greatest concentration of companies in history this year, while the value benchmark will have the highest number of stocks ever, says Savita Subramanian, BofA’s head of U.S. equity and quantitative strategy.
“The market has grown really oligopolistic, and we’ve seen a really focused group of growth companies taking share,” Subramanian says. “The value or old-economy companies are all getting relatively smaller and smaller.”
The greatest sector-weight shift will occur in the Russell Midcap growth index, where health care’s weight rises to 23%, from 17%. That’s driven by relative outperformance from small-cap biotechs growing into mid-cap valuations.
Russell index inclusion is a big deal for companies seeking a broader shareholder base and trading liquidity for their shares. Private-equity firm KKR (ticker: KKR), for example, has cited Russell index inclusion in 2020 as a strategic priority. If added to the Russell 1000, KKR shares could see $644 million worth of buying pressure from exchange-traded funds and passive investors, equal to almost seven trading days of average volume for the stock, estimates Jefferies equity strategist Steven DeSanctis.
That is a lot of extra demand, but nowhere near what some thinly traded small-caps entering the Russell 2000 could see. DeSanctis points to Atlas Technical Consultants (ATCX), SWK Holdings (SWKH), and Auburn National Bancorp (AUBN) as among the shares that could have hundreds of times greater buying pressure than their average daily volumes.
Passive selling, meanwhile, could weigh on other shares. Telehealth provider Teladoc Health (TDOC) has more than doubled this year, lifting its market value to $13 billion. That may earn it a promotion from the Russell 2000 to the Russell 1000, adding it to the investible universe of funds that use the large-cap index as a benchmark. But it also means that Teladoc will go from being one of the largest Russell 2000 companies to among the smallest in the Russell 1000, greatly reducing its weight in an index dominated by market-cap behemoths Microsoft (MSFT), Apple (AAPL), and Amazon.com (AMZN).
Passive and ETF selling could mean $828 million in outflows from Teladoc shares, per DeSanctis’ projections, or about 1.3 days to trade. Bank of Princeton (BPRN), TowneBank (TOWN), and Brown-Forman ’s (BF.A) Class A shares are among the stocks that could see the greatest selling pressure, relative to their average trading volume as a result of the reshuffle.
Traders and hedge funds approach the rebalancing several months before with multiple strategies. The simplest is to buy the stocks that could get a boost from buying by ETFs and other passive investors, thanks to being reclassified into a more-popular index or having their relative weight increase. Ditto for shorting shares moving in the opposite direction.
After the market volatility this year, the trade hasn’t been as straightforward. That could mean lower participation from risk-taking traders, lower liquidity, and more difficulty exiting positions. “There’s always great interest in the Russell rebalance—that mind-set hasn’t changed,” says John Spensieri, head of U.S. equity trading at Stifel. “But I think people are very concerned about the number of participants that are willing to take risk this year in offsetting the rebalance.”
The greater-than-usual scale of the rebalance this year might not yet be reflected in market bets. For investors able to stomach more volatility over the coming month, the rebalancing trade payoff could be higher than in most years.
Late June brings the end of the school year—and one of the highest trading-volume days on U.
