Intevac Set to Join Russell 2000® Index on June 29, 2020
SANTA CLARA, Calif.--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Intevac, Inc. (Nasdaq: IVAC), a leading supplier of thin-film processing systems and digital night-vision technologies, announced today that the company is set to join the Russell 2000® Index and the Russell 3000® Index at the conclusion of this year’s reconstitution of the Russell stock indexes, effective upon the opening of the U.S. stock markets on Monday, June 29, 2020, according to a preliminary list of additions posted June 5, 2020.
“Inclusion in the Russell Indexes is an important milestone, which will increase the liquidity of our stock and overall awareness of Intevac within the investment community,” said Wendell Blonigan, president and chief executive officer. “We believe this inclusion will benefit our ability to deliver long-term shareholder value as we grow the company. With approximately $9 trillion in assets benchmarked against Russell’s US indexes, our return to the Russell 2000 will improve our exposure and appeal to institutional investors.”
Russell indexes are widely used by investment managers and institutional investors for index funds and as benchmarks for active investment strategies. The annual Russell reconstitution captures the 4,000 largest US stocks as of May 8, ranking them by total market capitalization. Membership in the US all-cap Russell 3000® Index, which remains in place for one year, means automatic inclusion in the large-cap Russell 1000® Index or small-cap Russell 2000® Index, as well as the appropriate growth- and value-style indexes. FTSE Russell determines membership for its Russell indexes primarily by objective, market-capitalization rankings, and style attributes.
FTSE Russell is a leading global index provider creating and managing a wide range of indexes, data and analytic solutions to meet client needs across asset classes, style and strategies. Covering 98% of the investable market, FTSE Russell indexes offer a true picture of global markets, combined with the specialist knowledge gained from developing local benchmarks around the world.
FTSE Russell index expertise and products are used extensively by institutional and retail investors globally. Approximately $16 trillion is currently benchmarked to FTSE Russell indexes worldwide. For over 30 years, leading asset owners, asset managers, ETF providers and investment banks have chosen FTSE Russell indexes to benchmark their investment performance and create investment funds, ETFs, structured products and index-based derivatives. FTSE Russell indexes also provide clients with tools for asset allocation, investment strategy analysis and risk management.
A core set of universal principles guides FTSE Russell index design and management: a transparent rules-based methodology is informed by independent committees of leading market participants. FTSE Russell is focused on index innovation and customer partnership applying the highest industry standards and embracing the IOSCO Principles. FTSE Russell is wholly owned by London Stock Exchange Group.
Intevac was founded in 1991 and has two businesses: Thin-film Equipment and Photonics.
In our Thin-film Equipment business, we are a leader in the design and development of high-productivity, thin-film processing systems. Our production-proven platforms are designed for high-volume manufacturing of substrates with precise thin film properties, such as the hard drive media, display cover panel, and solar photovoltaic markets we serve currently.
In our Photonics business, we are a recognized leading developer of advanced high-sensitivity digital sensors, cameras and systems that primarily serve the defense industry. We are the provider of integrated digital imaging systems for most U.S. military night vision programs.
This press release includes statements that constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Reform Act”). Intevac claims the protection of the safe-harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Reform Act. These forward-looking statements are often characterized by the terms “may,” “believes,” “projects,” “expects,” or “anticipates,” and do not reflect historical facts. Specific forward-looking statements contained in this press release include, but are not limited to: expected inclusion in the Russell 2000 and 3000 indexes and the future growth of the company. The forward-looking statements contained herein involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the company’s expectations. These risks include, but are not limited to: changes in the company’s future growth expectations and its inclusion in Russell indexes, which could have a material impact on our business, our financial results, and the company's stock price. These risks and other factors are detailed in the company’s periodic filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
