CHESTER, N.Y.--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Repro Med Systems, Inc. d/b/a KORU Medical Systems (NASDAQ: KRMD) (“KORU Medical”) today announced that the Company is set to join the broad market Russell 3000® Index, the Russell 2000® Index, and Russell Microcap® Index at the conclusion of the 2020 Russell indexes annual reconstitution, effective after the U.S. stock market opens on June 29, 2020, based on a preliminary list of additions made public on June 5, 2020.
“Our addition to the Russell is another important milestone in the growth and evolution of KORU Medical,” said Don Pettigrew, President and CEO. “It reflects the substantial progress we have made over the past year in growing our business and creating long-term value for our shareholders. We are also confident that it will help to elevate our profile among investors. We remain focused on providing innovative, easy-to-use, at-home specialty infusion solutions that improve quality of life for patients around the world.”
Annual Russell indexes reconstitution captures the 4,000 largest US stocks as of May 8, ranking them by total market capitalization. Membership in the US all-cap Russell 3000® Index, which remains in place for one year, means automatic inclusion in the large-cap Russell 1000® Index or small-cap Russell 2000® Index as well as the appropriate growth and value style indexes. FTSE Russell determines membership for its Russell indexes primarily by objective, market-capitalization rankings and style attributes. Russell indexes are widely used by investment managers and institutional investors for index funds and as benchmarks for active investment strategies. Approximately $9 trillion in assets are benchmarked against Russell’s US indexes. Russell indexes are part of FTSE Russell, a leading global index provider. For more information on the Russell 3000® Index and the Russell indexes reconstitution, go to the “Russell Reconstitution” section on the FTSE Russell website .
KORU Medical Systems manufactures and commercializes innovative and easy-to-use specialty infusion solutions that improve quality of life for patients around the world. The FREEDOM Syringe Infusion System currently includes the FREEDOM60® and FreedomEdge® Syringe Infusion Drivers, Precision Flow Rate Tubing™ and HIgH-Flo Subcutaneous Safety Needle Sets™. These devices are used for infusions administered in the home and alternate care settings. For more information about the Company, please visit www.korumedical.com .
This press release may contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, identified by words such as “set to” and “will”. Actual results may differ materially from the results predicted and reported results should not be considered as an indication of future performance. The potential risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ from the results predicted include, among others, those risks and uncertainties included under the captions “Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as amended, and our most recent Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2020, which are on file with the SEC and are available on our website at www.korumedical.com/investors and on the SEC website at www.sec.gov . All information provided in this release and in the attachments is as of June 18, 2020. Undue reliance should not be placed on the forward-looking statements in this press release, which are based on information available to us on the date hereof. We undertake no duty to update this information unless required by law.
