The Russell 2000 is up almost 40% from its March 23 low, outstripping the gains of 38% the Russell 1000 and 31.2% for the FTSE All-World.
Part of the Russell 2000's newfound power comes from its bigger tilt to financials, producer durables and materials than the Russell 1000.
Risk-on/risk-off tug of war between technology (reliable growth) and health care (a traditional defensive champion) sheds greatest light on relative performances of US small and large-cap stocks this year.
US stocks regained their dominance with the global risk rally of the past two months, and US small caps have led the way. The Russell 2000 is up almost 40% from its March 23 low, outstripping the gains of 38% the Russell 1000 and 31.2% for the FTSE All-World.
Global equity market moves from March 23 Covid-19 correction lows (LC, TR)
Source: FTSE Russell. Data from March 23, 2020 through May 31, 2020. Past performance is no guarantee to future results. Please see the end for important disclosures.
Part of the Russell 2000's newfound power comes from its bigger tilt to financials, producer durables and materials than the Russell 1000. These economically sensitive sectors were pummeled in the March pandemic panic but have staged strong rebounds in May amid signs of a faster-than-expected resumption in post-lockdown economic activity in the US and elsewhere, as well as progress toward a vaccine.
Source: FTSE Russell. Data as of May 31, 2020. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Please see the end for important legal disclosures.
However, the risk-on/risk-off tug of war between technology (reliable growth) and health care (a traditional defensive champion) sheds the greatest light on the relative performances of US small and large-cap stocks this year. As shown below, although Russell 1000 tech stocks have held their lead over their small-cap tech peers in the recent rally, that advantage has been overwhelmed by the far greater underperformance of Russell 1000 health care stocks.
Source: FTSE Russell. Data through May 31, 2020. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Please see the end for important legal disclosures.
We also see this sector interplay at work in the 10 largest contributors to each index's May returns. Top-performing information technology stocks accounted for nearly one-third of Russell 1000's total return for the month but only 14% of Russell 2000 returns, while top-performing pharmaceuticals & biotech stocks drove nearly 22% of the Russell 2000 total but only 6% for the Russell 1000.
Source: FTSE Russell. Data as of May 31, 2020. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Please see the end for important legal disclosures.
Despite this strength, US small caps still have a great deal of ground to make up from the depths of their pandemic-driven losses. The Russell 2000 was down 17.2% by the end of May, nearly twice the 9.7% decline of the Russell 1000. Recent small-cap outperformance suggests that the economic outlook has become a bigger driver of market sentiment. Looking ahead, investors must assess the likelihood of a sustained and robust recovery and whether the current optimism can prevail.
© 2020 London Stock Exchange Group plc and its applicable group undertakings (the "LSE Group"). The LSE Group includes (1) FTSE International Limited ("FTSE"), (2) Frank Russell Company ("Russell"), (3) FTSE Global Debt Capital Markets Inc. and FTSE Global Debt Capital Markets Limited (together, "FTSE Canada"), (4) MTSNext Limited ("MTSNext"), (5) Mergent, Inc. ("Mergent"), (6) FTSE Fixed Income LLC ("FTSE FI"), (7) The Yield Book Inc ("YB") and (8) Beyond Ratings S.A.S. ("BR"). All rights reserved.
FTSE Russell® is a trading name of FTSE, Russell, FTSE Canada, MTSNext, Mergent, FTSE FI, YB and BR. "FTSE®", "Russell®", "FTSE Russell®", "MTS®", "FTSE4Good®", "ICB®", "Mergent®", "The Yield Book®", "Beyond Ratings®" and all other trademarks and service marks used herein (whether registered or unregistered) are trademarks and/or service marks owned or licensed by the applicable member of the LSE Group or their respective licensors and are owned, or used under licence, by FTSE, Russell, MTSNext, FTSE Canada, Mergent, FTSE FI, YB or BR. FTSE International Limited is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority as a benchmark administrator.
All information is provided for information purposes only. All information and data contained in this publication is obtained by the LSE Group, from sources believed by it to be accurate and reliable. Because of the possibility of human and mechanical error as well as other factors, however, such information and data is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind. No member of the LSE Group nor their respective directors, officers, employees, partners or licensors make any claim, prediction, warranty or representation whatsoever, expressly or impliedly, either as to the accuracy, timeliness, completeness, merchantability of any information or of results to be obtained from the use of FTSE Russell products, including but not limited to indexes, data and analytics, or the fitness or suitability of the FTSE Russell products for any particular purpose to which they might be put. Any representation of historical data accessible through FTSE Russell products is provided for information purposes only and is not a reliable indicator of future performance.
No responsibility or liability can be accepted by any member of the LSE Group nor their respective directors, officers, employees, partners or licensors for (a) any loss or damage in whole or in part caused by, resulting from, or relating to any error (negligent or otherwise) or other circumstance involved in procuring, collecting, compiling, interpreting, analysing, editing, transcribing, transmitting, communicating or delivering any such information or data or from use of this document or links to this document or (b) any direct, indirect, special, consequential or incidental damages whatsoever, even if any member of the LSE Group is advised in advance of the possibility of such damages, resulting from the use of, or inability to use, such information.
No member of the LSE Group nor their respective directors, officers, employees, partners or licensors provide investment advice and nothing contained in this document or accessible through FTSE Russell Indexes, including statistical data and industry reports, should be taken as constituting financial or investment advice or a financial promotion.
Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Charts and graphs are provided for illustrative purposes only. Index returns shown may not represent the results of the actual trading of investable assets. Certain returns shown may reflect back-tested performance. All performance presented prior to the index inception date is back-tested performance. Back-tested performance is not actual performance, but is hypothetical. The back-test calculations are based on the same methodology that was in effect when the index was officially launched. However, back- tested data may reflect the application of the index methodology with the benefit of hindsight, and the historic calculations of an index may change from month to month based on revisions to the underlying economic data used in the calculation of the index.
This publication may contain forward-looking assessments. These are based upon a number of assumptions concerning future conditions that ultimately may prove to be inaccurate. Such forward-looking assessments are subject to risks and uncertainties and may be affected by various factors that may cause actual results to differ materially. No member of the LSE Group nor their licensors assume any duty to and do not undertake to update forward-looking assessments.
No part of this information may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written permission of the applicable member of the LSE Group. Use and distribution of the LSE Group data requires a licence from FTSE, Russell, FTSE Canada, MTSNext, Mergent, FTSE FI, YB and/or their respective licensors.
Editor's Note: The summary bullets for this article were chosen by Seeking Alpha editors.
To report a factual error in this article, click here .
Your feedback matters to us!
