In this blog, we are going to take a look at the Elliott Wave chart of RTY_F (E-mini Russell 2000). The 1 hour NY Midday chart update shows that the cycle from April 29 peak is unfolding as a zig-zag pattern. Wave (A) ended at 1220.1 low and wave (B) bounce ended at 1341.7 high. While below 1375.12 high, the bounce in 3,7 or 11 swing is expected to fail. Since wave (A) unfolded as 5 waves structure, the index can see another 5 waves leg lower in wave (C).
The 1 hour Asia chart update from May 14 shows that the pullback extended lower and broke below previous wave (A) low. The pullback looks incomplete, but is close to ending. The 100% extension of wave (A)-(B) where wave (C) can potentially end is at 1150.93-1187.53 area. This area is shown with a blue box, where we expect buyers to appear for 3 waves bounce at least.
May 21 London chart update shows that the index ended the pullback at the blue box area at 1174.96 low and bounced higher from there. Wave ((i)) ended at 1243.6 high. Wave ((ii)) ended as a flat correction at 1212.60 low. From there, the index pushed higher and ended wave ((iii)) at 1350.7 high. Wave ((iv)) pullback ended at 1297.5 low. Afterwards, wave ((v)) ended at 1354.2 high. Currently, RTY_F has ended the cycle from May 14 low. The index is now expected to pullback in 3,7 or 11 swings before extending for another leg higher in wave C. The index still needs to break above April 29 peak to confirm that the low is in place and to confirm that the next leg up is in progress.
FURTHER DISCLOSURES AND DISCLAIMER CONCERNING RISK, RESPONSIBILITY
Trading in the Foreign Exchange market is a challenging opportunity where above average returns are available for educated and experienced investors who are willing to take above average risk.
However, before deciding to participate in Foreign Exchange (FX) trading, you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of  xperience and risk appetite. Do not invest or trade capital you cannot afford to lose. EME PROCESSING AND CONSULTING, LLC, THEIR REPRESENTATIVES, AND ANYONE WORKING FOR OR WITHIN WWW.ELLIOTTWAVE- FORECAST.COM is not responsible for any loss from any form of distributed advice, signal,
Again, we fully DISCLOSE to the Subscriber base that the Service as a whole, the individual Parties, Representatives, or owners shall not be liable to any and all Subscribers for any losses or damages as a result of any action taken by the Subscriber from any trade idea or signal posted on
the website(s) distributed through any form of social-media, email, the website, and/or any other electronic, written, verbal, or future form of communication . All analysis, trading signals, trading recommendations, all charts, communicated interpretations of the wave counts, and all content from any media form produced by www.Elliottwave-forecast.com and/or the Representatives are solely the opinions and best efforts of the respective author(s).
In general Forex instruments are highly leveraged, and traders can lose some or all of their initial margin funds. All content provided by www.Elliottwave-forecast.com is expressed in good faith and is intended to help Subscribers succeed in the marketplace, but it is never guaranteed. There is no “holy grail” to trading or forecasting the market and we are wrong sometimes like everyone else.
Please understand and accept the risk involved when making any trading and/or investment decision.
UNDERSTAND that all the content we provide is protected through copyright of EME PROCESSING AND CONSULTING, LLC. It is illegal to disseminate in any form of communication any part or all of our proprietary information without specific authorization.
UNDERSTAND that you also agree to not allow persons that are not PAID SUBSCRIBERS to view any of the content not released publicly. IF YOU ARE FOUND TO BE IN VIOLATION OF THESE RESTRICTIONS you or your firm (as the Subscriber) will be charged fully with no discount for one year  subscription to our Premium Plus Plan at $1,799.88 for EACH person or firm
who received any of our content illegally through the respected intermediary’s (Subscriber in violation of terms) channel(s) of communication.
