On February 21st, our team commented about the possibility that the small-cap Russell 2000 index could begin a new bearish leg because it was developing a corrective structure as a flat pattern.
The weekly chart released on February 21st showed Russell advancing in the third internal segment of a wave (B) of Intermediate degree labeled in blue.
Looking more in-depth, the lower degree examination unveiled by the daily chart revealed that the Russell 2000 index completed an expanding diagonal pattern, which, according to the Elliott wave perspective, called for potential declines in the short-term.
weekly chart, shows the price action moving in a bearish leg belonging to a (C) wave of Intermediate degree identified in blue.
The current bearish path in development began after the price topped at 1,713.61 pts in mid-January 2020.
The following chart represents the Russell 2000 evolution in its 12-hour timeframe. In the figure, we can observe the price action running in a consolidation sequence as a wave ((iv)) of Minute degree labeled in black.
On that chart, we could observe that the US index moves in a five-wave sequence that corresponds to the first bearish move of wave (C) of Intermediate degree.
The corrective structure presents two potential scenarios, where Russell could complete a wave 1 or A of Minor degree identified in green.
If the current sequence corresponds to a wave 1, of a bearish five-wave sequence, thus an upward pullback in three waves could push the Russell 2000 to a new decline in five waves corresponding to a wave 3 of Minor degree.
This scenario implies that the wave (5) of Intermediate degree in blue is the end of the long-term bullish cycle, and the stock market will begin a bear market soon.
A second scenario suggests the possibility that the current bearish movement does not complete to wave (C) in five waves, and be part of a three-wave sequence.
If this scenario occurs, the long-term corrective sequence instead of being a 3-3-5 pattern corresponding to a flat formation would be a 3-3-3 structure in progress. In consequence, the Elliott wave pattern in development could correspond to a triangle or a complex correction.
This scenario implies that the current sequence would be part of a fourth wave, and the next wave (5) of Intermediate degree would be the end of an extended third wave.
In conclusion, our preferred positioning in Russell 2000 is in the sell-side while the index continues moving below 1,609.48 pts. The current bearish five-wave sequence in progress should end soon, which could drive the US index to make a recovery in three segments that could bring us the opportunity to join in the bearish side at the end of that recovery.
Try Secure Leveraged Trading with EagleFX!
Risk Warning: CFD and Spot Forex trading both come with a high degree of risk. You must be prepared to sustain a total loss of any funds deposited with us, as well as any additional losses, charges, or other costs we incur in recovering any payment from you. Given the possibility of losing more than your entire investment, speculation in certain investments should only be conducted with risk capital funds that if lost will not significantly affect your personal or institution’s financial well-being. Before deciding to trade the products offered by us, you should carefully consider your objectives, financial situation, needs and level of experience. You should also be aware of all the risks associated with trading on margin.
