While the S&P took another, smaller, step lower. Both the NASDAQ and Russell 2000 seem to have stabilized around last week's trading range.
Yesterday's volume was lighter than Friday's but remained very heavy overall. Traders willing to use the current low as a risk measure may find enough room for a relief-rally trade, but it won't be one for the faint of heart, and could easily be stopped out today.
In the case of the iShares Russell 2000 ETF (NYSE: IWM ), the trade stop is below $95.69, but with an ATR of 7.84, you would ideally be looking at a stop closer to $83s to allow for volatility—making the typical risk:reward worthless. So, with that caveat, buyers want to be close to the exit button.
The NASDAQ low of 6,631 is where risk:reward is measured; again, an ATR of 433, rules out the volatility driven stop but prices are congesting in the 6,650 and 7,350 zone.
The S&P shed nearly 3% which dropped the index out of last week's prior congestion. As with the NASDAQ and Russell 2000, trading volume was lighter than on Friday.
NASDAQ bullish percents continue to shape a bottom which is another tick in the swing low development for the parent NASDAQ.
Also, the Percentage of NASDAQ Stocks above the 50-day MA has seen a 'buy' trigger in the MACD and CCI.
For today, look to the NASDAQ to continue its recovery—and from that—the Russell 2000 too. Traders may wish to wait for the first 30 minutes of trading to establish a range, then buy a break of that range should it move higher.
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read Investing.com's comments guidelines and agree to the terms described.
