$600 Federal Unemployment Checks To Be Extended?
The reason is the U.S.-centric nature of the Russell's members. They have more exposure to fluctuations here as 80% of their revenues are domestic, compared to about 40% of the S&P 500, in contrast. When U.S. GDP slows, the Russell 2000 feel the effect more strongly than the other indexes.
Small caps also have less access to financial resources and so can't weather economic storms as easily. And their business cycles tend to be shorter than the big companies.
All this frequently puts them out of phase with other equities. Then tend to drop first. But then, they often rebound harder and faster.
One sign of a recovery from a bear market according to experts (and that's one sign, not an always prescient indicator) is when the Russell starts to outperform the other U.S. indexes.
That's begun to look the case. Using data from S&P Capital IQ, I put together a chart of performance of the S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average, Nasdaq, and Russell 2000.
The start date is March 23, which seems to have been the bottom of the drop, at least for now. (Remember that blow-off tops, which the recent plummet was, have a nasty habit of looking as though they're in recovery only to turn nose down and reapply the accelerator.) The end is May 27.
I also indexed their performance to the March 23 value, so you get percentages of change. Look at the chart below.
Since that (let's hope) bottom, the Russell has been regaining ground faster than the other indexes.
The table below shows the percentage of gain for each since March 23.
That's a significant advantage for the Russell. Now for the less peppy part.
Again, there's no guarantee that things will go as they have been recently. As more earnings reports come in, there's a good chance that small caps are going to get whacked to a degree deserving of an extra Sopranos episode, given the domestic exposure.
The rally may not continue. Increasingly, there is a mind-numbing disparity between how the economy itself fares and the fortunes of equities. How long can low interest rates and the search for returns push cash into equities, driving up their prices? Hard to know, but to expect an unending upward trend seems excessively optimistic at a time when unemployment is at record highs and no one can be certain what will happen with the U.S. and global economies.
I'm a freelance journalist and writer with credits in Fortune, the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times Magazine, Newsweek, NBC News, CBS Moneywatch, Technology
I'm a freelance journalist and writer with credits in Fortune, the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times Magazine, Newsweek, NBC News, CBS Moneywatch, Technology Review, The Fiscal Times, Inc, and Vice. I also do ghost and corporate writing. You can see my portfolio at www.linkedin.com/in/eriksherman and find me on Twitter at @eriksherman.
