Today we follow our winning SP500 Trade Higher!
I also take a look at the larger Elliott wave count for the SP500, SP400 and the Russell 2000 (RUT)
Elliott Wave SP500 Intraday: Our target last week was 3065 and now that we are here I can see it edging higher into Sub Group2  SG2 3065|3072|3080 this is part of the Trading Levels concept - that is using the price as a Fibonacci ratio, which can be used in any time frame.
Russell 2000 SP500 and SP400 Elliott Wave in the big picture of Intermediate degree I put forward the possibility of a much bigger bullish trend. Tacking the Russell up to 2000. There are many indicators to determine bullish and bearish trends, however, I like simple support and resistance and if the SP400 can manage to develop tested support in 2000 (Major Trading Level TL2) then that would be a long trade set up and an indication of the market moving much higher.
As with any investment opportunity there is a risk of making losses on investments that Trading Lounge expresses opinions on.
Historical results are no guarantee of future returns. Some investments are inherently riskier than others.  At worst, you could lose your entire investment. TradingLounge™ uses a range of technical analysis tools, software and basic fundamental analysis as well as economic forecasts aimed at minimizing the potential for loss.
The advice we provide through our TradingLounge™ websites and our TradingLounge™ Membership has been prepared without considering your objectives, financial situation or needs. Reliance on such advice, information or data is at your own risk. The decision to trade and the method of trading is for you alone to decide. This information is of a general nature only, so you should, before acting upon any of the information or advice provided by us, consider the appropriateness of the advice considering your own objectives, financial situation or needs. Therefore, you should consult your financial advisor or accountant to determine whether trading in securities and derivatives products is appropriate for you considering your financial circumstances.
