This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Small-Cap Stocks Are Pricing In a Recession. Where to Look for Quality.
L Brands is one of BofA Securities’ high-conviction buying opportunities in the small- and midcap universe.
Small-capitalization stocks have been hit particularly hard in the market’s rapid tumble over the past month. Investors see the coronavirus’ fallout threatening the economically sensitive group, which tends to see its performance suffer more than larger companies in recessions.
The small-cap Russell 2000 index has dropped 38.6% since Feb. 19, when the S&P 500 hit its most recent record high. The large-cap index is down 29.5% in that time.
The sharp decline has compressed the Russell 2000’s forward price-to-earnings multiple to less than 11 times, the lowest it has been since the financial crisis and well below its long-term average of 14. Those future earnings estimates may well prove to be too high if the economy does fall into a recession .
The Russell 2000 is also at its greatest discount to the S&P 500 since 2001—below the trough of the recession that followed the financial crisis, according to BofA Securities equity strategists. It is fair for small-caps to trade at a cheaper multiple than large-caps, but the group now seems to be pricing in higher odds of an economic downturn.
As a whole, the Russell 2000 certainly is a riskier bet going into a possible recession than is the S&P 500. Smaller businesses tend to have tighter margins and potentially less of an ability to control costs given smaller scale than large-caps. The Russell 2000 also has a relatively higher aggregate debt load than the S&P 500, as years of ultralow interest rates encouraged companies to lever up. If earnings decline in a recession, that leverage increases.
“To make matters worse, high corporate leverage comes, this time around, hand in hand with low profitability,” Eduardo Lecubarri, global head of small- and midcap equity strategy at J.P. Morgan, wrote on Tuesday. “Indeed, the abundance of liquidity at record low interest rates has kept many businesses going that are simply not able to generate much of a return for investors. Between 24% and 40% of [small and mid caps] across Pan-Europe and the U.S. actually don’t make any money.”
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
Because many of the companies are in earlier stages of their growth, there is a much greater proportion of money-losing businesses in the small-cap index than in the large-cap. In other words, they are the first businesses to fall into trouble during a recession.
But not all 2000 or so members of the index are created equal. The broad selloff presents an opportunity to invest in higher-quality and more-resilient small-caps at a discount, the BofA analysts said.
“As we may likely slide back into ‘downturn/recession’ territory, larger, higher quality stocks tend to outperform,” the BofA strategists wrote on Monday. “Within small caps, quality and cash return are the best-performing styles in this regime, where stable dividends offer the best risk/reward in both large and small.”
BofA equity analysts highlighted several of their high-conviction buying opportunities in the small- and midcap universe. They include Tempur Sealy International (ticker: TPX), L Brands (LB), Oshkosh (OSK), Allison Transmission Holdings (ALSN), and Scotts Miracle-Gro (SMG).
Small-Cap Stocks Are Pricing In a Recession. Where to Look for Quality.
Small-capitalization stocks have been hit particularly hard in the market’s rapid tumble over the past month.
