In positive U.S. news, figures from Automatic Data Processing showed 2.76 million private-sector jobs were lost in May, a figure vastly lower than the 8.75 million expected. The numbers are seen as a preview of broader employment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics to be released on Friday.
Still, some analysts worried that investors could be getting ahead of themselves in thinking stock rallies are unstoppable.
“While markets are being fueled on a bonanza of cheap money, there is a growing worry that investors are mispricing the economic scarring that is likely to be left once the full effects of the current crisis have started to become more apparent,” added Hewson.
Investors have also largely brushed aside widespread U.S. protests, which have turned violent in some places, at times involving looting. Those have followed anger after following the May 25 death of George Floyd and other recent racially-charged killings.
The dollar, meanwhile, is down more than 5% from March highs and down about 2.5% over the past few weeks. Those are small numbers, relative to stock-market moves, but are significant for currencies . The recent drop is a sign that traders think things are returning to normal as global economies slowly awaken from the Covid-19 slumber.
On Wednesday, the U.S. Dollar Index ticked down another 0.4%. Other safe-haven assets also fell. The price of gold lost 1.9%, to $1,700.80. And the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note surged 8 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, to 0.761%, as the price of the securities fell.
Recent moves in discretionary retail stocks are another sign investors are looking ahead to better days. Discretionary goods—such as makeup and clothing—have been hit hard by the Covid-19 pandemic and stay-at-home orders.
Macy’s (ticker: M) stock, for instance, surged 12.9% Wednesday, on top of a 9.3% gain on Tuesday, despite damage done to its New York flagship store by looting that has accompanied nationwide protests against violence by police against people of color.
Another discretionary goods company, Coty (COTY), continues its volatile ride this week. The company announced a transaction with private-equity firm KKR (KKR) Monday, bringing in cash and paying down debt. As a result, Coty stock jumped 21% Monday. It gave back some of those gains Tuesday, falling 4.6%. But shares closed up again Wednesday, rising 13.3%.
The reason for Wednesday’s jump isn’t related to the KKR deal. Reports say the company is in talks with Kim Kardashian West on a beauty products line.
Macy’s and Coty stocks both remained down about 60% year to date as of Tuesday’s closing prices.
Campbell Soup (CPB) reported better than expected earnings Wednesday morning as comparable sales jumped 17% year over year. The company earned 83 cents a share, while analysts were looking for about 75 cents in per-share earnings. But Campbell stock fell 6.2% on Wednesday. Plenty of good news had already been reflected in the stock price after outperforming the S&P 500 by over 10 percentage points in 2020.
