“Yesterday’s selloff was so sudden and large that it could trigger a widening unease about the quality of the recent market rise, given the enthusiastic participation of novice traders on the way up and signs of speculative froth in low quality equities names,” said Saxo Bank’s chief economist and chief investment officer, Steen Jakobsen, in a note to clients.
“This is not a prediction, but a warning of heightened risk that only goes away if volatility quickly drops back lower,” Jakobsen added. The Cboe Volatility Index, or VIX,  a measure of expectations of future market volatility, surged Thursday, though it remains far below the levels seen when markets collapsed in March. It rose 4% more on Friday, about 42 points.
Haven assets were mixed after surging on Thursday as investors piled out of stocks. The price of gold slipped 0.1%, to $1,737.70 an ounce. The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note rose 5 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, to 0.699%, as the price of the securities fell. The U.S. Dollar Index (DXY)—which measures the greenback against a basket of other currencies—ticked up 0.5%.
Oil prices wavered around the break-even line. The price of West Texas Intermediate crude settled down 0.2%, at $36.26 a barrel, while Brent rose 0.5% to $38.73.
In one of the more curious moves Friday, Hertz Global Holdings (ticker: HTZ) saw its shares pop almost 40% after the bankrupt car rental firm announced it planned to sell $1 billion worth of shares to capitalize on the stock’s recent rise. Since the company filed for chapter 11 protection last month, the stock has moved wildly and has been a popular bet for retail investors.
Lululemon Athletica (LULU) shares closed down 3.7% after reporting weaker-than- expected financial results after Thursday’s close . The trendy sports apparel company had one of the more resilient stocks during the recent downtown but Wall Street was disappointed that the company declined to release comparable sales figures since many of its stores have been closed, even though many other retailers released such figures.
Boeing (BA) shares surged 11.5% following a 16.4% drop on Thursday. One of the plane manufacturer’s key suppliers for the grounded 737 MAX jet was asked to halt production for parts related to the plane , putting the timeline for reintroducing the plane to service at risk.
Adobe (ADBE) reported better-than-forecast quarterly earnings on Thursday evening. The software company gave guidance for its fiscal third-quarter below Wall Street expectations and withdrew its full-year guidance. Shares rose 4.9% Friday.
Stocks gained in the last hour of a volatile trading day on Friday, ending their worst week since March on a positive note.
