AUD/JPY remains optimistic even though the coronavirus pandemic concerns might keep dragging on the risk-sensitive exchanges.
The ASX 200 seems to be struggling at the pivotal inflection as the weakening basics affect the recent rally.
Re-imposition of the lockdown measures might fuel additional risk aversion in the next few days as the local cases keep increasing.
With the “second wave” of COVID-19 being imminent in Victoria, which is Australia’s 2nd most populous city, might result in the imposition of more lockdown restrictions as 12 more suburbs in Melbourne are placed under stern stay at home orders from 1st July.
Recording 74 more COVID-19 cases overnight, the state is single-handedly held back the countrywide ease of restrictions. Furthermore, the Australian medical association urges the local premiers to stop their plans to start rolling back until the state can bring the pandemic under control.
In a more desperate effort to put the pandemic under control, Daniel Andrews, who is Victoria’s premier also implemented complete lockdown for 9 tower blocks in Melbourne, which resulted in about 3000 residents being given a stay at home order for about 5 days, after an increase of COVID cases that were directly linked back to the cruise ships.
Because tourism is a significant aspect of the local economy, the latest developments might continue to adversely affect the opening of Victoria and territory borders, which might result in more losses to a sector that has already been decimated by the social distancing measures and lockdown restrictions.
In this regard, the lack of ability to successfully contain this outbreak will possibly fuel more risk aversion, resulting in the discounting of the growth-sensitive resources like the AUD/JPY exchange rates and the ASX 200 .
A resistance in the 61.8 percent (6,124) Fibonacci has again silenced customers of ASX 200, as about 6% rallied from 50% Fibonacci that is running out of morale.
While the momentum indicator has without a doubt strengthened to a positive zone the RSI development proposes a more sustained pullback might be considered, with its reversing close to the bullish territory above 60.
Support at the psychologically essential 6000 levels might continue acting as the cushion for potential buyers as the movement of the 50-day MA (5730) shows the bias is still skewed to the upper side.
The close and break above the current 23.6% Fibonacci and the 200-DMA are required for the bullish validation and might carve the path for the Aussie benchmark. Similar to that of the Bullish Correction on EUR/GBP .
The AUD/JPY remains constructive over support in the 74.16 Fibonacci as the bullish crossover on the MA suggesting possible tests for December high, which was 76.245 can happen in the next few days.
Nevertheless, resistance in the mid-June high (75.08) might halt the extra upside from the RSI failure as a way to strengthen the overbought region. This will happen with the momentum indicator suggesting a correction back to the 61.8% Fibonacci can eventuate.
