After continued weakness from the British Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate lately, the pair saw a surge in demand towards the end of last week due to a surprise shift in Brexit hopes. Sterling’s gains may be volatile however, and some analysts are doubtful that UK-EU Brexit talks will improve enough to lead to a deal. The Yen, on the other hand, was weaker as investors lost interest in safe haven currencies.
After opening last week at the level of 131.89, GBP/JPY spent much of the week trending near a monthly low of 130.50 before a significant rebound in demand on Thursday and Friday.
On Friday afternoon, GBP/JPY had climbed so far that it touched a three month high of 137.55. At its best points of the day, GBP/JPY had gained over 2.5%.
Near the beginning of last week, the Pound saw fresh pressure amid fears that UK-EU Brexit negotiations were on the brink of collapse.
The safe haven Japanese Yen spent most of the week benefitting from the Pound’s Brexit-inspired weakness, due to persisting fears that the upcoming round of US-China trade negotiations would also go poorly.
However, towards the end of the week, these global political factors driving the currencies appeared to be turned on their heads. Suddenly, Brexit optimism in markets surged and the Japanese Yen was tumbling on a fresh boost in market demand for riskier trade-correlated currencies.
The Pound saw sharp, strong gains on Thursday, following a surprisingly optimistic meeting between UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Ireland Leader Leo Varadkar. Both leaders said they could see a path to a possible Brexit deal.
It was perceived as perhaps the most optimistic Varadkar had been about the prospect of a new deal since Johnson took office. The Pound continued to surge towards the end of the week.
Still, analysts did express caution over the market’s excitement. Neil Wilson from Markets.com spoke about the Pound rally on Friday:
‘Of course this rally is built on shaky foundations and is susceptible to a crash if the negotiations don’t produce a deal for MPs to vote on.
The rally over the last two days has been astonishing - up four big figures in less than two sessions, it’s on course for one of its best two-day rallies in about 25 years.’
The safe haven Japanese Yen slumped on Friday as investors headed for riskier, trade-correlated currencies. This was due to fresh signs that US-China trade negotiations were going well and could even lead to some kind of temporary trade deal.
The surge the Pound saw at the end of last week could be very temporary, depending on how Brexit continues to unfold.
If the UK government is able to reach an agreement with Ireland and EU officials on some kind of new Brexit deal, the Pound is much more likely to hold onto most of its gains.
However, there is still a high possibility that talks could break down if the UK government is unable to get any major concessions on the Irish border.
Not only that, but the government may struggle to find the domestic support to pass such a deal through UK Parliament.
If Brexit talks collapse, Brexit delay or even no-deal Brexit bets could surge and the Pound could plummet.
Brexit developments will likely take focus over upcoming UK data. This week’s British ecostats include job market, inflation and retail sales figures.
While some notable Japanese ecostats will be published in the next week, these are likely to be overshadowed by US-China trade news, as the Japanese Yen’s movement has been dominated by risk-sentiment lately.
Economists and investors will be digesting the latest US-China negotiations over the weekend.
If they are perceived as optimistic, risk-sentiment will continue to rise and the Japanese Yen may be in for fresh losses when markets open on Monday.
On the other hand though, if US-China trade relations worsen again, investors will seek out safe haven currencies like the Japanese Yen.
Japanese ecostats on the way include industrial production data on Tuesday, and inflation stats on Friday.
If Japan’s inflation rate comes in stronger than expected, it could soften Bank of Japan (BoJ) easing speculation and weaken the Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
