Buy the Yen and Gold. Both Will Beat Oil, Sonal Desai Says.
In this final segment of this year’s Barron’s Roundtable , our remaining five panelists share and defend 32 promising investments for 2020.
The investment pros spend more than half of their daylong meeting each January proposing stocks, bonds, and funds that they believe will race ahead of the crowd or fall on their faces, and this year was no different. Our other five participants’ picks appeared last week.
Weighing in below is Sonal Desai of Franklin Templeton Fixed Income.
Barron’s: Sonal, you have both themes and picks.
Sonal Desai: The first theme is that we expect volatility to go up, on a combination of four factors. One is valuations. I think Treasuries are a prime example, but clearly equities are a concern, as well. We have the U.S. elections. We have geopolitics. And inflation risk. We are going to get periods of volatility in markets, and periods of risk aversion over the course of the year across all these factors.
My first recommendation would be gold—physical gold—and there are the obvious funds for that. Gold is a good hedge. The SPDR Gold Shares exchange-traded fund [ticker: GLD]. [The ETF is up 28% over the past five years through Jan. 3.]
Next, the Japanese yen is one of the few currencies I like, relative to the U.S. dollar. I don’t like being long the euro, but I do like being long the yen. It’s a better risk-aversion currency, than the Swiss franc, certainly better than the euro. I think both the yen and gold are going to be better than oil. [The dollar is currently at 108 yen.]
If you’re worried about geopolitics, if you’re worried about inflation, if you’re worried about election noise, gold is a hedge. And the yen tends to rally in periods of risk aversion. It’s a nice hedge for emerging market positions, and other risk positions in your fixed-income portfolio.
What do you like in emerging markets?
Desai: Traditional EM funds. One I like is the Payden Emerging Markets Bond fund [PYEWX; advisor class with a $5,000 minimum]. It uses a blended strategy, with 70% hard currency and 30% local currency. [The fund invests in emerging market sovereign and corporate bonds, and it’s mostly U.S. dollar-denominated. It gained an annualized 6.2% in the 10 years through Dec. 31.]
For emerging markets currency investments, you have to go country by country. For example, to fund Indonesia in Asia; I would be looking at low yielders like Korea and Taiwan.
Rupal Bhansali: What do you mean by hard currency?
Desai: The U.S. dollar. Emerging market countries can issue bonds in dollars, or they can issue bonds in local currency. And local currency, of course, is more subject to foreign-exchange movements. I am a bit more sanguine about the global growth outlook than most people right now, but it’s not as if risks don’t exist. I don’t think you should invest in EM local currency assets across the board, because each individual country’s policies vary. I like, for example, the Russian ruble-denominated assets. I would go long ruble-denominated assets. Historically, I have preferred local-market EM. Right now, I would look at more blended strategies.
What about the United Kingdom?
Desai: Brexit was blown completely out of proportion. The U.K. is still worth investing in. To get exposure to the U.K. equity market, U.S. investors can use the iShares MSCI United Kingdom exchange-traded fund [EWU; the fund invests in large and midsize companies and has returned 4.5%, on average, annually in the past 10 years through Jan. 3].
