For traders News and features Analysis CHF/JPY forecast for 2020 and beyond: does it stand a chance to rise?
Witnessing today’s global political and economic turbulence, many investors and traders want to diversify their investment portfolio as much as possible. Luckily, when it comes to the forex market, there are a plethora of options one can choose from, including the world’s major currencies, such as USD, EUR and GBP.
Usually characterised as “safe havens”, the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen represent strong and stable economies of two highly developed and influential countries – Switzerland and Japan. However, for the past few years, the CHF/JPY rate has been nothing else but volatile.
Not sure how the CHF vs JPY pair is set to perform in the foreseeable future? Let’s take a glance at its latest performance and the CHF/JPY forecast for 2020 and beyond to get you prepared for what the future holds.
The currency pairing of the Swiss franc against the Japanese yen is favoured by many in the foreign exchange market , even though it does not have large trading volumes and makes up only 5% of the total market turnover. The CHF/JPY pair represents how many Japanese yen – the quote currency – are needed to buy one Swiss franc – the base currency.
The Japanese yen, usually referred to as the “Ninja”, is the third most traded currency in the world, while the Swiss franc, also known as the “Swissie”, is the sixth.
The economies of both countries, Switzerland and Japan, have been developing at a rapid pace ever since World War II. Switzerland has become an international financial centre, while Japan has thrived as a locomotive of innovation and high technology. The unemployment rate in both countries remains one of the lowest in the world.
Why do traders choose this forex instrument? The CHF/JPY pair is a good example of what's known as a cross-currency pairing . It means that it is traded directly, without being first converted into the U.S. dollar. Therefore, directly exchanging Japanese yen for Swiss francs protects forex traders from volatilities associated with the U.S. dollar. Moreover, once incorporated in one’s investment portfolio, the pair can serve as a hedging tool against fluctuations in other international currencies.
Also, due to their low interest rates and unique financial properties, both the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen are known to be funding currencies and safe-haven assets. As a result, many international investors often turn to CHF and JPY during times of increasing market instability.
There are many factors that have a great impact on the value of the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen in relation to each other, as well as other currencies.
The CHF/JPY pair is very susceptible to various major political and economic events that take place not only in the home countries but also around the globe. For this reason, it may be rather difficult to make CHF/JPY predictions and forecast the future of its price chart.
However, there are a few factors that you may want to keep your eyes on when investing in this forex major. For instance, employment figures, gross domestic product, retail sales, industrial production, inflation, export and import data or economic and political crisis in either nation can have a significant influence on the currency pair.
Moreover, the CHF/JPY pair is affected by the interest rate differential between the Swiss National Bank and the Bank of Japan. Higher interest rates tend to have a positive effect on the currency, at least in the short term, and vice-versa.
Although the U.S. dollar is not present in this currency pair, nevertheless, it has a significant impact on it. Many traders believe that by combining the two charts of both USD/JPY and USD/CHF in one, you can get an approximate picture of the CHF/JPY chart.
As the US dollar has a substantial influence on both currencies, it is, therefore, necessary to take into account the main US economic indicators, when predicting the further price movement for the CHF/JPY pair. These, among others, include country’s GDP, unemployment, job creation and interest rates.
Even though the market movements of this currency pair tend to be rather volatile, the pair can offer great opportunities for experienced investors and traders looking for a diversification tool to move away from the forex majors, such as EUR/USD , EUR/GBP , GBP/USD or USD/JPY .
Let's take a closer look at the CHF/JPY rate trend from 1993:
From 1990 until mid-1995, the CHF/JPY pair had been mainly in the downtrend. In August of 1995, it reached the resistance line and made a breakthrough. However, it was short-lived. Witnessing several ups and downs, the pair took a downward course in mid-1998, reaching its absolute minimum of 58.75 in September 2000.
After that, it began its upward movement, which lasted until the beginning of the infamous crisis of 2008. Unlike other currency pairs, the CHF/JPY rate started to fall only in August 2008. It then took it another 4 years to finally gain upside momentum in 2012, hitting its all-time high of 136.96 in January 2015.
