Coronavirus outbreak in China has hit supply chains across the world and India is no exception. Indian importers of raw materials too are facing problems as China factories remain shut for some time now. But the development has also brought some relief for domestic companies who competes with finished Chinese goods. Santosh Meena, Senior Analyst at TradingBells believes that electronic equipment, organic chemicals, fertilisers and plastics are top import sectors which may benefit from fall China imports.Here are five likely beneficiaries of the reduced imports:
Dixon Technologies | CMP: Rs 4,636 |  1-year target: Rs 5,500
Dixon Technologies is Trading Bells’ top pick in the electronic equipment segment. "Make in India" theme is the key reason for the stellar performance of Dixon Technologies.  Synergy with marquee names like Samsung and Xiaomi is also a key factor for the vertical growth of the company.  The cost of production is increasing in China resulting in companies moving from China to India and Dixon technologies is a major beneficiary of this phenomenon. The company has a strong order book for FY20-21. A cut in corporate tax is also boosting the bottom-line of the company.
PI Industries | CMP : Rs 1,540 | 1-year target: Rs 1,920
PI Industries is leading players in the agrochemicals space which is getting major benefits from falling imports from China of fertilizer and chemical products. PI Industries is ready for multi-year growth in the CSM segment because of its enhanced R&D and supply scarcity related issues in China. Recently, it has witnessed big product wins and a significant surge in the deal pipeline. The company is in the mode of capacity expansion as management sees decent growth opportunities in the future.
Plastic products are the major beneficiaries of falling crude oil prices. Recently Supreme Industries has witnessed decent margin expansion amid a slow down in volume. The future growth outlook is bright as management expects volume to pick-up, led by a revival in demand from packaging and plastic piping segment. Pipes and fittings are likely to witness strong demand from the government’s ‘Nal se Jal’ Scheme. The company witnessed strong demand from that scheme in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh.
IOL Chemical & Pharmaceutical | CMP: Rs 193 | 1-year target: Rs 255
API and chemical business is shifting from China to India after pollution control measures are taken by the Chinese government. A recent fall in imports from China due to Coronavirus will lead to further growth in revenue and margin for Indian companies where IOLCP is a perfect play for both specialty chemical and API business. It has a profit growth of 34% CAGR for the last 5 years with a ROE of 36%. It has footprints in 56 countries and regularly supplying its high-quality products to major pharmaceutical players.
