We continue to see signs of risk appetite, as EUR/USD, GBP/USD and USD/JPY keep rallying following gains earlier this week.
Chris Beauchamp | Chief Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-04T09:40:00+0100
The EUR/USD pair shows no sign of slowing in its ascent ahead of the European Central Bank (ECB) meeting.
Over the past two weeks the pair has found support near the rising 50-hour simple moving avergae (SMA) which is currently $1.1198, and if this holds again another bounce above $1.126 may result. A reversal below $1.11 is needed to provide a more bearish view in the near term.
GBP/USD bulls will be hoping for the creation of a higher low as the price retreats from the highs of the week.
A rebound targets those highs at $1.26 and higher, while declines head towards $1.225 and then $1.22. Bears will need to see the creation of lower highs on the hourly chart, which for the time being is still an elusive goal.
The USD/JPY pair has finally cleared the zone of resistance around ¥107.80 and has leaped higher as a result.
Pullbacks towards this previous area of resistance may be buying opportunities, while short-term upside targets ¥109.45 and then on to ¥112.00.
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Trade the largest and most volatile financial market in the world.
Speculate from a range of platforms, including on mobile
