Gold and Japanese yen: Which one is not a safe-haven asset anymore?
losing its status. What about the JPY and XAU? The situation is unclear. Let's
get a grasp on it.
US-Iran tensions. Let us remind what happened. The US airstrike at the
direction of Donald Trump killed a top Iranian commander Qassem Soleimani. Iran
retaliated striking multiple US bases located in Iran and Iraq.
and the escalation continued until January 8. After, the tensions calmed. What
could we expect? According to the sense of the safe-haven asset, the Japanese
yen was expected to strengthen. However, the rise was limited. Let's take a
kept falling until January 3. On January 6, the rebound happened. Since then,
the pair has been moving up. The Iranian retaliation on January 8 was reflected
with the long lower shadow. Nonetheless, the USD/JPY continued rising.
What are the reasons then?
managers to buy higher-yielding foreign assets. The second reason may be hidden
in the trade deficit of Japan. The third point we should consider is the
overseas capital flows of Japanese companies.
low-interest currency and invest in the higher-interest currency. Since the
last year, the major central banks have been easing their monetary policy. The
basis of the loose policy is the lower interest rates. That means the advantage
of the Japanese yen as a low-interest currency has been vanishing. This year,
the central banks are anticipated to hold the rates unchanged. However, this
factor unlikely supports the JPY. Some analysts believe the euro with its
extremely low rates can be more attractive for carry-trade traders.
since 1980 at 7.6%. It signals upcoming levels to be narrow.
On the daily chart of USD/JPY, the pair has been trading at high of May 2019.
The resistance at 110.16 is the psychological level marked at the weekly chart.
If bulls can push it above, additional resistances are placed at 110.63,
Oscillator are in the overbought area. It means the rebound may happen soon.
Look at the supports at the range of 109.55-109.30, 108.47, 107.97.
What does all this mean? It seems the Japanese yen has lost
its position of the safe-haven asset. It is more likely the only recovery of
the carry trade factor will be able to support the Japanese yen. However, the
that may affect the carry trade.
escalation was more visible than the one the yen experienced. On January 8,
XAU/USD reached the highs of April 2013. Later the pair moved down and it was
expected. Firstly, the pair reached significant highs. Each maximum and minimum
are always followed by a correction. And such a correction happened. Secondly,
the upcoming first phase of the US-China agreement.
Securities argues the strength of the gold despite the current consolidation.
As for the analysts at MKS PAMP Group, they believe in the strength of the
XAU/USD with the average price of $1,636 with the high at $1,780 an ounce. The
support is anticipated to lie at $1,520. Analysts predict the pressure from
The risks for gold power also exist. Rumors of the global
rates on hold at least for a while, US-China trade war tensions improved, as a
result, the gold's rise may be limited. But we should not forget about the
unexpected factors such as political and geopolitical tensions. Thus, traders
should follow the news to be up to date.
reached highs of April 2013 on January 8. After that, the pair tuned down with
1,575. The previous maximum of 1,611 is high. It means the pair may form new
overbought area. That may cause a prolonged correction. The next support is at
uncertainties and decline when the risk sentiment is on. As for the Japanese
yen, the currency is not the refuge for investors anymore. The carry trade
strategy is the basis of the future position of the JPY. If it is still the
low-interest currency using for borrowing, it will have an opportunity to
appreciate against the USD. Until then, the strength of the yen is limited.
way we determine the strength of the domestic currency. If before the rate cut
signaled the weakness of the currency, it's more likely that in 2020, investors
will look at other easing measures.
