JAPANESE YEN TECHNICAL FORECAST – USD/JPY, EUR/JPY, AUD/JPY CHART SETUPS AS CHINA TENSION ESCALATES
AUD/JPY edged nearly 2% higher over the last five trading sessions, but the Japanese Yen might recover recent downside against its pro-risk Australian Dollar peer
JPY price action remained under pressure last week and fell roughly 0.5% on balance measured by the Japanese Yen currency index. The Yen has weathered bearish headwinds for most of the month relative to top counterparts – like the US Dollar , Euro and Australian Dollar – as resilient market sentiment crushes volatility .
Broad weakness in the Japanese Yen since April 30 has pushed spot USD /JPY, EUR/JPY, and AUD/JPY prices higher by 0.95%, 1.23%, and 0.62% respectively. With the Yen currently trading near the low end of its monthly range, however, there is potential for JPY price action to reverse its stretch of downside.
This is considering the likely chance that major currency pairs continue to ping-pong between critical technical support and resistance zones recently established. Nonetheless, the ebb and flow of market sentiment in response to conflicting fundamental drivers, such as renewed China tension and coronavirus vaccine hope , could weigh materially on the Yen.
USD/JPY jumped to a five-week high this past Tuesday. US Dollar strength against the Japanese Yen has sustained primarily on the back of fresh Fed Chair Powell rate outlook that disappointed dovish expectations. The advance just extended by USD/JPY price action reiterates the bullish trend formed by a series of higher lows since May 07.
This positively-sloped trendline might offer a healthy tailwind to USD/JPY price action going forward and help fuel a retest of last week’s high. Also, near the 107.40 mark, a confluence of popular moving averages show potential for the Dollar-Yen to stay relatively supported.
In light of technical resistance posed by the 108.00 handle, however, spot USD/JPY could struggle to continue climbing. Similarly, bearish divergence indicated by the RSI and MACD suggest that upward momentum recently recorded by USD/JPY price action has waned.
EUR/JPY jumped over 250-pips early last week in response to a 500bln Euro recovery fund proposed by EU leaders. Although, spot prices quickly ricocheted to the downside after EUR/JPY probed its upper Bollinger Band and failed to eclipse the 118.00 mark.
Euro-Yen price action correspondingly looks primed to keep sliding toward trendline support extended through the May 06 and May 14 intraday lows. If this area fails to keep spot EUR/JPY afloat, Japanese Yen bulls could flex their muscles and attempt to make a push for the 116.00 level.
