JPY: Japanese Yen at 8-Month Low as Volatility Wilts – Where to Next?
The Japanese Yen has plunged roughly 4.5% since printing its recent swing high this past August. Weaker JPY prices can be explained largely by the rebound in market sentiment driven broadly by US-China trade deal optimism with Washington and Beijing set to ink a partial trade agreement later this week.
This is due primarily to the Japanese Yen’s anti-risk characteristics and popular use to fund the currency carry trade . As such, JPY price action tends to benefit during episodes of risk aversion and periods of turbulence – or volatility. On the contrary, the Japanese Yen tends to experience downward pressure when appetite for risk proliferates and measures of currency volatility are low.
JAPANESE YEN CURRENCY INDEX PRICE CHART: DAILY TIME FRAME (DECEMBER 2018 TO JANUARY 2020)
This concept is illustrated in the chart above, which highlights the generally strong positive correlation between JXY (Japanese Yen Currency Index) and JYVIX (Cboe’s 30-day implied volatility index on the JPY). In turn, lower readings of implied volatility typically act as a headwind to JPY price action.
Expected activity in the Japanese Yen has swooned as of late with the apparent improvement in trade relations between the US and China – the two largest economies in the world – fueling a rebound in global GDP growth expectations. FX volatility has also been pressured lower by the series of dovish action revealed by major central banks last year, which have kept financial conditions accommodative.
JAPANESE YEN IMPLIED VOLATILITY (3-MONTH): USD/JPY, EUR/JPY, GBP/JPY, AUD/JPY & CAD/JPY
In fact, the recent string of upbeat market sentiment has sent various measures of Japanese Yen implied volatility down to their lowest levels on record. On that note, USD /JPY implied volatility over the next 3-months was just clocked at a record low 5.1% with the metric’s latest nosedive being mirrored closely by the respective 3-month implied volatility readings for EUR /JPY, GBP /JPY, AUD /JPY and CAD /JPY as well.
