The Pound (GBP) struggled against the safe-haven Japanese Yen (JPY) at the beginning of last week as the coronavirus pandemic continued to darken the UK’s economic outlook.
GBP fell after Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced on Monday that the UK would undergo an Italy-style lockdown for the period of three weeks to curb the spread of the coronavirus.
Yael Selfin, the chief economist for the UK at KPMG, commented on the future of the UK’s domestic economy, saying:
‘The Covid-19 pandemic is first and foremost a human crisis. But there will also be a very substantial negative impact on the global economy and the UK’s economic performance this year and potentially next. Until we know how and when the Covid-19 outbreak will end, the scale of the negative economic impact will be difficult to quantify.’
GBP also struggled after Tuesday’s release of March’s UK Markit services PMI, which fell deep into contraction territory from 53.2 to 35.7, leaving investors concerned as Britain’s largest sector continues to deteriorate due to the crisis.
Instead Sterling investors hoped that either the UK’s new finance minister, Rishi Sunak, or the Bank of England (BoE) would provide any more stimulus to help bolster the UK’s fragile economy.
Wednesday’s release of the UK’s inflation data failed to buoy the GBP/JPY exchange rate. The report from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) reported a modest rise of 1.7%.
However, Samuel Tombs, the Chief UK Economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, commented:
Meanwhile, Thursday’s Bank of England (BoE) interest rate decision, which the bank decided to hold at its all-time record low of 0.1%, provided the GBP/JPY exchange rate with some moderate uplifted.
However, the BoE was notably downcast in its statement, warning of ‘severe’ consequences to the British economy due to the coronavirus outbreak.
The Bank of England said in its statement:
‘The spread of the disease and the measures that are likely to be needed to contain it have evolved significantly. The economic consequences of these developments are becoming more apparent and a very sharp reduction in activity is likely. Given the severity of that disruption, there is a risk of longer-term damage to the economy, especially if there are business failures on a large scale or significant increases in unemployment.’
The GBP/JPY closed the week trading around ¥134.03 as Sterling traders became increasingly concerned for the British economy. This was also compounded by the news that Prime Minister Boris Johnson had been diagnosed with the coronavirus.
The Japanese Yen (JPY) continued to perform well last week as investors flocked to its safe-haven with concerns rising over the global economy due to the coronavirus pandemic.
The Japanese currency owes its attraction to its history of low inflation and financial and political stability. However, being a more liquid asset, its widely available ability to trade also bolstered the JPY/GBP exchange rate.
However, due to Japan’s increasingly shaky economy in the past few weeks, we could see the Japanese Yen’s safe-haven appeal become increasingly compromised as investors flock to the US Dollar instead.
‘The impact of this epidemic on tourism is extremely significant. The delay of the Olympic Games is even worse. My company served over 600 high-end Chinese tourists last year. They went to Japan to play golf, access health care services and look for properties to invest in. But I’m afraid I will see a big drop in business, compared to last year.’
Looking to the week ahead, the GBP/JPY exchange rate will likely face further volatility as the UK economy continues to struggle due to the coronavirus. Any further stimulus measures announced by Chancellor Rishi Sunak, however, would prove Pound-positive.
In UK economic data, Tuesday will see the release of the UK’s GDP figure for the fourth quarter. Any signs of deterioration could add to the UK’s economic woes and place further downward pressure on the GBP/JPY exchange rate.
Friday’s final UK Markit services PMI report for March, which is expected to confirm consensus and sink deeply into contraction territory would also weigh on the GBP/JPY exchange rate.
Japanese Yen (JPY) investors, meanwhile, will be paying close attention to Tuesday’s publication of the Japanese manufacturing outlook for the first quarter. As the outlook is expected to darken because of the coronavirus pandemic we could see the Japanese Yen lose some of its appeal.
The GBP/JPY exchange rate will continue to be driven by coronavirus developments next week. Any signs of the UK economy heading deeper into recession would weaken the Pound.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
