The Pound to Yen exchange rate (GBP/JPY) edged higher last week despite Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s exacerbation of no-deal Brexit fears after proposing to ban a UK-EU Brexit implementation period beyond late 2020.
Wednesday saw the Sterling-Yen currency conversion begin to slip, however, after as realities of a potential no-deal Brexit set in, weakening the Pound.
The UK’s Consumer Price Index, meanwhile, rose unexpectedly to 1.5%, although this was far below the Bank of England’s (BoE) target of 2%.
Meanwhile, Thursday saw the BoE hold its interest rates at 0.75% despite two policymakers pushing for it to be lowered to 0.5% due to concerns over a slowing growing economy and a possible cliff-edge Brexit.
The GBP/JPY rose at the end of last week, however, after the Conservatives secured a majority of 358 for its Brexit Withdrawal Agreement Bill, providing Sterling with some uplift as Brexit uncertainty diminished with the UK now expected to leave the EU by January 31st.
The Japanese Yen (JPY) began last week subdued after the Japanese Jibun Bank Manufacturing PMI failed to emerge from contraction territory at 48.8.
Joe Hayes, an Economist at IHS Markit, commented on the report:
‘Latest survey data showed that the Japanese economy remained stagnant in December, following on from a similar outturn in November. Taking fourth-quarter survey data as a whole, the poor performance in October could see Japan’s economy dip into contraction’
Meanwhile, Tuesday saw the Japanese Merchandise Trade Balance Total figure beat forecasts and rise to ¥-82.1 billion, although this failed to provide much uplift for the Japanese currency.
Improving US-China trade deal hopes, however, did benefit the JPY/GBP exchange rate last week, after US President Donald Trump said that he was simply waiting for the translation of the ‘phase one’ deal drawn up in Beijing.
The central bank was generally dovish in its statement:
‘Japan’s economy is likely to continue on a moderate expanding trend, as the impact of the slowdown in overseas economies on domestic demand is expected to be limited, although the economy is likely to continue to be affected by the slowdown for the time being.’
The JPY/GBP exchange rate closed the weak subdued, however, with the Pound strengthening on renewed Brexit optimism.
Brexit developments will continue to drive the Pound this week, with a lack of economic data due for release over the Christmas period.
However, if the markets are provided with any further reasons to fear a cliff-edge Brexit next year, we could see the GBP/JPY exchange rate sink.
Meanwhile, US-China trade developments will remain in focus for Japanese Yen (JPY) investors, with any signs of progression on a trade deal from the two superpowers being JPY-positive.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
