The Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate saw violent fluctuations last week as the Japanese Yen (JPY) continued to benefit from its safe-haven status, while Sterling was beleaguered by fears of the coronavirus wracking the British economy.
The GBP/JPY exchange rate saw highs of ¥134.640 to lows of ¥133.102 as markets continued to adjust to the new economic climate bought on by the coronavirus epidemic.
Senior Lecturer in Economics and Finance, University of Portsmouth, explains the Japanese Yen’s safe-haven-inspired gains:
‘A safe haven is not a theoretical construct, but the place where traders and investors seek shelter in practice when all options have been explored – including all the half-way houses. Judging by the events during the [coronavirus-led] market crash of March 2020, the Japanese Yen is still the safe-haven currency par excellence.’
Friday saw the release of Japan’s Jibun Bank Services PMI for March which fell deeply into contraction territory at 33.8. However, with markets continuing to remain frightful of a global economic recession the Japanese Yen continued to gain from its safe-haven appeal.
Tuesday’s release of the UK GDP report for the fourth-quarter showed a stagnation at 0%, leaving many Sterling investors concerned over the health of the British economy in the second-quarter of this year.
Wednesday also saw the UK Markit Manufacturing PMI for March sink into contraction territory, with the figure easing from 48 to 47.8.
Rob Dobson, the Director at IHS Markit, was downbeat in his analysis, commenting:
‘The latest survey numbers underscore how the global outbreak of COVID-19 is causing huge disruptions to production, demand and supply chains at UK manufacturers. Output and new orders fell at the fastest rates since mid- 2012, while supplier delivery times lengthened to the greatest extent in the 28-year survey history as shortages grew more widespread. The resulting job losses took the rate of decline in employment to its highest since July 2009.’
The GBP/JPY exchange rate closed the week trading down by around -0.6% as the UK Markit Services PMI significantly contracted to a worse-than-expected 34.5, leaving investors concerned about the health of the UK economy in the coming weeks.
Duncan Brock, the Group Director at the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply, described the figure as being ‘sucked into a black hole … by the forceful impact of the COVID-19 coronavirus, affecting every area of supply chains from transport to purchasing levels and job creation.’
Japanese Yen (JPY) investors will be looking ahead to Monday’s release of Japan’s Overall Household Spending report, which is expected to fall by -3.9%. Consequently, we could see the JPY/GBP begin to fall as economic data continues to point towards a bumpy road ahead for the Japanese economy.
Thursday’s release of the Japanese Consumer Confidence Index for March could also weigh on JPY as consumer morale is expected to be heavily impacted by growing fears over the coronavirus pandemic.
The Pound (GBP) will continue to be driven by coronavirus developments this week with investors keeping a close eye on Downing Street’s announcements. However, as Covid-19 is expected to severely weaken the UK economy in the coming months we could see Sterling continue to suffer.
In UK economic data, Thursday’s publication of February’s Manufacturing Production report will shed some light on Britain’s economic health prior to the coronavirus outbreak. If this is significantly negative, we could see the GBP/JPY exchange rate continue to fall.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
