The JPY is the strongest and the AUD is the weakest as NA traders enter for the day.  The flows are following the risk off protocol today as stocks fall in reaction to heightened coronavirus fears.  The Senate passed the PPP extension.  Retail sales and employment in Germany, and PMI data in Europe were generally better but the EUR is still lower on the day.  The USD is higher vs all major currencies this morning with the exception of the JPY.
The USDJPY and the JPY pairs are trading near or at the session lows as the NA session gets underway.  The EURUSD has traded mostly lower. The AUDUSD is trading at the session lows as it loses steam on risk off fears.  The ranges overall are mostly modest with the major pairs - with the exception of the USDJPY - with low to high trading ranges much lower than the 22 day averages (about a month of trading).
In the US stock market the premarket futures are trading lower:
In the US debt market yields are trading higher with the yield curve steepening a few basis points. The 2 – 10 year spread has moved to 52.69 basis points from 50.76 basis points at the close yesterday.
In the European debt market, the benchmark 10 year yields are moving to the upside with Germany and France leading the way at 4.6 basis points and 4.3 basis points to the upside. The better data at of Europe this morning has helped to push the yields higher.
The ADP employment report for June is expected to come out and show a 2900K increase. The US employment report will be released a day early on Thursday due to 4 July holiday in the US on Friday.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
