I first arrived in Japan on July 15, 1971, as an American college student beginning a year abroad. Though I already knew a certain amount about the country and its people, life in Tokyo, my new home, was full of surprises. One that I will never forget was the profusion of zeroes on the paper currency that I got in exchange for my US dollars. I had known that the exchange rate of the yen was ¥360 to $1, but even so I couldn’t help being taken aback to see yen bills with denominations of 500, 1,000, 5,000, and even 10,000. The price tags in stores were similarly startling.
Back in the United States I had never carried around anything bigger than a $20 bill, and at first I felt uncomfortable having and using bills with denominations in the hundreds and thousands. Even after my initial surprise wore off, they still seemed wrong somehow. Well before I came to Japan, I had learned that the country had made a remarkable recovery from the devastation of World War II and achieved great economic growth and technological advances. In some ways it had even surpassed the United States, as with its high-speed Shinkansen rail link between Tokyo and Osaka. This positive image did not fit well with the multizero bills, which seemed like the currency of a country whose economy was on the rocks.
In December 1971, less than half a year after I arrived, the exchange rate of the yen to the dollar was changed from ¥360 to ¥308, meaning a hike of about 17% in the Japanese currency’s value. And in March 1973 the post–World War II system of fixed exchange rates was scrapped and major currencies were allowed to float against each other. Over the four and a half decades since then, the exchange rate has fluctuated, but overall the yen has risen substantially. Currently, as of late 2018, it is trading in the vicinity of ¥110 to the dollar. This makes it worth over three times more in dollar terms than as of mid-1971.
Despite this rise, the exchange rate of the yen to the dollar still runs to three digits, which is highly unusual for a currency of a major country. From time to time there has been talk of redenominating the yen by a factor of 100, which would mean two fewer zeros at the end of each of the current denominations—10,000 becoming 100, 5,000 becoming 50, and so forth. But this idea has not been implemented. So many Westerners visiting Japan probably feel the same sense of strangeness as I did 47 years ago at seeing the implausibly high numbers on Japanese currency.
Many years after being taken aback by Japan’s high-denomination bills I had another currency-related surprise: I learned that a yen had originally been worth one US dollar.
Japan adopted the yen as its currency unit in 1871. This was early in the Meiji era (1868–1912), when Japan was scrambling to turn itself into a modern nation-state that could deal with the Western powers on an equal footing. The new currency was set at a value of 1.5 grams of gold, on parity with the US dollar. In other words, the initial yen-dollar exchange rate was ¥1 = $1. As shown in the attached chart, the yen lost about half of its value against the greenback in the 1880s and 1890s, and it took another fall in the 1930s, declining to around a quarter of its original value in dollar terms. As of December 1941, when Japan went to war with the United States, the yen was worth $0.234, meaning an exchange rate of slightly over ¥4 to the dollar.
The real collapse in the yen’s value came after Japan’s 1945 defeat in the war. Tokyo and other major cities lay in ruins, the economy was in tatters, and inflation raged unchecked, robbing the currency of its worth. In 1949 a new official exchange rate was adopted: ¥360 to the dollar. The yen, which had started out in parity with the greenback in 1871 and was still worth almost a quarter of a dollar at the beginning of the 1940s, was at the end of the same decade worth a mere $0.0028, or about a quarter of a penny. The exchange rate expressed as yen per dollar, which had started at ¥1 and was in the vicinity of ¥4 as of 1941, turned into a three-digit number, ¥360, after the war.
This ¥360 = $1 peg remained in effect for over two decades, but in the 1970s the postwar Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates broke down, and the yen was floated against the dollar and other currencies. After that the yen appreciated, particularly from 1985 to 1995, when the rate went from ¥239 to ¥94 against the dollar—from three digits to two. At this point the yen’s worth had roughly quadrupled in dollar terms in comparison with the decades of the postwar peg. This was a remarkable rise—and a tremendous blow to Japan’s export industries—but it still left the yen worth only $0.0106, or a smidgen above a penny. Looking again at the exchange rate chart, we see that the red line showing the yen’s value has remained stuck close to the horizontal axis at the bottom to this day. And currently the yen-dollar rate is in the vicinity of ¥110—back in the three-digit range, meaning a yen is again worth less than a penny.
The yen may appreciate against the dollar in the future, reducing the number of digits in the exchange rate from three to two again. But no amount of ordinary currency appreciation can wipe out the drastic devaluation of the early postwar period and restore the yen to a value in the range of the dollar, thereby bringing the exchange rate down to a single digit.
The vast majority of today’s Japanese have grown up in the age of three-digit yen-dollar exchange rates, which must seem perfectly normal to them. And even if they are not old enough to have personally experienced the postwar ¥360 = $1 peg, they have probably heard of it and may look at the current rate of around ¥110 = $1 as showing today’s yen to be “strong” in comparison with the decades following the war.
My perspective is different. Shortly after graduating from college in 1973, I got a job in Tokyo and have lived here ever since. But even after long exposure to three-digit yen-dollar rates and currency notes loaded with zeroes, they still feel strange to me. It seems peculiar for a country of such high international stature to have such a puny currency, worth less than an American penny. The number of foreign tourists visiting Japan has grown dramatically in recent years, and as I noted above, those coming from the United States or other Western countries are liable to have the same sort of reaction.
Subjective impressions aside, Japan is exceptional among the major advanced nations in having such a low-valued currency unit. Consider the attached table presenting the exchange rates of the currencies used by the 36 economically advanced democracies belonging to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The table lists these 20 currencies in the order of their value expressed in US dollars.
