The US Dollar and Japanese Yen are both safe haven currencies that benefit in times of market uncertainty and are weaker when investors are more willing to take risks, and with risk-sentiment surging this week the US Dollar to Japanese Yen (USD/JPY) exchange rate isn’t seeing much in the way of significant movement. While the US Dollar benefitted more from US-China trade hopes last week, the currency is being weighed by poor US data.
Due largely to US-China trade developments, USD/JPY advanced last week. USD/JPY climbed from the week’s opening level of 108.58 to close near the level of 109.37.
On Friday as US-China trade hopes peaked, USD/JPY touched on a high of 109.69 – the best level for the pair since the beginning of December.
At the time of writing on Monday, USD/JPY trends just above the week’s opening levels as the US Dollar lacks the drive to sustain big gains.
At the end of last week, months of uncertainty finally saw some kind of conclusion as the US and China officially agreed to a preliminary trade deal.
While the ‘phase one’ trade deal was not hugely sweeping, it marked a notable de-escalation in US-China trade tensions. This led to a surge in market demand for riskier, trade-correlated currencies.
While the US Dollar is a safe haven currency, it has been strongly correlated to US-China trade negotiations at times due to the US economy being directly impacted by the trade war.
As a result, when the US-China ‘phase one’ deal was announced, it left the US Dollar much more appealing than the safe haven Japanese Yen. This led to a rise in demand for USD/JPY at the end of last week.
Still, the pair’s gains were fairly limited and movement was fairly modest today.
Investors are hesitant to buy the US Dollar too much, as despite the trade deal, recent US data has been fairly disappointing.
Friday’s US retail sales data unexpectedly slowed to just 0.2%. The data worsened concerns that the Federal Reserve may not see much reason to become more hawkish on US monetary policy any time soon.
The Federal Reserve adopted a more cautious than expected tone in its most recent policy decision, dousing hopes for a rate hike next year and keeping pressure on the US Dollar.
The Japanese Yen is a currency that is often seen solidly as a safe haven. The currency is often much more likely to be influenced by global market jitters than domestic Japanese data – and the same is true for the past week.
As US-China trade negotiations finally reached a ‘phase one’ trade deal, the safe haven Japanese Yen plummeted while markets headed for currencies correlated to trade and US-China trade relations.
This was the primary cause of Japanese Yen movement last week, and continues to weigh on the currency today.
Last week’s Japanese manufacturing and production stats were generally disappointing and did little to change the Yen’s support.
Some other Japanese stats published in recent sessions, like non-manufacturing PMIs, have beaten forecasts. However, this news has been unable to influence the Yen either.
Instead, USD/JPY continue to slowly advance as US-China trade news supports USD more then JPY.
The first phase of a US-China trade deal has been completed, but analysts warn that there is still uncertainty and potential for worsening relations ahead.
According to Jane Foley, Senior Currency Strategist at Rabobank:
‘While there is significant relief over the trade deal, a lot of that would have been in the price already, so now there is a chance that trade relations could be strained again and we know a second phase of the trade agreement will be difficult’
On top of potential trade developments, investors will also be eagerly awaiting upcoming key data.
US housing and production stats tomorrow, followed by Japanese trade data on Wednesday, could cause some US Dollar to Japanese Yen exchange rate movement in the coming days.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
