While the US Dollar (USD) is a safe haven currency, rising
Yen (JPY) as the market’s safe haven currency of choice, and the US Dollar to
Japanese Yen (USD/JPY) outlook has worsened.
USD/JPY has seen significant losses since mid-April, shedding essentially all of its 2019 gains. Last week was yet another sharp loss for USD/JPY, with the pair opening the week at the level of 109.30, and closing at the level of 108.27.
Losses have slowed down, but USD/JPY continues to trend lower this week so far. USD/JPY touched on a low of 107.87 this morning, and currently trends nearer the level of 108.02.
level, which was 107.42 in January.
The latest losses for the US Dollar to Japanese Yen exchange rate have been due to a combination of weaker US data, and US trade protectionism fears causing Federal Reserve interest rate cut bets to rise.
many major currencies, due to fresh signs of weakness in the US economy, as
well as protectionist rhetoric from US President Donald Trump.
This movement is continuing this week so far, as comments from Federal Reserve officials on recent US data has made investors more concerned that the US Central Bank could take a more dovish tone on monetary policy soon.
economy and weaker US inflation.
‘As long as it (the Dollar) is at the center of the trade conflict, US yields fall due to concerns about real economic effects and the market is literally calling out for rate cuts, there are no positive arguments supporting the Dollar,’
With Fed rate cut bets rising and the US Dollar weakening,
the Japanese Yen has largely capitalised on its rival’s weakness.
For much of 2019 so far, expectations for continued
most appealing safe haven currency.
However, as US data increasingly shows signs of weakness,
and concerns of the US economy being hit by trade protectionism rise, investors
seeking safe haven currencies have been looking elsewhere.
in times of global uncertainty where the US Dollar is unappealing as well.
highly anticipating further indication of US economic health.
This afternoon, US factory orders will be published.
Non-manufacturing PMI data will come in tomorrow, with trade balance data on
Thursday and Non-Farm Payroll data on Friday.
If these notable stats beat market expectations, they could
on the bank’s monetary policy outlook.
