Based on the early price action, the direction of the USD/JPY on Thursday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to 107.038.
The Dollar/Yen is edging higher on Thursday as an increase in coronavirus cases in the United States and fresh trade tensions undermined hopes for a quick global recovery and prompted investors to trim bets on riskier currencies.
At 05:26 GMT, the USD/JPY is trading 107.150, up 0.089 or +0.08%.
“The market is getting worried that this is not just a temporary spike. Things could be actually getting worse, and with the U.S. being the world’s largest economy, any further economic shutdowns would have serious repercussions,” said Bart Wakabayashi, Tokyo Branch manager of State Street Bank and Trust.
“The risk-averse mood is supporting the dollar. After the markets have priced in all the positive news about economic recovery, now we are seeing the news about the second wave,” said Shinichiro Kadota, senior currency strategist at Barclays.
The main trend is down according to the daily swing chart. However, momentum has shifted to the upside. A trade through 106.074 will signal a resumption of the downtrend. The main trend will change to up on a move through 107.641.
The minor trend is up. The minor trend changed to up earlier today when buyers traded through the minor top at 107.221. This also shifted momentum to the upside.
A series of 50% levels is support. They come in at 107.038, 106.706 and 106.450.
On the upside, the nearest resistance is the Fibonacci level at 108.008.
Based on the early price action and the current price at 107.150, the direction of the USD/JPY the rest of the session on Thursday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the 50% level at 107.038.
A sustained move over 107.038 will indicate the presence of buyers. If this move is able to generate enough upside momentum then look for the rally to extend into the main top at 107.641. Overtaking this level will change the main trend to up with 108.008 the next likely upside target.
A sustained move under 107.038 is likely to trigger a labored break with targets lined up at 106.706, 106.450 and 106.074.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
