USD/JPY remains steady above 107.40, little moved after the FOMC minutes.
The Federal Reserve confirms an accommodative policy and warns about the economic uncertainty.
The US dollar ticked down from 107.47 after the release of the minutes of the Federal Reserve’s June 9-10 meeting, although it remains steady within previous ranges, hovering above trendline support at 107.40.
At its June 9-10 meeting, the Federal Reserve’s Monetary Policy Committee maintained its benchmark borrowing rate unchanged in the 0%-0.25% range and highlighted the need for a “highly accommodative monetary policy for some time”, discarding any rate hike in the foreseeable future, minutes showed. Furthermore, the committee stated the need to communicate a more explicit form of forward guidance for interest rates and more clarity regarding purchases of Treasury securities.
Regarding the economic projections, the Bank foresees a 6.5% economic contraction in 2020 and a 5% growth in 2021, yet, warning about the “extraordinary amount of uncertainty and considerable risks to the economic outlook.”
From a wider perspective, Terence Wu, an FX strategist at OCBC, expects the pair to remain trading in a range, between 106.00 and 108.00, “For now, any extension towards the 200-day MA (108.40) should be rejected in favour of staying within the established 106.00 to 108.00 range [...] In the interim, the 55-day MA (107.43) should support on the downside.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
