According to analysts at Citi, monetary and fiscal stimulus are not yet enough to counter the depth and duration of the coronavirus. They still see a case for an overall risk averse backdrop.
“Combination of the Fed “to act forcefully, proactively and aggressively” and do more if needed together with its current policy stance adds to USD headwinds as funding conditions continue to normalize.”
“We conclude that current set of global fiscal/ monetary measures are not yet enough to counter the depth and duration of the public health crisis. There is still a case for an overall risk averse backdrop to continue even if we see tactical bounces seen in risk sentiment from time to time.”
“USDJPY once broke the pivotal 106.92 support but there had been no downside acceleration and it just held at 106.45. We expect the pair will move towards good support in the 104.46-105.07 range after consolidation. Below here and a move towards 101.2 would be the next target. Resistances may find at 108.08 and 109.38 respectively.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
