We feature the top 5 cryptocurrency exchanges based on our own trading experience. Please view the risks associated with bitcoin & cryptocurrency trading at the bottom of this page. Also access our affiliate disclaimer .
Binance – Referral ID: EE59L0QP for 10% cashback on all trading fees.
A global cryptocurrency exchange that provides a platform for trading more than 100 cryptocurrencies . Since early 2018, Binance is considered as the biggest and best cryptocurrency exchange in the world in terms of trading volume.
Trading fees are some of the lowest and are as following:
Fees start at 0.10% per transaction, and based on volume can be as low as 0.02%. This is much lower than most exchanges which start at 0.15%. The transaction fees can also be 25% lower if you hold a specific volume of BNB tokens.
If you are looking for a high volume low transaction fee exchange Binance is recommended.
KuCoin – Top VIP Program.
One of the most popular exchanges in the world with a decent amount of volume. They enable you to purchase bitcoin or other cryptocurrencies directly with your credit card.
They also offer the ability to lend USDT, BTC, EOS, LTC, ETH, and XRP , to earn interest. Also hold other cryptocurrencies and earn staking rewards.
For high rollers they have a generous VIP program.
Bittrex is a US-based cryptocurrency exchange headquartered in Seattle, Washington. As a note they also have operate Bittrex International which is Bittrex’s Europe-based affiliate, which lists certain tokens that are only available on the Bittrex International platform — not to U.S. users.
Bittrex has taken a stance against accepting payments for listings of tokens. Tokens are listed based on merit and quality of project. This is especially important when investing in what are deemed as high risk ALT-Coins.
We believe this is one of the better options, as Bittrex is very transparent when it comes to how they operate.
As of March, 2020 fees have been reduced to 0.10% per transaction, and may be further reduced to 0.01% based on volume, and if it is a ‘maker’ or ‘taker’ transaction.
Poloniex – Referral Code: P44N7LQZ for 10% cashback on all trading fees.
At one point this was the most popular exchange in the world. They still have an impeccable reputation.
Both ‘Maker’ and ‘Taker’ fees start at 0.09% and drop with volume. This is significantly less than the industry standard of 0.20%, and these are the lowest fees of any exchange that we trust.
Bitfinex – Established in 2012.
This is one of the oldest exchange in the world as they were founded in December, 2012.
‘Maker’ fees start at 0.10% and drop with volume, in the meantime ‘taker’ fees are higher than the industry standard and start at 0.20%
There is a very high degree of risk involved in trading securities, and this trading risk is  higher with Cryptocurrencies due to markets being decentralized and non-regulated. There is no central bank that can take corrective measure to protect the value of Cryptocurrencies in a crisis or issue more currency. You should be aware that you may lose a significant portion of your portfolio.
Securities.io is not a registered broker, analyst, or investment advisor.
All information contained herein should be independently verified and confirmed. We do not accept any liability for any loss or damage whatsoever caused in reliance upon such information or services. Please be aware of the risks involved with any trading done in any financial market. Do not trade with money that you cannot afford to lose. When in doubt, you should consult a qualified financial advisor before making any investment decisions.
Some of the links in this website either through images, text, audio or video are affiliate links. This means if you click on the link and purchase the item or use the service, the owner of this website will receive an affiliate commission.
To learn more visit our affiliate disclosure page.
