Home » Cryptocurrency » Bitcoin » Bitcoin is the least used cryptocurrency, says John McAfee
Bitcoin is the least used cryptocurrency, says John McAfee
John McAfee, previously known as a major Bitcoin supporter, turned his back on the largest crypto.
In a series of tweets on May 1st, McAfee criticized BTC for being a zero-privacy coin that is widely traded.
Instead, he praised monero, stating that it is a perfect coin to build the crypto industry on top of.
John McAfee, the creator of McAfee Antivirus and a known crypto supporter, recently praised privacy coin Monero (XMR). McAfee acknowledged XMR as the most used cryptocurrency. Meanwhile, he also put down Bitcoin, stating that no one wants to accept it anymore.
McAfee became a big and vocal crypto supporter over the last several years. Over the course of the last few months, he entered the crypto industry as an exchange founder and coin launcher, too. He created his own crypto exchange, McafeeDex. In addition, he also created the software enterprise, McAfee Associates.
His negative comments against Bitcoin do come as a surprise, however. After all, McAfee is well-known for his interest in Bitcoin , among other things. He was a Bitcoin advocate who claimed that the coin will hit the price of $1 million before 2020 ends.
When I predicted Bitcoin at $500,000 by the end of 2020, it used a model that predicted $5,000 at the end of 2017. BTC has accelerated much faster than my model assumptions. I now predict Bircoin at $1 million by the end of 2020. I will still eat my dick if wrong. pic.twitter.com/WVx3E71nyD
— John McAfee (@officialmcafee) November 29, 2017
However, it now seems that the former Bitcoin bull is no longer a fan of the world’s largest cryptocurrency.
He actually started bashing Bitcoin in his tweets from May 1st, when he called it a zero-privacy coin.
Does anyone else see the insanity of virtually all of crypto being tied to the value of Bitcoin?
Why for example, should Monero, whose value is its Privacy, be tied in any way to a coin that has ZERO privacy — Bitcoin?
— John McAfee (@officialmcafee) May 1, 2020
In the same tweet, McAfee expressed his surprise by the fact that all other cryptos are tied to Bitcoin’s price movement. He particularly questioned Monero’s price to the world’s first crypto. Monero , as a privacy coin, offers and values privacy. Meanwhile, Bitcoin has ‘ZERO privacy,’ as McAfee put it. With that in mind, he sees no sense in the correlation between the two.
Monero as the most used, Bitcoin as only widely traded
McAfee also commented on other people’s tweets, suggesting Monero as the most used crypto. He even stressed that he does mean the most used, not the most traded coin.
Right now it's Monero – the most widely used ("used", not "traded") crypto in the World.
— John McAfee (@officialmcafee) May 1, 2020
He then addressed a tweet of a user called STILLHODLING, who noted that BTC is the king of crypto. The user did note that this should not be like that, but they acknowledged that it is, in fact the case. However, McAfee denied it, stating that BTC is simply the most widely ‘traded’ coin. Even though everyone wants to trade Bitcoin , no one is actually using it for normal spending purposes. He once again stressed that it is Monero that is the most widely ‘used’ crypto.
It is not King. It's the most widely "traded" coin.
The most widely "used" coin is Monero.
If you doubt that check vendors on the Dark Web.
— John McAfee (@officialmcafee) May 1, 2020
Interestingly, his data seems to come from the Dark Web, where, as he says, no one accepts Bitcoin anymore.
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
