Many prominent investors continue to demonize Bitcoin, but there are many players who have benefited from the rising Bitcoin price since its launch in 2009 until today.
Barry Silbert, Changphang Zhao or Micree Zhan Ketuan are just some of the financial heavyweights who invested in Bitcoin early on.
According to data from Bitinfocharts.com, more than 26 % of the richest Bitcoin addresses own between 1 000 and 10 000 BTCs, 12 % between 10 000 and 100 000 BTCs and just 3 % more than 100 000 BTCs. If one had bought 100 Bitcoin at a price of 1 USD, one would be a millionaire several times over today. From the genesis block to the present day, Bitcoin has outperformed many stocks by far.
Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss have invested the capital from their lawsuit against Facebook in cryptocurrencies, most of it in the market leader Bitcoin. The brothers claim that they own approximately 1% of all Bitcoin in circulation, which is the equivalent of more than one billion USD. According to the official statement, the Winklevoss brothers therefore own more than 180,000 BTC.
The prominent investors founded the cryptocurrency exchange Gemini several years ago, which also owns its own stablecoin, the Gemini Dollar (GUSD). With a daily trading volume of more than 27 million USD, Gemini belongs to the 100 largest cryptocurrency exchanges worldwide.
Another well-known early investor in Bitcoin is the multiple billionaire Mike Novogratz. According to his own statement, he has invested almost 30% of his assets in cryptocurrencies, although it has not yet been officially announced how large his Bitcoin assets are in detail. However, he has already set up a crypto-fund in the amount of USD 500 million in 2015, in which he has invested USD 150 million in equity. Novogratz predicted that Bitcoin would reach a price of 40,000 USD in 2018.
Changpeng Zhao is a crypto-millionaire and founder of the world’s largest exchange, Binance . Zhao studied computer science and managed a successful high frequency trading system before joining Binance. In 2014, however, he put all his eggs in one basket and sold his house and invested a large part of his assets in Bitcoin. To date, however, Zhao has never provided accurate information about his actual assets tied up in Bitcoin. According to Forbes, his assets are estimated at more than $1.2 billion.
Barry Silbert is founder and chairman of the Digital Currency Group. The group of companies supports start-ups in the tech and blockchain scene to advance the creative ideas of tomorrow’s founders. To date, the Digital Currency Group has holdings in more than 100 companies, giving Barry Silbert the nickname “The King of Crypto”. The exact number of his private Bitcoin is not known, but according to Forbes, his net worth is estimated at $400 to $500 million.
Rather unknown is Micree Zhan Ketuan, who as a 41-year-old electrical engineer entered the Bitcoin market early on. Together with Jihan Wu, Zhan founded the crypto-mining giant Bitmain, which controls the two largest Bitcoin mining pools in the world, BTC.com and Antpool. Zhan holds just under 36% of the shares in the company, while his founding partner holds 20%. His assets are estimated at just under USD 2.7 billion.
The Swiss Niklas Nikolajsen bought 1,000 Bitcoin when the price was still 0.50 USD. Over the course of his career, his Bitcoin balance continued to grow. In 2013 he founded Bitcoin Suisse AG, one of the leading asset managers and financial services providers in the market. The net assets of Bitcoin Suisse are estimated at 55 million Swiss francs.
Brian Armstrong founded the cryptocurrency exchange Coinbase and has since then bought many companies or acquired shares in many companies. Most of his assets come from his shares in Coinbase, but he also owns a considerable number of Bitcoins, but he does not disclose the exact number. However, he has committed to donate a large part of his assets to the Bill Gates Foundation for charity.
Roger Ver is one of the biggest Bitcoin advocates of recent years and is an early investor, like so many on the list. In his opinion, Bitcoin Cash is the real Bitcoin and comes closest to the original vision according to Satoshi Nakamoto’s white paper.
Satoshi Nakamoto is known as the founder of Bitcoin. To this day, it is not clear who is actually behind the pseudonym. However, there is unanimous agreement that Nakamoto owns more than one million Bitcoin and is therefore a multiple billionaire.
Craig Wright, who is currently involved in an ongoing lawsuit , claims to be the true founder of Bitcoin. Most recently, he refused to present 10,000 documents relevant to the case to the court to prove that he is the founder of Bitcoin.
Below we have compiled a list of large Bitcoin accounts, but it is not possible to assign the addresses to a person.
