The first digital currency climbed above $9,000 during European hours on Wednesday, though the upside momentum remains weak. At the time of writing, BTC/USD is changing hands at $9,083, having gained 2.6% in the recent 24 hours. Bitcoin’s market value has increased to $165 billion, which is 67.3% of the total capitalization of all digital assets in circulation.
Ripple has been growing its global presence due to a large number of advanced fintech projects and payment solutions. However, according to the job listings on Ripple’s website, the company is ready to expand into the lending services, which may become the biggest real-life use-case for the third-largest cryptocurrency.
While it is not clear, if the company plans to use XRP on a cross-border basis to provide lending capital, this move can speed up the adoption of the asset, provided that Ripple finds the way to legal and regulatory hurdles.
Monero has been trading well in recent session and on Wednesday pushed over 5% higher. The price has now broken the red trendline on the chart and looks set to hit the green resistance zone at 65.82. Beyond that, the high on the chart stands at 67.67 and the bulls will be looking to take this out to test the psychological 70.00 zone.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
