Experts Share: What Will Bitcoin’s Price Look Like in 2020?
I don&rsquo;t expect Bitcoin to drop below $6,000. We might see some FUD before the Bitcoin halving. By the end of 2020, I think the Bitcoin price will be at least $20,000.
I have previously commented that I thought $250,000 to $500,000 would be plausible in the longer term. I think there is a good prospect of exceeding the previous all-time high of $20,000 in 2020, as the effects of the halving and technology fundamentals come to bear, perhaps reaching as high as $100,000.
In addition to the halving and inflow of institutional funds into crypto assets, I consider the macroeconomic situation to be a strong driver of the Bitcoin price.
In a financial market completely distorted by central banks, Bitcoin offers one of the very few hedging opportunities, which is increasingly realized by traditional investors.
It would not surprise me if in 2020 some of the bubbles created by the artificial glut of money burst, which will give Bitcoin a significant boost as an alternative asset class.
I would say the interesting question here is not the price of BTC, but whether BTC (and other main cryptocurrencies, such as ETH) will be more widely adopted on a long-term basis rather than only for a pure speculative aspect. We do not want to see a repeat of 2018, when users jumped hastily into crypto. I would prefer to see a genuine interest in the technology and its application and an overall appreciation of the utility of the tokens that support the different networks, products and services built upon the public ledger technology. And while most of the altcoins have depreciated in value over the last two years, ERC-721/ERC-1155 based nonfungible tokens have gone up, with some great examples such as Gods Unchained cards doing a 3&ndash;4x multiple or Axie Infinity Mystic creatures.
Last week, we launched our first round of the LAND presale, representing 2.5% of the game map. The 3,096 available presale LANDS (including those from our partners) were bought by users in about four hours, with 2,123 LAND parcels sold within the first hour alone! Hundreds of users participated in our LAND presale and are now owners of a piece of The Sandbox metaverse. It is a great success!
Gamers and content creators were the first to understand the potential of NFTs. where game assets become blockchain-backed digital assets, tokenized as NFTs that are tradeable on a free and open decentralized marketplace. Through this, players can enjoy permissionless transfer of their assets from one game to another, retaining digital scarcity, security and authenticity.
No, I cannot make such predictions, because I am not interested in crypto as an investment. I am interested in it as a tool for providing services, and especially services that facilitate trade or create opportunities for developing countries or the poor. For example, low-cost insurance for small, single crop farmers in Africa, or trade financing for SMEs or the ability to offer infrastructure bonds at prices that can be purchased by the middle class. These can be impacted by very large movements in crypto (particularly on the upside), so I keep my eye on the market &mdash; but I make no attempt to predict its future.
There are many different perspectives on the future of the market. Bitcoin is still a small market cap instrument, so there will be high volatility in the short term. However, if you look at the fundamental technology, the longer-term view, about a five-year or 10-year horizon, we're very confident that Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies are here to stay. In fact, blockchain will have a bigger impact on society than the internet. The industry will get bigger &mdash; and when the industry gets bigger, the price will go higher. We are also seeing an increasing amount of interest from institutional players, which also indicates a more bullish market in 2020.
The value of asset forecasting is to make election polling look good.
In all seriousness, the motivation in investing in BTC (and crypto at large) is in relation to its benefits over the competition. The best performing asset of the past decade has been BTC; I don&rsquo;t see why there cannot be an encore over the next decade.
I believe no one can seriously predict price levels &mdash; this hasn&rsquo;t worked in 2016, 2017, 2018 and neither this year. So, my prediction is $100,000 for one BTC by the end of 2020, which is probably more wishful thinking. But on a more serious note: I remain bullish on the lead currency that BTC is for two reasons: We see a lot of incumbents, traditional banks, wealth managers, and even asset managers moving into crypto. That&rsquo;s actually my daily work: defining strategies for them on how to successfully enter the arena and bring their clients &mdash; but also their own organization and culture &mdash; into the crypto world. Alongside that, we&rsquo;ll see much more what I call &ldquo;BTC-access products&rdquo;: derivatives on BTC, mutual funds, and &mdash; one day &mdash; ETFs. The second reason is, in my view, that BTC is indeed the lighthouse currency in an increasingly complex non-fiat ecosystem: Think security tokens and stablecoins hitting the markets, they will be pegged to their respective underlyings, so BTC as an &ldquo;independent,&rdquo; liquid, popular and noncorrelated cryptocurrency will actually gain in appeal, also because of the stability of the blockchain &ldquo;behind&rdquo; Bitcoin. Here, the miners play a key role, so I&rsquo;m always following closely, for example, how miners make choices across Bitcoin, Bitcoin Cash and Bitcoin Satoshi Vision.
There is too much uncertainty in the market to predict the price of Bitcoin. It is a relatively illiquid market that remains susceptible to manipulation and that is facing significant regulatory uncertainty globally. If the landscape remains similar to the way it is today &mdash; regulatory uncertainty, declining retail interest and limited fundraising for funds I do not think we will see upward asset movement. I do believe that the market is maturing and that Bitcoin is establishing as an alternative asset class that should be a composite part of a diversified investment portfolio. Some major catalysts for upward price movement would be RIAs becoming more comfortable with digital assets, the SEC approving ETFs or structured products, increasing liquidity in institutional markets, and the ultimate catalyst (which we are not quite ready for) is pensions allocating to digital assets.
With a 99% certainty, we can say that Bitcoin will remain within a wide range between $100 and $1 million.
If the inflation and store of value narrative takes hold, Bitcoin should regain its previous all-time high. It&rsquo;s a significant physiological level. I expect it will flirt a while with that figure, then eventually break through.
Through anecdotal evidence, I believe the median efficiency miner&rsquo;s marginal cost of Bitcoin is in the $3,000 to $4,000 range. True Bitcoin range bottoms are formed around the breakeven point for the median miner. If we revert back to bear territory, I expect the price to hold $3,000.
Min: $3,400 &mdash; because it&rsquo;s higher than the lowest price in 2019 and Bitcoin typically sets higher lows each year.
Max: $200,000 &mdash; everything is possible in crypto, especially with illiquid banking system, the Fed going haywire with repo operations and the looming recession.
Regarding BTC price, I can say one thing only: On average, it will grow.
I'm afraid I can't comment on that. Such a prognosis might even be interpreted by our customers as unauthorised investment advice.
A concrete prediction can perhaps be made: The price of Bitcoin will continue to fluctuate wildly. With the halving in 2020, the increasing number of products bringing liquidity to the market and new regulatory issues (sometimes positive, sometimes negative), the price will remain very exciting.
We have seen industry leaders make price predictions in the past and get them drastically wrong time and time again.
There are a number of factors influencing the markets, and volatility is still something the cryptocurrency market needs to overcome.
That said, with increased institutional investment and the rise of central bank digital currencies, I am confident that in the long term, BTC will continue to rise and thrive.
Of course, I would like the Bitcoin price to go to the moon. However, in 2020 it is unlikely that the maximum will be reset.
Yes, a new Bitcoin halving will happen on May 17, 2020, and after this event, the block reward will be halved again (to 6.25 BTC). Such a reduction will lead to an increase in demand and, accordingly, price. Therefore, 2020 may be better than 2019. January 2019 was the worst month for Bitcoin, so the 2020 rally should be expected in February&ndash;May before halving. If by February the price is stably above $7,000, then by the end of the year, growth is possible above the high of 2019 &mdash; $13,920. That said, Bitcoin is a highly speculative instrument and can react in a very fast way to daily events such as the prospect of war and we could potentially see even $50,000 per Bitcoin in 2020!
I can see BTC going above $25,000 a few months after the BTC halving, but we may start the year as low as $6,000. Bitcoin is a volatile asset &mdash; but that doesn&rsquo;t make it a bad store of value. As CNN reported, BTC has been the best performing asset over the last 10 years. I won&rsquo;t be surprised if it&rsquo;s again the best performing asset in the 2020s.
I believe the minimum and maximum price Bitcoin will be at by the end of 2020 is $16,000 and $24,000. The reason for this is because of a few key elements that I've referenced previously on Twitter. When:
The halving cuts new daily issued Bitcoin in half,
PlusToken finishes selling its Bitcoin and Ether,
And more institutional onramps become available,
&hellip;Bitcoin&rsquo;s price will start to move higher, and at a very fast pace. This range considers the fact that by the end of the year of the last halving, we saw Bitcoin's price near its all-time highs. So, a spread around $20,000 would be realistic, according to history.
No, I cannot and no one can. But if I am forced to bring out my dusty crystal ball, I would guess that in terms of Bitcoin price, 2020 will be a year similar to that of 2016. That is, we will see a positive trend starting up to the halving and we will see Bitcoin reach close to a new all-time high. But that we perhaps need one last shakeout of weak hands before a new sustained positive trend takes hold. With this in mind, I guess for a minimum price of $5,900 and a maximum price of $17,000.
First of all, let me reiterate that price isn't the same as value. Bitcoin still has largely the same value proposition at a price of $100 or $100,000, and it's what Bitcoin *does* that's a force for change in the world, not the speculative dollar value of 1 BTC. For most "shitcoins," however, the price is what matters, with people just looking to get rich quick by exploiting others' desire for the same.
All that having been said, my guess is that BTC will mostly stay under $10,000 for a while longer, and maybe even test its supports again at $3,000. At some point, it will probably make another breakout bull run, but I don't think we're anywhere close to seeing Bitcoin's true market value yet. I don't mean this as a "to the moon" prediction, just that it's far too soon to properly weigh the worth of 1 BTC when we don't know how Bitcoin will ultimately end up changing the world of finance yet.
I think we could see substantial upside after the halving that triggers a new wave of capital that drives the price to another major parabolic cycle. I don&rsquo;t think there is much downside below current levels.
This question is very difficult and I would not like to give an estimate. On the one hand, there is the narrative that considers Bitcoin as digital gold. According to this, the price of a Bitcoin would quickly be in the six-figure range. On the other hand, there are developments in India, China and other countries that make cryptocurrencies very sceptical. If appropriate measures are taken in economically important countries, the price of Bitcoin can also drop massively, for example to a low four-digit number. These two extreme cases are both possible in principle and can be argued. This is exactly where the enormous volatility comes from, which we have been observing for some time now.
Can I predict the Bitcoin price at the end of 2020? Sure, to the third decimal place! 7,000 euros &mdash; plus/minus 5,000 euros.
I see no future for Bitcoin. It is not suitable as a means of payment &mdash; who wants to spend 10 minutes at the checkout in the supermarket for verification. And there is hardly any innovation associated with it. And once the fast Bitcoin, the Lightning Network, arrives, it will be too late, then others will be ahead.
I've actually stopped trying to predict the Bitcon price, as it's really anyone's guess when trying to predict particular time scales. I'm confident the price will continue to rise in the long term, but predicting the price short term has become an impossible task.
Just for fun, let's say between $12,000 and $28,000.
I don&rsquo;t like to speculate on price, but I believe it still has lots of growth potential.
Unfortunately, I cannot make a statement on this. We are neutral, but we are pleased if the courses develop positively.
My best guess, I would put a max price on Bitcoin of $25,000 and a minimum of $4,000&ndash;$5,000.
It&rsquo;s hard to accurately predict Bitcoin price, but considering the upcoming halving and historical data, I believe that minimum value will be around $6,500 and maximum value during hype can reach around $80,000, with a new solid bottom at around $15,000.
Min: $5,400 (I think we won&rsquo;t retest the $3,000 prices ever again, but we could still have months of bearishness ahead).
Max: $150,000 (If bubble #5 occurs in 2020, I think we could get up to $150,000 &mdash; and if so, it&rsquo;ll never fall below $20,000 again).
We get a lot of questions about price forecasts. Even though Whale Alert is used by many traders as a tool to predict prices and trends, we aim to remain a neutral party; we offer no predictions or endorsements for any cryptocurrency or platform.
I don&rsquo;t think I have a solid basis for making such predictions, but I will try.
Using the basic logic, we can play within the historical all-time high and all-time low boundaries. I think it is possible that at some point in 2020 Bitcoin may hit the all-time low or even go a bit below it, so I would say the low can be $3,000.
As things progress and the adoption grows, the demand for Bitcoin and crypto in general will surge, and it is totally possible that it will go up to all-time high or more. So, I would say $30,000.
