Gold slides as stocks rise; traders still like gold long-term
Allen Sykora Tuesday February 04, 2020 10:38
(Kitco News) - A big comeback in equities sent gold futures sharply lower  Tuesday, but some futures-market strategists and traders look for the yellow metal  to eventually right itself since interest rates are low and there is uneasiness  with valuations in equities.
As of 10:05 a.m. EST, Comex April gold was $19.40 lower to  $1,563 an ounce. The contract bottomed at $1,566.20, its weakest level since  Jan. 24.
Meanwhile, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was around 400  points higher in early trading after also rising on Monday. Previously, stocks  had been on the defensive amid worries about the economic impact of China’s  coronavirus outbreak.
“Looking at gold , obviously, with the U.S. equities markets  continuing to power higher on yesterday’s turnaround, that has really caught a  lot of people off guard who were planning for more follow-through selling to  the downside (in stocks),” said Phillip  Streible, chief market strategist with Blue Line Futures.
Right now, there  seems to be a “fear of missing out” on moves in a number of stocks – such as  Telsa – that are surging sharply, he continued.
All of this has  taken away some of the previous safe-haven buying in gold that occurred when  stocks were falling amid the virus worries. U.S. dollar strength is also  playing a role in gold’s pullback, said Sean Lusk, co-director of commercial hedging with Walsh  Trading.
“As these equities firm higher, those recent longs [bullish traders] in  gold are taking it on the chin and probably getting stopped out,” Lusk said.
Traders get “stopped out” of a market when prices hit chart points that  automatically trigger pre-placed sell orders, as market participants look to either  limit losses or protect prior profits.
Still, “I like  gold,” Streible said.
He called gold’s  downdraft “slightly damaging” on the technical charts. However, the metal  remains above what he sees as the key chart point of $1,542.80 an ounce, which  was the low on Jan. 14.
“If we close below  there, gold has some real trouble and we’re probably going to have a continued  washout,” Streible.
Lusk listed downside  chart-support points of $1,551, $1,536 and a longer-term trendline around  $1,530. Should the latter fail, April gold conceivably could fall all the way  to around $1,470, Lusk added.
“I think longer  term, gold is still in an uptrend,” Lusk said. “But you’re going to have some  violent corrections in the near term because there are so many longs in the  market.”
The most recent  positioning data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission showed that as  of Jan. 28, money managers were net-long, or bullish, by 219,938 futures contracts. This is not far below the 232,732 lots from the end of 2019. This eventually means selling whenever  these speculators opt to exit their positions, and this has tended to happen  whenever the net long has gotten up around 230,000, Lusk added.
Ultimately, Streible  and Lusk both look for the metal to draw some support from continued low  interest rates.
“We haven’t reached  any important thresholds with the Fed’s inflation targets. So they’re going to  be sitting on the sideline,” Lusk said. “We’ve seen central banks around the  world continue to amass gold.”
Streible also noted  that the Federal Reserve is still active in the repurchase-agreement market,  and the Treasury yield curve has been inverted at times lately, typically seen  as an indicator that not all may be well with the economy.
“I think gold is a  good investment right now,” Streible said. “This U.S. equity market is like a  huge dam. A couple of cracks are starting to show in it. If the dam breaks,  we’re going to see a massive correction in equities.”
And if so, investors in gold could benefit from rising prices,  he continued.
Lusk added that gold has been a headline-driven market for  some time now.
“That means on the next [new] headline, we could rally by 30  or 40 bucks and trade back over $1,600,” Lusk said.
