Neils Christensen Tuesday March 10, 2020 15:34
( Kitco News )  -Market volatility is having  a significant impact on gold prices and gold miners, but one fund manager is  recommending that investors look through the noise and focus on the bigger  picture: falling bond yields will ultimately drive gold prices higher.
Joe Foster, portfolio  manager and strategist of VanEck’s Gold and Precious Metals Strategy, said in a  report Monday that despite the market chaos, precious metals and the mining  sector remain in the early stages of a secular bull market.
“Through the coronavirus  crash, ten-year treasury yields have plummeted to all-time lows. With the  markets in disarray, gold has not responded to this fall in real rates. Once  the volatility subsides, we expect real rates to again become a primary driver  of gold prices,” he said in his latest report.
Foster's comments come as gold prices struggle to find momentum after hitting a seve-year high at the start of the week. April gold futures last traded at $1,650.40 an ounce, down 1.50% on the day. At the same time, the VanEck Vectors Gold Miners ETF (NYSE: GDX ) last traded at $27.10 a share, down 0.77% on the day.
Foster added that if history  is any gauge for market sentiment, higher gold prices should lead miners out of  the correction at a faster pace than general equities.
He noted that in 2008, at  the height of the financial crisis, gold prices dropped 10%; meanwhile, the  Gold Miners Index dropped 48%. However, by the end of the year, the index has  recovered to pre-Lehman bankruptcy levels. In contrast, the S&P 500 Index  didn’t officially bottom until March 2009 and took two years to recover from  its 46% drop.
“So, while the general stock  market was struggling to recover for over two years, the gold stock market  quickly rebounded and went on to bull market gains,” he said. “We believe the  markets will look back on the coronavirus “black swan” as a buying opportunity  for gold shares, however, whether the worst is yet behind us is anyone’s  guess.”
Foster added that he would not be surprised if  the global economy fell into a recession as the virus continues to spread.  Ultimately, this scenario will drive gold prices higher.
“If there is to be a  recession, then we believe that debt will become the foremost risk, as it has  been in nearly every recession,’ he said. “Overwhelming levels of sovereign  debt may limit government’s ability to borrow and spend in a downturn. Central  banks may come under pressure to monetize or print money to keep governments  and businesses afloat. These are the financial risks that might drive gold  higher in the next recession.”
However, Foster is not  convinced that monetary policy will be able to save the global economy.
“No amount of rate cuts or  quantitative easing will have much impact until people and businesses are able  to resume normal activities,” he said.
