The traditional idea of mining cryptocurrency evokes images of either powerful GPUs at a minimum, or in a day of ASIC chips, massive purpose-built hardware for the express purpose of solving those equations. Mining on a mobile phone seems to go against the grain. However, as Phil Chen, Decentralized Chief Officer at HTC, says
“Bitcoin and mobile phones are the most important and impactful technology inventions of recent times. I am lucky enough to be involved on the frontlines of both these technologies. What drives our decisions around these technologies is our values; specifically, the question of how we can further decentralize and create a more inclusive monetary system.
“Mining on mobile is an important research topic in understanding the development of secure crypto networks. The number of mobile phones in 2020 is approaching 3.5 Billion, which would further decentralize and distribute the hash rate and mining power of such crypto networks.
“Monero is an important and crucial experiment resisting the trend of centralized mining. It utilizes an algorithm called “Random X” that is suitable for CPU-based calculation. The use of this algorithm is actively fighting some of the centralizing forces that create the mining pools in Bitcoin.”
“Furthermore, the mature development of power-saving software on mobile, as opposed to power-hungry laptops or desktops, amplifies the effectiveness and efficiency of the profitability of mining on mobile. “
“At HTC, our position is to use the mobile phone to drive further decentralization. The mobile phone has become the primary computing device of the people and making it accessible to everyone empowers the people.”
“In other words, the question is not should we use an ASIC or a CPU. The question is how can we further decentralize and ensure a more inclusive monetary system?”
Dr. Jri Lee, founder and CEO of Midas Labs and Professor at National Taiwan University, echoes Chern’s thoughts on a higher degree of decentralization.
“Cryptocurrency mining should never be limited to centralized farms or giant miners. Mining on mobile or other personal devices perfectly meets the main spirit of blockchain, i.e., decentralization. Today, the most valuable cryptocurrencies are still based on proof of work. That is, mining is the indispensable part of these cryptocurrencies,” he told me.
“Mobile mining will meaningfully add to decentralization as it will increase the security of the network. If we’re helping to secure the networks, then all cryptocurrency users benefit from it. We should also bear in mind that there are billions of smartphones in the world. Using Monero as an example, the mobile hash rate could easily exceed the existing hash rate if only 1% of smartphones conduct mining. Bringing mining to mobile is a very important step for blockchain.”
Monero is the chosen cryptocurrency for HTC to begin this journey towards further decentralizing cryptocurrencies through the proliferation of mobile devices, however, it is a coin that courts quite a bit of controversy.
Being a privacy-focused coin, it is one that has uses outside the realms of what is legal. The added anonymity on Monero sees the coin rubbing regulators up the wrong way, and has seen businesses react negatively towards it.
Estonia-based BitBay announced Monday that Monero (XML) will no longer be tradeable in February due to regulatory concerns about its potential uses in money laundering. This followed from OKEx also dropping the coin. Coinbase in the UK has also dropped Zcash, a similarly inclined privacy coin.
For Chern, the issues with Monero's privacy aspects should not impact its technical ability to be mined as a breakthrough for mobile.
“Any issues with Monero’s privacy does not impact on its technical ability to be mined in this first important step and breakthrough.
“The privacy and fungible aspect of Monero is mostly irrelevant to the AML and KYC of banks. In other words, banks can still properly perform AML and KYC with a privacy coin like Monero. Asking the customer, for example, where your Monero came from is an off-chain problem. Further, I’d argue that the fungibility aspect of Monero makes it even more antifragile as a medium of exchange as opposed to a piece of property with clear provenance,” he added.
“Zooming out a bit, this is fundamentally about financial institutions, not just banks. It’s all financial institutions that are required to do AML, KYC, and other regulations.”
“The distinction to be made is that we should be regulating people and companies. We should not be fooling ourselves into thinking money should become a titled property. That experiment was already run hundreds of years ago.”
I am an award-winning journalist that has covered a variety of topics from finance to economics, technology, and even sport. With the emergence of Blockchain technology…
I am an award-winning journalist that has covered a variety of topics from finance to economics, technology, and even sport. With the emergence of Blockchain technology and the rise in popularity of cryptocurrencies I have focused my efforts towards this fascinating and important ecosystem. I also have a legal background, and as such, have a keen interest in the regulation and adoption of Blockchain & cryptocurrency, as well as innovative and disruptive uses for this revolutionary digital solution. 
I have written for a number of online publications on Blockchain & cryptocurrencies and their impact globally.
