Wealth Research Group Monday February 03, 2020 09:41
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
There  you have it; the World Economic Forum is meeting in Davos and all the  billionaire investors and hedge fund managers are talking about is the fact  that the Federal Reserve is behind the  MARKET'S PARABOLIC surge.
The  commentary coming out of there is textbook Wealth Research Group material. I want to show you today why the real question you must be asking  yourself is whether you're a LONG-TERM investor, viewing the world like Warren  Buffett does , or if you're a trader, viewing it like billionaire investor  Paul Tudor Jones.
The  reason I say this is because if you're an investor, your options are truly  limited, few and far between and offer little in the way of extraordinary  compounding opportunities, at the moment.
Buffett  isn't sitting on $128B in cash because he has liquidated his portfolio; a  long-term investor will NEVER sell equities or ownership stakes in great  businesses, bought at good prices, simply because markets are due  for a big shakeout.
The  way he accumulated this cash position was simply by shying away from making new  allocations, whenever profits came in and piled on. I've done something similar  and now I've stuffed the equivalent of 40% of my stock portfolio into the  brokerage account as cash.
For  every $3 that is invested, $2 is on the sidelines, as liquid cash.
The  difference between Berkshire Hathaway's famed mega-billionaire investor and  myself is that I'm also diversifying out of long-term dividend plays and into precious  metals , private lending, small-cap stocks and real estate.
The  reason is that NO ONE has any idea for how long the Federal Reserve and the other  top central banks will continue to POUR trillions of dollars in  liquidity into markets.
As  you can see, the smart money's holdings represent a HUGE paradox. On the one  hand, they are certain the markets are in a bubble, GROSSLY overpriced,  compared with fundamentals. On the other hand, as David Tepper, the billionaire  hedge fund mogul and owner of the Carolina Panthers says: "I like riding  horses, when they're running."
The  lesson is clear: IF there's a bubble – BUT there's also enough time to jump off  the train and not take part of the collision – then 2020 is a time to make  SENSATIONAL returns.
In  the chart above, you can see that highly experienced investors are betting that  the FED will not let the economy contract, if they can help it. They will  intervene in the Repurchase Operations (Repo), pump liquidity via QE4 and let  inflation run hot, if the consumer gets stronger.
Officially  and unequivocally, we are investing in a U.S. stock market that is overly  bullish, where investors are buying stocks out of a lack of alternatives, where  profits signal that corporations can't extract more earnings (for the time  being), and where leverage is already at a record.
The  billionaires' bet is that there is still a 30%-40% return to be made before the  peak is reached. Therefore, you need to be asking yourself if you are IN OR OUT  and how much you will be risking.
Take  a look at this beautiful chart:
The  uptrend is CERTAINLY in place!
As  you can see, in 2011, the last mania for gold, the price was 2.3 times above  the trend-line support. To replicate that, the price will have to reach  $2,750/ounce.
There's  so much more TORQUE to this move and the Davos billionaires are UNUSUALLY  bullish. Ray Dalio's firm leads the bull camp, with Paul Tudor Jones,  Guggenheim Fund LONG silver, David Einhorn and Stanley Druckenmiller, among  the gold crowd.
The  CHIEF reason that they're now forecasting a breakout into the $1,800's and  above is that they BELIEVE central banks have been cornered into never  tightening again.
After  the 2013 tantrum and the December 2018 one-month bear market, the verdict is  out: Jerome Powell has WEASELED OUT of his promise to normalize rates, and from  here on, all the FED can really do is hope the markets don't become bent out of  shape again, forcing more drastic measures.
The  FED is like a chef, who’s already poured too much SALT into the soup. Instead  of admitting the error, throwing it away and starting anew, he continues  experimenting with the recipe, assuring a RECALL.
I  have so much more to publish this coming Tuesday on the matter, so I want to  present two more important charts that prove that stocks are now, same as other  assets, a way to be allocated into anything that isn't cash.
For  one, look at the crashing confidence levels of consumers regarding the economy  and the jobs market; this is not LOOKING GOOD.
In  an economy that is 69%-based on services and consumerism, this is unacceptable.
But  it's not only that; the DISPARITY between valuations and what corporations are  worth is HUGE.
Truly,  central banks have distorted pricing mechanisms and everyone is in the BLAST RADIUS.
No  one in the history of the world has been able to ride a bubble forever. All  bubbles POP and this one is no EXCEPTION.
Stocks  are units of ownership in companies and profits are the ultimate barometer of  the value of businesses.
As David Tepper says, you can ride the horse, while  it's running, but if you're not sure how to stop a wild horse safely, consider  watching this last bit from the stands.
