As Julie Maupin announced, the IOTA Foundation will implement new projects in Chile, in Japan in the field of industrial IoT and various other projects.
Maupin, who has been dealing with regulatory issues, among others, will end her daily work at the IOTA Foundation, but will continue to represent IOTA.
As Julie Maupin announced yesterday via Twitter, she will withdraw from the IOTA Foundation as she wants to concentrate more on her family and her family office. Maupin has been working at IOTA Foundation as Director of Social Impact and Public Regulatory Affairs and will now take on a smaller role. Maupin will no longer participate in the daily management of the IOTA Foundation, but will only represent the Foundation at the International Association for Trusted Blockchain Applications (INATBA) and other events, as she explained:
While I will no longer be involved in the day to day management of the Foundation, I will still serve on behalf of #IOTA at @INATBA_org and represent the project at key public events.
As IOTA co-founder David Sønstebø explained via Discord, the decision had been made a long time ago, which meant that appropriate measures could be planned.
No need for a replacement. She will still be around and the team she has built has matured into their roles.This is not an “overnight” thing, we’ve been planning this since the end of last year.
However, Maupin, who was also appointed member of the Fintech Advisory Board of the German Ministry of Finance, did not leave the IOTA Foundation without a bang. In a tweet in which she gave an outlook on what is in store for the IOTA Foundation in the near future, she explained:
What’s next for IOTA? Landfill gas monitoring in Chile, industrial IoT project in Japan, new mobility, digital health, and climate change management use cases, and much more. Stay tuned!
Via Discord, the statements were taken up by a user who approached Sønstebø and asked whether the projects mentioned were just proof of concepts (PoCs) and ideas or actual use and adaptation. However, the IOTA co-founder did not reveal any further details and referred to the coming weeks or months:
As she says: Stay tuned. Details on these issues will be announced in due course.
Finally, Sønstebø revealed a few days ago that “80 percent” of the adaptation progress is still taking place behind the scenes. In particular, he referred to the Tangle EE Working Group and the Digital Twin Consortium membership announced a week ago. Presumably, however, the application scenarios mentioned by Maupin are also included.
One focus of the IOTA Foundation could certainly be on solutions for sustainability and climate change management. In addition to Maupin’s mention of this application, the IOTA Foundation has announced various initiatives in this area in recent weeks. As reported by CNF, the IOTA Foundation was recently selected by the EU Commission to participate in the development of a digital supply chain solution for the mining industry.
