XMR/USD is moving inside the range without a clear direction.
Monero's hash rate increased by 186% in recent days after the team released a new update with the new mining algorithm RandomX. The new rules eliminate the benefits of ASIC-based mining and increase network decentralization.
Hash rate is ofter referred to as a network difficulty as it defines the number of hashes calculated by computers before the next block is discovered.
Prior to the upgrade, Monero hash rate was registered at 309 MHash/s, while seven days later it has settled at 952 MHash/s. Experts believe that the spike is caused by ASIC-resistant features that gives all miners an equal opportunity to participate in the mining.
While the development is regarded as positive for the Monero network, the price has been stagnant lately. On Tuesday, XMR/USD attempted a move towards $55.00 but retreated to $52.40. At the time of writing, the coin is changing hands at $53.41, having gained about 2% of its value since the beginning of the day.
Looking technically, the strong resistance is created by a $55.00-$55.20 area. This is the upper boundary of the recent consolidation channel. Once it is out of the way, the upside is likely to gain traction with the next focus on SMA50 (Simple Moving Average) daily at $57.60, reinforced by the upper line of the daily Bollinger Band.
On the downside, a sustainable move below $52.00 will increase the selling pressure and push the price towards a psychological $50.00. The next slang-term support awaits us at $45.90, which is the lowest level since November 25.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
