Monero researchers have outlined a new system called “Triptych,” which could enhance Monero’s privacy and scalability.
Triptych may or may not be introduced to future versions of Monero, but it has been described in full in a Jan. 6 research paper . Researchers say they are also working on a variant with “even better scaling.”
Triptych builds on Ring Confidential Transactions , or RingCTs, which are used by Monero to obscure transaction values through decoy inputs. Triptych would allow Monero to handle a greater number of decoys more efficiently and, by extension, process highly private transactions that require very little verification time.
Triptych offers logarithmic scaling, meaning that it would allow Monero to handle far more decoys than it currently does. Right now, Monero adds 10 decoys to each transaction by default. By contrast, Triptych would allow Monero to handle 512 decoys, and doing so would only take 45 milliseconds on average, according to developers.
Triptych has another advantage: it is trustless. In trusted setups, like that which Electric Coin Company, formerly Zcash, implemented, privacy can be compromised if initial participants collude, or if critical data is leaked.
Though Monero itself does not rely on a trusted setup, most current alternatives to Triptych do rely on such a setup, giving Triptych a possible advantage.
It’s not yet clear if Monero developers will choose to utilize Triptych. The technology is still in a preprint stage and has yet to be reviewed. There are also several other scalability improvements under consideration, including RingCT 3.0, CLSAG, Lelantus, and Omniring—all of which would enhance transaction privacy as well.
Monero has also implemented other improvements in the past. The project introduced bulletproofs in October 2018, which reduced transaction fees and transaction times significantly. Monero’s November 2019 hard fork, which is best known for introducing RandomX , also improved security and privacy through several small changes.
The information on or accessed through this website is obtained from independent sources we believe to be accurate and reliable, but Decentral Media, Inc. makes no representation or warranty as to the timeliness, completeness, or accuracy of any information on or accessed through this website. Decentral Media, Inc. is not an investment advisor. We do not give personalized investment advice or other financial advice. The information on this website is subject to change without notice. Some or all of the information on this website may become outdated, or it may be or become incomplete or inaccurate. We may, but are not obligated to, update any outdated, incomplete, or inaccurate information.
You should never make an investment decision on an ICO, IEO, or other investment based on the information on this website, and you should never interpret or otherwise rely on any of the information on this website as investment advice. We strongly recommend that you consult a licensed investment advisor or other qualified financial professional if you are seeking investment advice on an ICO, IEO, or other investment. We do not accept compensation in any form for analyzing or reporting on any ICO, IEO, cryptocurrency, currency, tokenized sales, securities, or commodities.
