On October 21st, 2019, multi-currency fiat-to-cryptocurrency exchange BTSE revealed it had launched Monero (XMR) spot trading. The addition of the largest privacy coin by market capitalization marks the seventh cryptocurrency that is tradeable on BTSE.
The listing of Monero enables BTSE users to trade XMR with a wide variety of crypto- and fiat currencies, without withdrawal limits, tier systems, or KYC for crypto-to-crypto pairs.
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates (PRWEB) October 21, 2019
On October 21st, 2019, multi-currency fiat-to-cryptocurrency exchange BTSE revealed it had launched Monero (XMR) spot trading. The addition of the largest privacy coin by market capitalization marks the seventh cryptocurrency tradeable on BTSE.
The listing of Monero spot trading enables BTSE users to buy or sell their XMR with or for Bitcoin, Litecoin, Ethereum, Tether, USDC, TUSD, and a wide variety of fiat currencies (including USD, EUR, JPY, GBP, and many more). Monero is further tradeable on BTSE without withdrawal limits, tier systems, or KYC for crypto-to-crypto pairs.
"Monero is a cryptocurrency that has a practical use case for people around the world today," explained BTSE's CEO Jonathan Leong. "I expect the demand for XMR to grow because of its invaluable usefulness for those in immediate need of financial privacy."
Monero (XMR) is one of the most popular privacy coins. It benefits from advanced cryptographic obfuscation mechanisms which make all transactions confidential to the extent that only the sender and the recipient are able to see the amount sent and other data. While cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, Litecoin, and Ethereum leave permanent traces on their blockchains and can be subjected to professional analysis, Monero is private by default and completely secretive to outsiders.
Offering futures and spot trading as well as multiple fiat on- and off-ramps, BTSE is designed as a one-stop solution for traders at all levels to conveniently deposit, trade, convert, and withdraw crypto- and fiat currencies.
BTSE utilizes a combination of proven technologies from the institutional trading landscape and cutting-edge Bitcoin technology to facilitate a maximally secure and efficient trading experience. The exchange's powerful matching engine, horizontal scaling infrastructure, and self-hosted servers are some of the building blocks that make BTSE independent of third-party providers and enable the platform to operate with no downtime or system overloads.
BTSE developed Futures 2.0, fully customizable futures contracts that allow traders to freely choose and combine their margin and settlement assets. This makes BTSE's futures technology the most advanced on the market.
Share article on social media or email:
