David Erfle Friday May 29, 2020 10:10
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
When I first  began to invest in the stock market over 20 years ago, I was determined to become  the best investor possible. I watched CNBC daily, read Barron’s and countless  other mainstream paraphernalia…….and promptly lost over 50% of my investment capital  in just two years.
After losing  a large sum of money by listening to mainstream media, be sure to get your  money’s worth by learning from your mistakes. Although this was an expensive  lesson, it was an essential one, which motivated me even more to become a  successful investor in the stock market.
After a few  all-night drinking binges’, I decided to do some contrarian research and came  upon a newsletter entitled Dow Theory Letters and the living legend that published  this highly successful service, Richard Russell. Sadly, in 2015, Mr. Russell  left us after an incredible 91-year lifetime of helping countless investors  reap fortunes in the stock market.
I don’t know  whether to thank the old master, or condemn him for introducing me to the most  fascinating, frustrating, and volatile sector on the planet that is the  precious metals miner complex. Please see this column entitled “Miners on the Verge of a Multi-Year  Breakout….Again” for  my account of how frustrating and treacherous this sector has been recently.
There have  been countless lessons I have learned from Mr. Russell over the years until his  passing and one of the best was to find an unloved and completely decimated  sector that has made a solid bottom. Then, overweight your portfolio into that  sector and hold on until it matures. This is the best way to make big money in  the market.
Despite the  huge move gold has already made since breaking out of a 6-year base last summer,  the 20-year monthly chart of the HUI/Gold ratio shows the incredible value gold  stocks are presenting investors in relation to the price of gold at this time.  This ratio double topped in 2006 and although the gold price hit an all-time  high in 2011 at $1920, it shows gold stocks have been mired in a 14-year bear  market in relation to the price of gold ever since.
However, the  gold stock bear market may have ended with a double bottom in the HUI/Gold  ratio just a few months ago. Since the panic low in the precious metals sector  took place in mid-March, I have been recommending readers of this column to accumulate long-term holding  positions in the  mining complex before the breakout occurred last month. Now that the “Bear Trap  Bottom” in the GDX has been confirmed with a monthly close above 7-year  resistance at $32 in mid-April, weakness in the sector continues to be bought  down the food chain of riskier juniors.
Enter Mr.  Russell’s words of wisdom “hold on until the sector matures” which harken back  to a character known as “Old Turkey” from whom famed trader Jesse Livermore  learned so much nearly 100 years ago. In Edwin Lefevre’s “Reminiscences of a Stock Operator” , published in 1923, Livermore  recounts this valuable lesson from Old Turkey:
“And  right here let me say one thing: After spending many years in Wall Street and  after making and losing millions of dollars I want to tell you this it is no  trick at all to be right on the market. You always find lots of early bulls in  bull markets and early bears in bear markets. I’ve known many men who were  right at exactly the right time, and began buying or selling stocks when prices  were at the very level which should show the greatest profit. And their  experience invariably matched mine that is, they made no real money out of it.  Men who can both be right and sit tight are uncommon. I found it one of the  hardest things to learn. But it is only after a stock operator has firmly  grasped this that he can make big money. It is literally true that millions  come easier to a trader after he knows how to trade than hundreds did in the  days of his ignorance.”
I have been  waiting for “Old Turkey Time” in this sector since the first phase in the miner  bull market during H1 2016 took nearly four years to consolidate. After the nearly  85% decimation of the GDX from 2011-2015, a short-cover fueled rally took the  global miner ETF into an over-extended 160% move in 6-months which saw many  juniors run 10x or more into August of 2016.
However, after  this sharp move higher fizzled out as gold reached critical resistance at  $1375, many juniors were sold down to their respective early 2016 lows and some  lower still. Once long-suffering miner speculators finally threw in the junior towel  just a few short months ago, there were literally no sellers left which created  an even more attractive entry point for bold and cashed up contrarians.
With the  Federal Reserve now going down the Modern Monetary Theory  (MMT) road in  an attempt to keep shut-down state economies afloat, the result of these  desperate actions are already showing early signs of stagflation in the U.S. economy. Last week, the  Labor Department reported that prices U.S. consumers paid for groceries jumped 2.6% in April. This was the largest  one-month rise since February 1974, when stagflation in the U.S. economy assisted  in taking gold from roughly $100 that year, to $850 by January of 1980.
With the GDX  having broken out of a huge 7-year base recently, gold stocks are beginning  to spark the interest of generalist investors. Moreover, hedge fund luminaries and momentum players have begun to  come into this tiny sector and continue to buy the precious metals mining complex  on weakness.
If you are  already fully invested in the space, then just think of Old Turkey when the  sector is experiencing a correction. There is strong support at the breakout  region of $30-$32 in the GDX, while the technically measured target of the  breakout is $50. If you are still accumulating, then buy weakness in quality miners  and hold fast until this impulse move from the 7-year accumulative base has  matured.
If you  require assistance is choosing the best juniors to accumulate for the  long-term, stop by my website at www.juniorminerjunky.com and sign up for my free email list. You will  receive this column in your inbox each week, along with current interviews. Although  the 250-membership cap has been reached in the JMJ subscription service , place your name and email address  on the waiting list if you are interested in becoming a member and you will be  contacted once spaces open up.
