“In light of user protection and public interest, and risks such as terrorist financing and money laundering, the FSA expects prudent consideration of appropriateness of crypto-assets and which crypto-assets exchanges business operators deal with,” a representative of the FSA told Forbes. “And we assume that each operator operates based on that.”
One possible interpretation of the Japan regulator’s response is that its concerns might be less about the cryptocurrency itself than the compliance of exchanges with know-your-customer and anti-money laundering protections. For example, in the notoriously unfriendly crypto environment in the U.S. both Coinbase and Gemini offer zcash, while bragging about their compliance.
Giving credence to that possibility, another regulator called the Japan Virtual Currency Exchange Association, a self-regulatory agency similar to the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), was slightly less daunting than the FCA, if still very cautious. The agency, with members including CoinCheck, told Forbes it did not disclose details about its position on specific coins, adding, “JVCEA will examine characteristics of coins and member companies' internal control in listing and dealing with coins.” The criteria for that evaluation is publicly available.
Interestingly, the Rand Corporation report commissioned by the Electric Coin Company (ECC) behind zcash, and published last week found that 59% of illicit transactions conducted on the eight largest dark markets in the world used bitcoin, compared to 27% that used monero, 12% that used ether and 1% that used litecoin or zcash. In response to an email sent from Forbes to the FSA on May 5, asking whether or not the FCA had received a copy of the findings, the agency declined to comment.
Privacy advocates including ECC co-founder Zooko Wilcox argue that as every aspect of individuals’ online lives are increasingly being monitored, privacy coins will become an important protection of civil liberties. Detractors of the coins argue the risks posed by dark market deals outweigh such privacy concerns of law-abiding citizens. A representative of the ECC declined to comment on whether or not conversations with regulators were ongoing.
I report on how blockchain and cryptocurrencies are being adopted by enterprises and the broader business community. My coverage includes the use of cryptocurrencies such
I report on how blockchain and cryptocurrencies are being adopted by enterprises and the broader business community. My coverage includes the use of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Ethereum and Ripple, and extends to non-cryptocurrency applications of blockchain in finance, supply chain management, digital identity and a number of other use cases. Previously, I was a staff reporter at blockchain news site, CoinDesk, where I covered the increasing willingness of enterprises to explore how blockchain could make their work more efficient and in some cases, unnecessary. I have been covering blockchain since 2011, been published in the New Yorker, and been nationally syndicated by American City Business Journals. My work has been published in Blockchain in Financial Markets and Beyond by Risk Books and I am regularly cited in industry research reports. Since 2009 I’ve run Literary Manhattan, a 501 (c) (3) non-profit organization dedicated to showing Manhattan’s rich literary heritage.
