Whose data is being auctioned off? So far, Cyberint has spotted a handful of listings. There was a trove of documents from a major U.S. food distributor with a starting price of $100,000. A 50 gigabyte cache of sensitive files from a U.S. law firm was priced at $30,000.
The highest-priced listing: an legal firm specializing in intellectual property law. For a starting bid of $1.2 million, the winner would gain access to a digital library full of trade secrets, patent documentation, and internal communications.
REvil was one of the first groups to start selling its victims’ data. In mid-March the gang started selling access to data outright. Some of those hit by REvil saw gigabytes of private files sold off for few measly Euros.
For victims, it’s a lose-lose-lose scenario. They can pay the ransom and regain access to the encrypted files, but they have to trust that a group of criminals is going to follow through and permanently destroy all other copies of the stolen data. That’s unlikely at best.
Victims could also choose to roll the dice and bid anonymously on their own data. Again, they’re trusting that a criminal won’t re-sell that data or hang on to it and use it for future extortion attempts.
They could opt to not pay and to ignore the threat of private data being exposed. A good set of backups can restore the data, but the data leak creates a host of new problems. Criminals can use the data to launch sophisticated business email compromise scams that can lead to multi-million-dollar losses - not to mention jeopardizing business deals, angering clients, or creating public relations nightmares.
Cyber attacks are surging. Victims keep paying ransoms, which gives ransomware gangs more incentive to continue with their attacks.
They won’t back off any time soon. The best defense: education.
Email inboxes are still the most common starting point for ransomware attacks. Being able to identify a phishing message could keep your secrets from being spilled to the highest bidder.
Lee started writing about software, hardware, and geek culture around the time that the Red Wings last won the Stanley Cup. The two aren't related in any way, however.
Lee started writing about software, hardware, and geek culture around the time that the Red Wings last won the Stanley Cup. The two aren't related in any way, however. When he's not catching up on tech news or blogging about it, you can find him watching or playing baseball and doing his part to ensure the next generation of geeks is raised properly.
