The Wolf of Wall Street II, if possibly there’s such a sequel 10 years later, might be a story that is much duller than the first installment as there won’t be a scene showing that in a stock exchange well-suited traders gathering in a hall, crying, laughing and swearing.
In the brand-new world, traders just lie in bed, watching graphs and charts in the mobile phone, after some calculation with the calculator in the phone, he places orders and finds profits without stepping out of his house.
This has become more frequently seen during the coronavirus epidemic – data shows that more and more bitcoin traders choose the mobile phone to be a professional facility for mobile bitcoin trading.
“Over the past week we have seen a significant growth number in mobile usage by our users,” said Joselyn Rawee, the head of the operation team at Bexplus , a bitcoin-based futures exchange, “whether it is new registrations or switching from PC to mobile apps, a 182% growth of usage optimistically suggests that the lockdowns have brought something different.”
One of the reasons may be before the outbreak of the epidemic, people love to watch the real-time trends when they’re in the office, or even managing bitcoin trading as a full-time job. Lying on the bed is a common position when people are grounded in the home. Renowned for its minimalism, Bexplus apps provide powerful features that can be compared to the web-based console.
As of May 2020, Bexplus ’s apps have been ranked in the Top 5 of keyword search results related to bitcoin trading in 56 countries, according to App Annie, the largest mobile marketing app analytics and app market database in the world.
Established in late 2017, Bexplus is a leading crypto futures trading platform headquartered in Hong Kong, which has branches in Singapore, Japan, USA, and Brazil and is constantly expanding worldwide. Currently, Bexplus provides BTC, ETH, LTC, EOS and XRP perpetual contracts for trading with up to 100x leverage.
With 100x leverage applied, you can use 1 BTC to open a position of 100 BTC by going long (predicting BTC price will be up) or going short (predicting BTC price will be down). Besides, Bexplus has risk control instruments to maximize your profits as well as control the risks.
For example, in the spot trading, if you buy 1 Bitcoin at the price of $10,000, and climbs up to $10,500, you’ll gain only $500 as profits. On Bexplus, if you invest in 1 BTC at the same price with 100x leverage, and the Bitcoin price rises to $10,500, you have a chance to get profits of more than 4.5 Bitcoins (1 BTC* (10,500-10,000)/10,000 * 100 = 4.5115 BTC, more than 450% ROI, fees included).
If you haven’t traded cryptocurrency futures before, you can try out the Trading Simulator (PC browser recommended) with free 10 Bitcoins available. It also helps to get to know Bexplus trading interface as well as the trading algorithms before starting to work with the real crypto assets.
What you can get from the Bexplus app?
Bexplus app provides a simple interface but also with a professional trading toolkits interface. You can follow the trends of mainstream cryptos including BTC, ETH, LTC, EOS at any time, anywhere.
Bexplus use Google cloud messaging service and Apple Native Notification to send you clean and valuable trading signals. Every time bitcoin prices dance wildly, you will receive a notification to watch your position or seize a chance to open positions in seconds. Surely you can block the messages in the phone settings.
Once an opportunity or a risk appears, you may lose money for wasting every second. Having Bexplus app on your mobile phone allows you to act in 10 seconds.
All data and assets can be accessed through all kinds of devices including Windows, Macbook, Android phones, iPhones and tablets.
Since its establishment in 2017, Bexplus has kept a $0 fund theft record thanks to its cold wallet mechanism. Bexplus users can enable Google 2-Step Verification binding to prevent unauthorized logins.
