We feature the top brokers and exchanges that offer the option to buy Menero (XMR) with a credit card or debit card. For larger sums you can also send a wire transfer. We list exchanges and services based on personal experience, and reputation. Please view the risks associated with bitcoin and cryptocurrency trading at the bottom of this page. Also access our affiliate disclaimer .
Binance – Referral ID: EE59L0QP for 10% cashback on all trading fees.
Processing is offered by Simplex, a fully licensed and regulated electronic money institution in the EU, providing the leading fiat infrastructure and payment processing solution to over 130 cryptocurrency ecosystem leaders.
Founded in 2018, Binance has quickly become the most popular cryptocurrency exchange in the world. Once you have XMR you can easily exchange for 100s of other tokens listed on the platform.
KuCoin – Top VIP Program.
Processing is offered by Simplex, a fully licensed and regulated electronic money institution in the EU, providing the leading fiat infrastructure and payment processing solution to over 130 cryptocurrency ecosystem leaders.
Once XMR is purchased you can trade for 100s of other tokens on this popular exchange.
Buy with Visa debit or Mastercard, USD wire transfer or cryptocurrency. This is one of the most popular crypto exchanges in the world.
Once you have purchased XMR you can exchange with 100s of other tokens.
Monero is a decentralized, open-source cryptocurrency, which was established in 2014.  This digital currency is widely known as the most popular ‘privacy-coin’.
Monero provides its users with a means to efficiently transfer value, through the use of privacy centric digital coins under the ticker ‘XMR’.  Its development, and launch, was widely due to deficiencies in privacy on the Bitcoin network.
Unlike various rivals, privacy features on the Monero blockchain are inherent, and cannot be turned off – Every transactions is as private as the one before it.
Much like many other popular cryptocurrencies , Monero relies upon a ‘proof-of-work’ structuring to underpin its network.  Notably, developers which contribute to Monero have worked to keep mining of this asset profitable on GPUs.  While ASIC devices are required to be profitable on cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, Monero regularly adapts its mining algorithms to dissuade their use.
While use of Monero is much the same as most cryptocurrencies, it achieves its unmatched privacy in a unique manner.
Development of Monero is community driven, rather than solely a small group of dedicated developers.
Arguably the biggest development on the Monero roadmap, is the implementation of second layer solutions.  A prime example of this would be the usage of the Lightning Network.  By utilizing this solution, Monero would then benefit, primarily, from the ability to complete atomic swaps.
There is one clear ideology, which has driven development of Monero – privacy.  In a world becoming increasingly connected, society has less privacy than ever.  Undoubtedly, this is the driving appeal behind Monero, as it is able to give back some of what we have lost in recent years, in the name of connectivity.
Due to the nature of Monero, there are various governments that do not condone its use.  This is due to the privacy afforded to the user, essentially, making this attribute a double edged sword.
This is a difficult issue to overcome. On one hand, people are entitled to privacy, while on the other, some may abuse Monero for illicit activities.
While the majority of nations have stayed silent on their view of Monero, there are a select few which have spoken against its use.  The most prominent example of this is in Japan; As a result, various exchanges looking to maintain licensure in the nation have delisted Monero and similar coins.
Monero is widely believed to have been created by 7 individuals.  Keeping in line with their privacy focused creation, 5 of these individuals have not revealed their identities, to this day.  The other two are as follows,
Interestingly, there is a growing belief that the author of the original Monero Whitepaper, Nicolas van Saberhagen, may be the infamous Satoshi Nakamoto.  This belief is founded on the past writings known to be Satoshi, which detail ideas such as ring signatures, stealth addresses, etc. – the very unique traits that were imbued within Monero a mere 3 years after Bitcoin came into existence.  This belief, however, has not been proven to be fact, but simply conjecture, at this time.
There is a very high degree of risk involved in trading securities, and this trading risk is  higher with Cryptocurrencies such as XMR due to markets being decentralized and non-regulated. There is no central bank that can take corrective measure to protect the value of Cryptocurrencies in a crisis or issue more currency. You should be aware that you may lose a significant portion of your portfolio.
Securities.io is not a registered broker, analyst, or investment advisor.
All information contained herein should be independently verified and confirmed. We do not accept any liability for any loss or damage whatsoever caused in reliance upon such information or services. Please be aware of the risks involved with any trading done in any financial market. Do not trade with money that you cannot afford to lose. When in doubt, you should consult a qualified financial advisor before making any investment decisions.
Some of the links in this website either through images, text, audio or video are affiliate links. This means if you click on the link and purchase the item or use the service, the owner of this website will receive an affiliate commission.
To learn more visit our affiliate disclosure page.
