White House Market (WHM) is an ultra-secure darknet market (DNM). It disallows Javascript, enforces PGP throughout, admins key sign every 72 hours, and only accepts monero ( XMR ). It might be the darknet’s most private market. But do its vendors deliver? News.Bitcoin.com dusted down some XMR and decided to find out.
“All transactions on the blockchain can be traced due to blockchain’s immutability,” begins surveillance firm Bitfury in its December report on darknet interactions. That’s not quite true, for while public chains like bitcoin can be inspected by anyone with a block explorer or forensic analysis tool, monero provides no such luxury. That’s why its usage is enforced on White House, one of the several dozen DNMs competing for market share.
Empire, the darknet’s most popular market, has been struggling under heavy DDoS attacks for weeks, believed to be the work of a slighted ex-vendor, “Stackz420,” who’s gone so far as to publish a script so that anyone can join in the assault on its servers. Just to add to their woes, Stackz420 has attempted to dox Empire’s operators and exposed security holes in the site. Empire survives for now, but given its extended periods of downtime, it seemed opportune to give a different DNM a try.
White House is locked down like a fortress, with enough security measures to keep amateurs at bay, but enough tutorials to ensure the determined can get inside and ply their trade. It’s an opsec obsessive’s paradise.
What’s Inside the White House?
The homepage for WHM lays down the house rules from the get-go. For starters, you need to upload your PGP key just to be able to browse. You also need to add the site’s public key to your keychain to verify the signed messages from its operators attesting that they are still alive and supplying mirror links for the market.
Exit scams occur almost monthly on the darknet, with Grey Market the latest site to disappear. Even with frequent message signing, there is no way of verifying the integrity of White House’s operators, and thus it too could fall by the wayside. The use of mandatory encryption throughout, however, coupled with direct payments between vendors and buyers, limits the possible fallout.
After logging into the site, you must decrypt a PGP message using the private key you associated with your WHM account. It contains a code that you enter to verify your pseudonymous identity.
On its About page, White House Market lays out the security measures it has in place, which functions are encrypted, and what information is retained in plaintext. It explains: “We assume that any server can be hacked or seized eventually, so we don’t want to keep more data our servers then we need to.” PGP and monero private keys are reportedly not kept on the servers.
Under “Security Considerations,” detailed advice on maintaining good opsec, both online and offline, is provided. This includes the invocation not to reuse usernames/passwords/PGP keys over multiple darknet markets, finishing: “Under any circumstances do not use on darknet any username / nickname / moniker / password / PGP key that you may use or may have used on the clearnet or in real life, not even something similar. It’s the fastest way to get caught.”
Although PGP can seem complex at first, once you’re accustomed, it adds mere seconds onto DNM purchases, and the peace of mind it buys is well worth it. While other DNMs employ optional PGP, White House enforces it, preventing users from getting lazy.
In reviewing WHM, I had no monero to hand but did have some BTC in a noncustodial Bitcoin.com Wallet . I sent it over to accountless crypto changer Flyp.me and within half an hour had its XMR equivalent in a noncustodial Monerujo Android wallet. For similar privacy guarantees and a slightly better exchange rate I could have alternatively traded BTC for XMR on exchange.Bitcoin.com .
As a newer darknet market and one with a stricter door policy, WHM has fewer listings than the market leaders; a little over 4,000 products in its drugs category, and around 6,000 across all categories. This will grow, though, if the site sticks around and builds up trust. In the meantime, there’s enough listings to cover most bases, territories, and tastes. Many vendors have yet to accrue much feedback, but some have ported their PGP key and with it their rep over from other DNMs.
I order something fragrant for testing purposes, from two different sellers, and receive a PGP encrypted message containing the seller’s XMR address. I must decrypt it with my own key, or I can scan in the wallet QR code. A BTC option is available at checkout, but WHM discourages its usage. I send the XMR from my Monerujo wallet and within 10 minutes my transaction has cleared and within 48 hours the package is on my doorstep. Financial freedom and the free exchange of goods and services is a beautiful thing.
Bitfury estimates that $920M of BTC poured into darknet markets last year, with other cryptos likely taking that total past the $1 billion mark. “Unfortunately, we see that the annual flow of funds to darknet entities is increasing,” finishes Bitfury’s darknet report. Fortunately, we have private cryptocurrency and there’s nothing Bitfury and their surveillance sisters can do to stop it.
Do you think darknet market sales will increase this year? Let us know in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Did you know you can verify any unconfirmed Bitcoin transaction with our Bitcoin Block Explorer tool ? Simply complete a Bitcoin address search to view it on the blockchain. Plus, visit our Bitcoin Charts to see what’s happening in the industry.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
The bitcoin ASIC mining rig manufacturer, Ebang International Holdings, was recently listed on Nasdaq last Friday on June 26. Ebang is now the second mining rig manufacturer to have a U.S. initial public offering (IPO) by selling company shares. Since ... read more.
A number of cryptocurrency proponents have been discussing the stablecoin DAI this week, as the DAI allegedly held on the Compound platform is much larger than what is recorded in circulation. At press time, Compound statistics show there’s $523 million ... read more.
A Russian district court has dismissed bitcoin theft as a crime since cryptocurrency is not regulated in Russia and there is no legal status for bitcoin. The accused were found guilty, sentenced to prison, and ordered to return only the ... read more.
The UK is denying Nicolas Maduro access to Venezuela's gold worth about $1 billion, stored at the Bank of England. The UK High Court has ruled that the country does not recognize Maduro as president of Venezuela, blocking him from ... read more.
Arcane Crypto, a Norway-based investment company, said Thursday that it is planning to go public through a reverse takeover by Vertical Ventures, a publicly traded Swedish firm. Vertical Ventures will buy Arcane Crypto for $33 million by issuing over 6.6 ... read more.
According to a number of crypto prediction markets and futures, Trump will still win the election in 123 days, but his chances have lessened a great deal. No matter who wins, however, the large sums of money flowing into these ... read more.
Crypto Use-Cases in Africa on the Rise, According to Luno
Twitter and Square CEO, Jack Dorsey recently said “Africa will define the future (especially the Bitcoin one!)” But was he right? Crypto in Africa on the Rise Sad to be leaving the continent…for now. Africa will define the future (especially ... read more.
The United States tax agency has published a request for information pertaining to privacy-centric cryptocurrencies and technologies that obfuscate crypto transactions. The IRS-CI Cyber Crimes Unit request is also asking for information in relation to “layer two offchain protocol networks, ... read more.
A global bitcoin scam has reportedly leaked personal data of about 250,000 people from more than 20 countries. The majority of the compromised data were of people in the U.K., Australia, South Africa, and the U.S. This bitcoin scam operates ... read more.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has a new president as Germany took over the presidency from China. The intergovernmental organization also highlighted the need for more guidance on cryptocurrencies as many countries have not yet fully implemented its revised ... read more.
More than 2,500 merchants in Austria can accept three types of cryptocurrencies via the payment processor Salamantex. The company explained that the system was tested with a number of select A1 5Gi network shops. Since the Covid-19 outbreak, contactless payments ... read more.
Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome ... read more.
