SmallCapPower | May 20, 2020: Silver’s role as an industrial metal has tempered its advance relative to that of gold during the past year, but this appears to be changing if the recent spike in the gold/silver ratio is any indication. Today we have chosen two junior silver stocks that look to have superior upside in a rising silver price environment.
*Returns are based on closing stock prices as of May 19, 2020
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Fortuna Silver Mines is a precious metal producer with assets that include the Caylloma silver mine in Peru, the San Jose silver-gold mine in Mexico and the Lindero Gold Project, currently under construction, in Argentina. On May 14, 2020, Fortuna Silver reported a six-fold increase year over year in its first-quarter free cash flow to US$14.2 million. The Company added that it plans opex and capex reductions of US$23 million for 2020 in response to the new COVID-19 business environment. Significant upside for this stock could come from the start of production at the Lindero open pit heap leach gold mine, in which Fortuna said its construction was about 94% complete as of March 31, 2020. The Argentine mine is expected to be one of the most profitable mining operations.
MAG Silver is a development and exploration company focused on becoming a top-tier primary silver mining company. Its principal asset is its 44% stake in the Juanicipio Project in Mexico, being developed in a Joint Venture with Fresnillo. Underground production at Juanicipio is scheduled for mid 2020 and it is expected to become one of the world’s largest silver mines. A 2017 resource estimate at Juanicipio showed 176 million Indicated silver ounces at 427 grams per tonne. Eric Sprott recently invested C$60 million into MAG Silver via a non-brokered private placement at a price of C$13.25 per share.
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
