Unlike the recent fall in crude , which gapped down , client level defaults are unlikely in silver, which fell after opening higher.
Mumbai: Brokers cut bullish positions of clients who couldn’t meet margin calls on the active silver futures contract, which posted its biggest ever intraday fall of 16.6% or Rs 67,31per kilo at the time of writing. The lower circuit in silver follows 4% stages.
“Clients on the long side who could meet margin calls retained their positions , but those who couldn’t saw their positions being put on square off mode,” said Jay Prakash Gupta, director, Moneylicious Securities.
Unlike the recent fall in crude , which gapped down , client level defaults are unlikely in silver, which fell after opening higher.
The active contract which closed at Rs 40,487 a kilo on Friday, opened at Rs 40,962 and hit a low of Rs 33,756 intraday. Trading continues through 11:30 pm IST on metals and energy bourse MCX NSE 0.10 % . MCX raised the initial margin on silver active contract from 14.61% to as much as 26.57% intraday on Monday. The fall was led by shrinking industrial output in the world’s largest metals consumer China — 13.5% down y-o-y in January-February — induced by Covid-19. Silver and gold were also hit by collateral damage as traders covered their losses in equities by selling bullion.
Nitin Kedia said that so long as silver held the $11.8 an ounce support on Comex, it could bounce to $13/oz.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
