Written by Benjamin Fisher on June 29, 2020
Chino Mine as seen across Silver City from Market Street on Snake Hill on June 12.
Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in other countries are expected to play a crucial role in if — or when — copper mines in Grant County fully open again.
When Freeport-McMoRan initially closed Chino, its largest mine in Grant County, it was reportedly due to a growing outbreak of the coronavirus in the operation’s truck shop. After the first positive case was reported among workers April 1, around a dozen workers at Chino contracted the disease.
But even before the outbreak in Santa Rita, the global mining giant was already beset by pressures related to the pandemic.
China, where the virus emerged from a wet market in Wuhan, is also the world’s largest purchaser of copper. It is the country with both the most construction activity and the most manufacturing in the world.
As the coronavirus burned its way outward from its origin, China resorted to extreme measures to control its spread and the resulting death toll. That meant halting the vast majority of its economy, including projects that utilize copper, in their tracks.
Copper was at a high of $2.87 in January, following announcements of phase one of a trade deal between the U.S. and China, but just in time for the virus to implode the market.
Prices dropped by 30 cents in February and another 40 cents in March, as the virus spread across the globe.
“Copper is a good indicator, as far as economic activity goes, because it goes into everything,” said Jorge Romero-Habeych, an economist with roots in the extractive industry. He is set to assume the post of resident economist and assistant professor at Western New Mexico University this fall, and was, until recently, a research assistant at the Free Market Institute at Texas Tech University while he completed a Ph.D. in agricultural and applied economics. As such, he has been following copper.
“Now, we’ve been seeing a rebound in the last two months,” he said, referencing a U.S. Census Bureau tracking of construction spending. “That was up in April, which I don’t think anybody expected.”
The initial drop in price when the pandemic drove many crews home may seem counterintuitive, based on traditional supply-and-demand economics, but William X. Chavez Jr., professor of geological engineering at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology — who said he works extensively in Chile and Peru, as well as Australia and central Africa — said nothing worked normally with the pandemic, including commodities prices.
“Although the immediate thought would be that reduced production would lead quickly, but not immediately, to an increase on copper price, due to temporarily reduced metal supply, the concomitant reduction in demand resulted in the opposite effect, as copper consumption was quickly reduced as industries that use copper either reduced capacity or shut down temporarily,” he said. “Even outbreaks of COVID-19 cases in major copper-producing countries — especially Chile and Peru, and soon-to-be-worse [Democratic Republic of Congo] and Zambia — have not had substantive impacts on copper price.”
And, Romero-Habeych said, any recovery is still very fragile, as the reopening of China has not gone smoothly.
“Now, China has a whole outbreak scare again, in Beijing and surrounding areas,” he said. “That’s going to impact everything. Things are just extremely uncertain.”
Later in April, Freeport-McMoRan extended furloughs and announced future layoffs, even calling any future for Chino at all into question. According to Linda Hayes, vice president of communications for Freeport, that outlook has not improved.
“No decision has been made regarding the future operation of the Chino Mine,” she wrote.
But the company is also being hit from forces in South America.
In the last week, reports have emerged from Chile of major COVID-19 outbreaks in copper mines there, including increasing numbers of deaths.
“Chile is the largest exporter of copper in the world,” Romero-Habeych said. “And they haven’t done anything drastic in terms of shutting down production.”
He said that a lot of that is because in Chile — like Grant County — mining is a huge part of the economy, and the industry has been deemed essential, unlike many others which have been completely frozen by the pandemic.
“Politically, the government official that deals with industry in Chile is trying to balance that industry, which is very valuable to them with the economic damage, with health,” Romero-Habeych said. “They want to take it easy there, because they have to fund all these economic rescue programs they have put in place.”
Freeport-McMoRan itself has several mines in Chile. By way of answering whether any of those have seen outbreaks, Hayes wrote: “We, like every other mining company and communities around the globe, have experienced cases of COVID-19 among our workforce.”
Codelco, the Chilean state-owned mine, has reportedly seen the worst outbreak, and is sending administrative and non-vital people home from the mines, as well as instituting more extreme measures.
“They’ve gone to 14-day shifts in the mines, and redirected flights for their crews from going or coming to other cities,” Romero-Habeych said.
These moves are riling Chilean labor unions, which Romero-Habeych said have major power. Actions by those unions, he said, have led to global price volatility in the past.
“The labor unions are going to be an interesting thing to watch,” he said.
What this all might have to do with Chino and Freeport-McMoRan’s other mines in the American southwest, is that they produce a similar product.
“Chile has mines that produce some of the similar grade that is produced in New Mexico and Arizona,” Romero-Habeych said. “That is not the majority of what they produce, but they do some of the same.”
Chavez said Chile has become the world leader in copper production, not only for the variety of grades found there and leaching techniques used there, but also their generally much lower operation costs relative to U.S. mines. And changes in the Southern Hemisphere could change Freeport-McMoRan’s decisions about Chino.
“While recent market conditions have been volatile and the near-term outlook uncertain, we view the long-term outlook for copper to be positive, supported by fundamentals,” Hayes wrote. “In addition, copper will play an important role in the economy as the world moves towards lower carbon energy generation and an expanded digital economy.”
A report from Berkshire Hathaway released early this spring, funded by the investment giant, predicted that — pandemic or no — copper production will continue its increase through 2023.
Romero-Habeych said riding uncertainty is the “name of the game” of the industry.
“For a lot of companies, you just don’t know what governments are going to do, or what else is going to happen — what pandemic is going to come along,” he said.
But, Romero-Habeych said, Grant County citizens should not necessarily give up hope, even though there’s no clear sign of if or when Freeport-McMoRan will reopen Chino.
“They can save money by shutting it down,” he said. “From a worker’s standpoint, by the mine shutting down, in the long run, there might be a job for them where [otherwise] there might not be. If they play this game of opening up, then shutting down, and playing with the models, they might be worse off.”
