Shoppers line up as they wait their turn to enter Winners and HomeSense at the Silver Hills shopping complex on May 28. John Lappa/Sudbury Star
The planning committee has voted in favour of amendments to its official plan and zoning bylaws that will permit the expansion of Silver Hills Drive and the commercial complex taking shape at the top of the hill.
A numbered company, 1232252 Ontario Inc., was seeking amendments to the official plan and zoning bylaws, in order to allow a mix of residential and commercial uses on land behind Best Buy and Lowe’s on Marcus Drive. The proponents have been identified as Interpaving/ARG DEV INC.
“The proposed rezoning is intended to change the zoning classification of the subject lands from medium-density residential special to general commercial special in order to permit all C2 land uses except for an animal shelter, automotive leasing establishment, automotive lube shop, car wash, dry cleaning establishment, funeral home, long-term care facility, mobile home dealership, modular home dealership, service trade and taxi stand,” a staff report indicated.
Ward 5 Coun. Robert Kirwan wanted to know why a long-term care home was excluded from the possible list of uses.
Glen Ferguson, a senior planner with the city, said “at the end of the day, it was just how the application was framed.” Ferguson said staff engaged in conversation with the applicant to determine which uses would be permitted.
A representative for Interpaving explained that long-term care had been excluded from the list of uses simply because licences are required for the beds. After listening to Kirwan, however, and learning more about the demographics of the Sudbury area, she said the company may have to reconsider.
“To meet future needs, we have no objections to keeping the long-term care and perhaps after reconsideration we should keep it. The population is aging and maybe we should reconsider that,” the proponent said.
Staff was recommending the planning committee approve the application.
“Staff is satisfied the development proposal conforms with the official plan for the City of Greater Sudbury. The development proposal is also generally consistent with the land-use planning policy directions identified in the provincial policy statement,” the report noted.
“Staff also notes the application conforms to and does not conflict with the growth plan for Northern Ontario. The planning services division is recommending the applications for official plan amendment and zoning bylaw amendment be approved.”
The planning committee approved the application, with the caveat that a long-term care facility be allowed.
The Minnow Lake Restoration Group submitted a letter to the city, indicating it had some concerns about traffic through Minnow Lake.
“We note that roads, traffic and transportation expressed some concern with the submitted property sketch in terms of the depicted location of the proposed entrance, parking layout and site circulation — we do likewise. In the site plan drawing provided, it shows Silver Hills Drive but no reference to its extension to the intersection of Bellevue and Bancroft. Is this still a consideration? The current master transportation plan references this but only if development warrants, which is suggested in the current application but not specifically referred to,” they said in their letter.
The restoration group said they were concerned traffic along Bancroft Drive and Bellevue Avenue would increase significantly, even though the thoroughfare is nearly at capacity as is.
The proposal illustrates that Silver Hills Drive could be extended to Bancroft Drive, creating a traffic corridor between Barrydowne Road and Minnow Lake, but as the proponent explained, Barry Street will remain a cul-de-sac to ensure it remains quiet and kid-friendly.
The proponent said the concerns of the Minnow Lake Restoration Group have been addressed in the application.
