Written by Makayla Grijalva on June 30, 2020
Trash to Treasure co-owners Stuart Egnal and Stephen Lindsey stand beside the truck that will be used to pick up and separate subscribers’ recyclables. Pickups will officially begin July 3.
A private recycling program, Trash to Treasure, will begin curbside pickup of recyclables for its paid subscribers next month.
While the pickups will officially begin July 3, not all subscribers will get their recyclables picked up on the same day. The company plans to communicate by email to inform subscribers when they should prepare their recyclables for pickup.
Stuart Egnal, owner of Trash to Treasure, put out a survey earlier this month in collaboration with Silver City Recycles to assess the recycling needs of the area. Egnal said that the positive response to the survey influenced the decision to introduce a local for-profit curbside recycling program.
Egnal said that since the announcement of the program and launch of the website June 22, the program has accumulated more than 50 paid subscribers, and 15 pending subscriptions as of Sunday afternoon.
Subscribers to Trash to Treasure are expected to clean and separate their recyclables prior to pickup into five different groups — plastic, aluminum, corrugated cardboard, glass and steel.
Cardboard, aluminum and steel will be transferred to the Grant County Solid Waste Authority, which never stopped recycling these materials, according to Egnal — they just stopped picking up the materials from residences. The glass will be processed by Silver City Recycles, which acquired a glass pulverizer in collaboration with the town of Silver City in February.
The plastic products — types No. 1, No. 2 and No. 5 — still do not have a finalized plan for processing, but Trash to Treasure is working with The Future Forge nonprofit to create a way to transform the plastics into a pulverized and reusable form.
Egnal said that he doesn’t expect either cleaning or separation to be a problem, since subscribers are both self-selecting and paying for the service.
“This program is targeted towards people who are specifically interested in recycling,” Egnal said. “So if you randomly surveyed people, you’d probably find a relatively few of them are willing to do that work to clean and separate these items, but just by virtue of the fact it’s a paid service, these people are motivated, and they are willing to do that extra work.”
He said that, ideally, those who did not properly clean or sort their recyclables would be identified during the pickup process.
“You can tell if someone was careful or not,” Egnal said.
Trash to Treasure offers two different subscription options — a twice-a-month pickup option for $30, and a monthly option for $20. There is also a drop-off service in the works, but those details have yet to be ironed out.
Rebecca Margolis and Dale Steele, Silver City residents for the past five years, signed up for Trash to Treasure last week, choosing the biweekly curbside pickup option.
“It’s the first thing that we know about that will help us get recycling in Silver City,” Margolis said. “It’s been really discouraging. And I know it’s been a problem — we understand the reasons why. We don’t blame our city for not being able to afford to continue the recycling, but we so hoped there’d be an alternative to nothing.”
Margolis said that paying for the service did not deter her from subscribing.
“Thirty dollars for my household is $1 a day, and we think that it’s well worth it,” she said.
Azima Lila Forest, a 20-year resident of Silver City who subscribed to the monthly pickup service, shared a similar sentiment, and said that she’s willing to pay for this important service.
Forest said she moved to Silver City from San Francisco, which has a large recycling program, and felt at a small loss when the same recycling options weren’t available in town here. She added that she feels grateful to Trash to Treasure for bringing recycling back to the area.
“All of us who live on this planet have a responsibility to do the best we can for processes that are in harmony with the planet,” Forest said. “Filling up our landfill with stuff is not that. This is an opportunity to reuse and recycle all the stuff that we don’t use.”
Individuals can sign up for the Trash to Treasure curbside recycling program at t2t.green.
Makayla Grijalva may be reached at makayla@scdai lypress.com.
