Digital payment system numbers are back closer to Feb levels: NPCI
The Global Head of Financial Markets Research at Rabobank says economies will soon need new stimulus and current packages will run out soon.
We did have a very good month in May, a stupendous month of June as well. Where are things really headed in July?
For US stocks, a lot would depend on how the lockdown is going to work. Obviously, without having flattened the first wave of Covid-19, many states started to reopen and over the past two weeks news flow has not been positive. They have been trying to curb a rise in the number of cases and hospitalisations by reversing some of the lockdowns. Just about 15 states, particularly in the south and west, are doing it now at the moment.
We know the markets have been trading quite divorced from economic or even virus realities, because of all the liquidity promises. But actually we have to see more of it come through as some of the stimulus packages are going to run out in the coming weeks. Our assumption is that the politicians will actually agree to more stimulus, our assumption is also that the Fed will do more. But at the same time, these are all assumptions and we have to also get a view of how that will continue to help Trump’s status. I think it is going to be tough in the first quarter. The longevity of the virus is really going to have an impact on a lot of companies – small, medium and even some of the large companies. I think some of that is going to be a drag on stocks, but it is a difficult call with so much liquidity out there.
What do you make of the testimony that the US Federal Chair and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin gave yesterday in front of the House financial services committee? The theme continued to be the high level of uncertainty. Anthony Fauci is also saying that this is a battle that we perhaps are going to fight for a very long time. So in terms of uncertainties, do you believe markets are completely ignoring the longer-term uncertainties that we are dealing with at this point of time?
Yes. Markets are aware of these uncertainties. They just assume that liquidity will trump all that. In the remarks by Anthony Fauci, I think there were two messages: he is afraid that the number of daily cases could go to up to as high 100,000. He says we all seem to be banking on this vaccine arriving, but that is no means a certainty. He does not want to be pessimistic, but at the same time he cannot just guarantee a vaccine. I think that is a good point to keep making that the longevity of this virus could be much more than what people think.
The point I took from the joint testimony of Mnuchin and Powell was that there was not a whole lot of concrete details about how fiscal stimulus would be supported by the Fed. I think it is all implicitly there, but clearly Mnuchin cannot decide for the Congress to come up with a new fiscal stimulus package. The package itself depends on how the virus goes. If the situation keeps going backwards, then we may require a very big fiscal package. I think we know this has no backstop to it and we have to do whatever it takes to support that.
Powell made a same argument about a month ago, where he said do not expect a V-shaped recovery, confidence of businesses and consumers simply cannot return to normal until we have a vaccine or such medicine can that alleviated people’s concerns. That is what people have to keep going back to. Without that, do not think the jumps we are currently seeing are a V-shaped recovery. It is not.
While uncertainties continue in the markets due to the Covid-19 jitters, what do you think of other commodities, especially gold. It seems people are parking a lot of money there and gold has hit an almost eight-year peak. Do you believe perhaps it is time to include gold and silver in your portfolio instead of equities?
Well, there is a rush to buy everything, it seems, whether it is corporate bonds or stocks for that matter. Government bonds, obviously, have not been up so much. I wonder what yields are left there. That is how I would see how gold and silver being bid up as well. There is so much money chasing so few assets. On top of that, there has been so much uncertainty. Some of these asset classes stand to benefit. I do not think that is going to be your long-term strategy overall, but clearly these asset classes have been doing better. I do not think traditional investors are so concerned about inflation there. We have inflation everywhere in the world, but it is asset price inflation and not consumer price inflation at the moment.
