Interestingly, if you look at the chart below, silver ETF holdings appear to have begun tracking the price not of silver, but of gold.
This suggests to me that some investors are using the white metal as a more affordable safe haven and diversifier than gold. But there’s more to the story.
Increased Silver Demand in Industrial Applications, Most Notably Solar
Like copper, nickel, lithium, cobalt and other metals, silver is set to become a major beneficiary of emerging industrial applications.
That includes sources of renewable energy, and solar specifically, which continues to ramp up around the globe in response to a combination of carbon emissions legislation and a rapid decrease in the cost of “green” electricity.
According to a recent report by CRU Consulting, solar power generation will increase to 1,053 terawatt hours (TWh) by 2025, close to double the amount that was generated in 2019. Amazon alone is planning five major solar projects around the world, including its first in China, as the retail giant seeks to reach 80 percent renewable energy by 2024 and 100 percent by 2030. Once completed, these five projects will generate 1.2 million megawatt hours (MWh) of energy every year, or enough to power 113,000 average U.S. homes, according to a press release.
I expect this to be a huge boon to silver, which is used to manufacture the all-important PV cells found in solar panels. Between now and 2030, PV manufacturers are projected to consume a staggering 888 million ounces of silver, according to CRU. To put that in perspective, that’s 51.5 million ounces more than the combined output from global silver mines in 2019.
But there are other technologies on the horizon that will require vast amounts of the white metal.
The global rollout of 5G technology, still in the very early stages, will increase production for goods such as semiconductor chips, cabling, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), Internet of things (IoT)-enabled devices—all of which require silver. In 2019, the amount of silver used in the applications stood at 7.5 million ounces, or 0.75 percent of annual output. By 2025, that amount could more than double to 16 million ounces and, by 2030, triple to 23 million ounces, according to estimates by Precious Metals Commodity Management.
Obviously there are other ways to get exposure to silver than buying physical bullion and silver-backed ETFs. Those include the silver miners themselves, if you can stomach the extra volatility.
Silver producers had a below-average first quarter compared to gold miners, with production plunging even before COVID-19 led to the closure of mines. This had a negative effect on revenue.
Even so, a number of silver miners have performed very well, especially following the market lows in March. Among our favorites are SilverCrest Metals, up an incredible 105.8 percent over the past 12 months; Pan American Silver, up 142.3 percent; and First Majestic Silver, up 56.18 percent.
I cover gold, natural resources and emerging markets, melding macro ideas, such as supercycles, government policies and behavioral finance, to investment opportunities.…
I cover gold, natural resources and emerging markets, melding macro ideas, such as supercycles, government policies and behavioral finance, to investment opportunities. I’m a Toronto-transplant who is currently the CEO and chief investment officer for San-Antonio based U.S. Global Investors, an investment advisor that manages no-load mutual funds including the Global Resources Fund (PSPFX), the World Precious Minerals Fund (UNWPX) and the Gold and Precious Metals Fund (USERX). I’ve been named the Mining Fund Manager of the Year by Mining Journal magazine in 2006 and I co-authored The Goldwatcher: Demystifying Gold Investing, which covers the complexity of gold and gold companies.
