Give me my free report!
In addition, Sprott said the yellow metal is gaining more attention from portfolio managers, some of whom might not typically be interested in that type of investment.
“Some of the very key specialists in the finance world — and I’m thinking of, for example, Ray Dalio and Jeff Gundlach — they’re effusive about gold. And then there’s many others that have never spoken that way before. So we have quite a collection of evidence suggesting that people are going to gold.”
Speaking about where gold could go in 2020, Sprott said he thinks it could rise as high as US$2,000.
“Believe me, I’ll be the least surprised guy in the world to see (gold) go through US$2,000 this year, if not early this year,” he said. However, he doesn’t necessarily think that investors should follow his lead when deciding where to put their money.
As mentioned, Sprott has attracted attention in recent times for the massive amount of money he has injected into the junior mining space. One estimate puts the sum at somewhere between $200 and $300 million in just a few months.
“It might be a little early to speculate on the smaller companies, even though I have,” he said, pointing out that he did so in a different environment. “We weren’t looking at COVID-19 at the time, and shutting down the mines and things like that.”
As an example, he mentioned that he is heavily involved with Kirkland Lake Gold (TSX: KL ,NYSE:KL), which has been dealing with coronavirus-related obstacles at its assets. “I don’t think the path is quite as clear for the mining companies today,” Sprott noted.
In different circumstances, however, he might still be on a buying spree.
“If we didn’t have COVID-19 in front of us right now, I would be gobbling up even more private placements in smaller mining companies — the values are quite extreme, and they’re extreme for junior and mid-tier producers,” said Sprott.
For now, he thinks physical gold and silver are where it’s at.
“It’s a very difficult time to invest, period, with this COVID-19, and essentially almost being in a depression, an economic depression … it’s a bizarre kind of world to be in. I know for myself I think the obvious purchases today are gold and silver — the precious metals themselves — and own physically.”
Other major names in the mining sector also took part in the Grit Capital event — click here to learn what Ross Beaty said in his segment, and stay tuned for a writeup on Rick Rule’s talk.
Don’t forget to follow us @INN_Resource for real-time updates!
Securities Disclosure: I, Charlotte McLeod, hold no direct investment interest in any company mentioned in this article.
