In conversation with Maurice Jackson of Proven and Probable, the president and CEO of Riverside Resources describes his company's option agreement with Hochschild Mining and plans to move the Los Cuarentas Gold-Silver Project forward.
Maurice: Today, we're going to highlight Riverside Resources Inc. (RRI:TSX.V; RVSDF:OTCQB) , a project generator that just consummated a definitive option agreement with a two-prong earn-in agreement worth $11 million and an additional $20 million for a buyout, with a 1% net smelter return.
Dr. Staude, pleasure to speak with you today.
Maurice: John-Mark, you have some exciting news for shareholders regarding a definitive option agreement on the Los Cuarentas Gold-Silver Project ( press release ). Dr. Staude, what would you like to share with us?
John-Mark: We're so excited. We've been working a long-time on the Los Cuarentas project, and to have a major partner like Hochschild Mining Plc (HOC:LSE) join us in conducting the exploration is wonderful. The option is for them to earn a 51% interest by investing over US$8 million into the ground, with us as the operator. For us, this is the perfect example of prospect generation. We generate projects, progress them, and now have the major command with an aggressive drill program, aggressive exploration to unlock the value for us and our partners. We're in a great position. We're very excited today about this news.
Maurice: There's some history between Hochschild and Riverside Resources. How did that factor into the consummation on the option agreement on the Los Cuarentas?
John-Mark: We're so lucky. We worked with them in the past. We had a strategic exploration alliance where we generated projects, forwarded those, and built out a portfolio working with Hochschild. We also really enjoyed working with them. In these difficult times, when things went down, they stuck with us and we stuck with them.
So now, here we are in COVID, yet again in challenging times, and we're delighted to know we're going with a partner that we worked within the past. We have good alignment in values, vision and particularly in a goal to make discoveries working with Hochschild and Riverside. So. . .now we get to go forward with a big drill program. We're in a great position.
Maurice: Speaking of the drill program, can you define the roles of Riverside and Hochschild's respectively? And when will it begin?
John-Mark: It's starting right away. Right now, we're working on the budget. We went out to the site earlier in January, and it's so lucky we did, because in March, as we know, things changed so much.
But by going out to site, we began to layout the program. And so now we're able to go out in the field; we have a team in Hermosillo, Mexico. We live and work there. We can work from that location and then up at the project site to carry out the exploration over the next months and be ready to drill. During this year, we'll have drill results and go for a drill discovery. We'll be pushing hard first, with geophysics and then with drilling. So we're in a great position now.
Maurice: John-Mark, why does Riverside like this epithermal gold-silver district so much?
John-Mark: Mexico has been a world leader for five centuries with epithermal. These are shallow systems where hot water brings gold and silver and deposits it with silica near the surface. The reason we like it is, first, it's rich. Second, it's often fairly easy to mine. Third, it's company makers. Many companies have been built out of this style of deposit, Hochschild, who've made their careers mining epithermal.
And right next to us, just to the east of us, is SilverCrest Metals Inc. (SIL:TSX.V; SILV:NYSE.American), with their mining operations and exploration that they're doing with the Los Chispas mine. And to the west of us is the Mercedes mining district. . .where we see Premier Gold Mines Ltd. (PG:TSX) developing and mining. To the north of us, we have Santa Gertrudis mine with Agnico Eagle Mines Ltd. (AEM:TSX; AEM:NYSE), and to the south of us, we have First Majestic Silver Corp. (FR:TSX; AG:NYSE; FMV:FSE) and the Santa Elena mine.
And all of those are within this world of epithermal, shallow mineralization—young, gold, very positive. So we're so excited to be right in the middle with this project. And these are the type of deposits we want to be a part of making in the discovery through exploration.
Maurice: Location, location, location. John-Mark, walk us through the transaction details, beginning with phase one of the earn-in option agreement.
John-Mark: In phase one, there's US$750,000 exploration funding in the first year. It's a four-year option. In the first phase. . .Hochschild will be spending $8 million in work [with] Riverside as the operator. Also, Hochschild is covering any of the lingering, underlying costs to buy out the underlying owners, and to pay for any of their taxes and other things like that. So for us, we've generated this in this phase one. We've got to test these targets that we've already come up with, and explore the property-wide program. It's a great situation for all parties.
John-Mark: Phase two is really exciting as well. Hochschild gets to go to 75% by doing another $3 million of work and completing a study, and of course, paying us, as well some more fees.
So it's a really good situation, and that's the type of deal we like to do where it gives them the upside, but it also gives us a chance where, if they carry it forward further, or it doesn't dilute us, or if we make a joint venture, we're able to be a large holder in it. So phase two is a great step, as well, for both companies.
Maurice: John-Mark, this is another great demonstration of the business acumen and on behalf of all the shareholders, as I am one myself, thank you. This is great.
All right, switching gears, John-Mark, please share the current share price and the capital structure for Riverside Resources.
John-Mark: Riverside right now is trading in about CA$0.20, and on the U.S. side is about $0.14 cents. Our share structure: 63 million shares. We're in a good position with over $2 million cash in the bank and no debt. Riverside's poised for doing well for the remainder of 2020 and onward.
Maurice: In closing, what did I forget to ask?
John-Mark: I think what took us so long to get this deal done was because of COVID. We wanted to get this done, but we had to wait a while to make sure we had it all aligned. We've all been very respectful, so delighted to work with Hochschild, and now we're ready to go ahead.
We had a bit of a hiatus during COVID, but we're set to go. We've gotten through that. Now, we're ready to go in the field. So I think that's our excitement now, is getting going with results.
Maurice: Dr. Staude, for someone listening that wants to get more information on Riverside Resources, please share the contact details.
John-Mark: Please come to our website: www.rivres.com .
Maurice: Dr. Staude, thank you for joining us today on Proven and Probable.
Riverside Resources trades on the TSX.V: RRI | OTCQB: RVSDF. Before you make your next bullion purchase, make sure you call me. I'm a licensed representative for Miles Franklin Precious Metals Investments . We have several options to expand your precious metals portfolio from physical delivery, offshore depositories and precious metal IRAs. Call me at (855) 505-1900, or you may e-mail maurice@milesfranklin.com .
Finally, please subscribe to Proven and Probable for mining insights and bullion sales. Subscription is free.
Maurice Jackson is the founder of Proven and Probable, a site that aims to enrich its subscribers through education in precious metals and junior mining companies that will enrich the world.
Want to be the first to know about interesting Gold and Silver investment ideas?  Sign up to receive the FREE Streetwise Reports' newsletter.
1) Maurice Jackson: I, or members of my immediate household or family, own shares of the following companies mentioned in this article: Riverside Resources. I personally am, or members of my immediate household or family are, paid by the following companies mentioned in this article: None. My company has a financial relationship with the following companies mentioned in this article: Riverside Resources is a sponsor of Proven and Probable. Proven and Probable disclosures are listed below.
2) The following companies mentioned in this article are billboard sponsors of Streetwise Reports: None. Click here for important disclosures about sponsor fees.
3) Statements and opinions expressed are the opinions of the author and not of Streetwise Reports or its officers. The author is wholly responsible for the validity of the statements. The author was not paid by Streetwise Reports for this article. Streetwise Reports was not paid by the author to publish or syndicate this article. The information provided above is for informational purposes only and is not a recommendation to buy or sell any security. Streetwise Reports requires contributing authors to disclose any shareholdings in, or economic relationships with, companies that they write about. Streetwise Reports relies upon the authors to accurately provide this information and Streetwise Reports has no means of verifying its accuracy.
4) This article does not constitute investment advice. Each reader is encouraged to consult with his or her individual financial professional and any action a reader takes as a result of information presented here is his or her own responsibility. By opening this page, each reader accepts and agrees to Streetwise Reports' terms of use and full legal disclaimer . This article is not a solicitation for investment. Streetwise Reports does not render general or specific investment advice and the information on Streetwise Reports should not be considered a recommendation to buy or sell any security. Streetwise Reports does not endorse or recommend the business, products, services or securities of any company mentioned on Streetwise Reports.
5) From time to time, Streetwise Reports LLC and its directors, officers, employees or members of their families, as well as persons interviewed for articles and interviews on the site, may have a long or short position in securities mentioned. Directors, officers, employees or members of their immediate families are prohibited from making purchases and/or sales of those securities in the open market or otherwise from the time of the interview or the decision to write an article until three business days after the publication of the interview or article. The foregoing prohibition does not apply to articles that in substance only restate previously published company releases. As of the date of this article, officers and/or employees of Streetwise Reports LLC (including members of their household) own shares of Riverside Resources, a company mentioned in this article.
Disclosures for Proven and Probable: Proven and Probable LLC receives financial compensation from its sponsors. The compensation is used is to fund both sponsor-specific activities and general report activities, website, and general and administrative costs. Sponsor-specific activities may include aggregating content and publishing that content on the Proven and Probable website, creating and maintaining company landing pages, interviewing key management, posting a banner/billboard, and/or issuing press releases. The fees also cover the costs for Proven and Probable to publish sector-specific information on our site, and also to create content by interviewing experts in the sector. Monthly sponsorship fees range from $1,000 to $4,000 per month. Proven and Probable LLC does accept stock for payment of sponsorship fees. Sponsor pages may be considered advertising for the purposes of 18 U.S.C. 1734.
The Information presented in Proven and Probable is provided for educational and informational purposes only, without any express or implied warranty of any kind, including warranties of accuracy, completeness, or fitness for any particular purpose. The Information contained in or provided from or through this forum is not intended to be and does not constitute financial advice, investment advice, trading advice or any other advice. The Information on this forum and provided from or through this forum is general in nature and is not specific to you the User or anyone else. You should not make any decision, financial, investments, trading or otherwise, based on any of the information presented on this forum without undertaking independent due diligence and consultation with a professional broker or competent financial advisor. You understand that you are using any and all Information available on or through this forum at your own risk.
Images provided by the author.
Peter Epstein of the Epstein Report interviews Brad Rourke, CEO of Scottie Resources, a 'rising star' working in the prolific Golden Triangle.
Recent drill results and project model changes, leading to an increased target price on Troilus Gold, are outlined in a Canaccord Genuity report.
