Money raised will help event organiser Friends of Dorothy provide valuable lifelines for the older LGBT+ community.
The virtual event will take place on July 25 and July 26, with appearances from TV’s Christopher Biggins, as well as drag make-up, mental health masterclasses, live DJ sets and performances from choirs, musicians, dancers and storytellers.
Money raised will help event organiser Friends of Dorothy - a social enterprise with groups in Leeds and Manchester – provide valuable lifelines for the older LGBT+ community.
Friends of Dorothy founder Craig Burton.
Sorry, there seem to be some issues. Please try again later.
Organiser and Friends of Dorothy founder, Craig Burton, said: “Older LGBT+ people are twice as likely to be living alone, and six times more likely to suffer from mental health issues, often related to loneliness and isolation. We strongly believe inter-generational friendships and events like Silver Pride are vital to help tackle these problems.
“Lockdown has exacerbated the issues of isolation and loneliness, but we’re determined to make sure the older generations have a reason to celebrate and socialise online.
“This year marks the 50th anniversary of the first ever Pride march in the USA, and it’s important we remember the sacrifices the older LGBT+ community made for us. They took to the streets to campaign and fight for our rights, and paved the way to enjoy life as we do today. Hosting an online celebration for them is the least we can do.
He added: “Silver Pride is all about championing inclusion, and celebrating and connecting with our older communities. It will be a celebration of LGBT history, our freedom of expression and recognition of the battles the older community faced for us – and the battles they continue to face.”
Organisers are keen to hear from any performers interested in getting involved and sharing their talent as part of the celebrations.
Craig added: “Whether it’s theatre, literature, live music, comedy, dance, wellbeing classes, or simply sharing your life stories, we’d love to hear from anyone who’s keen to get involved.”
Tickets will be available from silverpride.org.uk from July 6. Money raised will go to the Friends of Dorothy charity to help continue its outreach with older people, combatting loneliness and isolation.
For details, or to get in touch about performing, visit: silverpride.org.uk
