Allen Sykora Thursday March 19, 2020 13:35
Editor's Note: With so much market volatility, stay on top of daily news! Get caught up in minutes with our speedy summary of today's must-read news and expert opinions. Sign up here!
(Kitco News) -   Shares of gold -mining companies have fallen  with the broader stock market lately, but producers are likely to become more  attractive over the next couple of months as investors take note of the revenue  and free cash flow they are generating, said Frank Holmes, chief executive and  investment officer with U.S. Global Investors.
“You’re going  to see these gold stocks all of a sudden looking extremely attractive coming  into April and May [based on] their numbers,” Holmes told Kitco News in an  interview.
Meanwhile, he said, as stocks of base-metals  companies get beat down on worries about less use of  commodities due to slowing industrial demand,  these could end up being bargains for those with a longer-term time horizon.
U.S. Global Investors’ mutual funds include  those for precious metals, natural resources and emerging markets. The company  also oversees a gold exchange-traded fund.
Holmes pointed out that there are two pillars  upon which gold-mining stocks normally stand. They correlate with both the  trend in the commodity price, as well as the broader stock market. So when the  major stock indices took a beating lately on COVID-19 worries, with investors  looking to preserve capital and raise cash, gold-mining stocks fell too.
“In short  periods of time, they correlate very highly with the S&P 500,” Holmes said.
Nevertheless, gold stocks do have factors  working in their favor that will eventually kick in, the CEO continued.
“You’re going  to expect this quarter that the year-over-year growth in revenue, growth in  cash flow and returns on investor capital [for gold companies] are going to be  much higher than in copper mines and base-metal mines…,” Holmes said.
Likewise, he later pointed out, certain  retailers – such as Walgreens – might also fare well due to anticipated revenue  growth as customers stockpile goods amid the COVID-19 virus outbreak.
“You’re seeing  this rotation in the general market with people looking for revenue-per-share  growth,” Holmes said. “Even with the market meltdown, Walgreens [shares] are up  because people know they’re going to have great revenue this quarter.
“And gold  stocks are going to show, in this quarter, great revenue per share. Of the 100  gold producers we follow, they’ll be showing very attractive returns.”
Revenue hinges not only on the amount of  production but gold prices. The yellow metal has pulled back sharply from the  seven-year highs hit earlier in March. Still, Holmes pointed out, prices are  well above where they were a year ago, meaning favorable year-on-year  comparisons when investors look at producers’ potential revenue and earnings.  The price of spot metal was $1,473 an ounce as of 12:17 p.m. EDT on Thursday,  well above $1,292 at the end of the first quarter of 2019.
“Newmont has a  free-cash-flow yield of about 4%,” Holmes said. He later added, “It’s going  have bigger revenue-per-share growth this quarter … at probably greater than  the S&P average stock. So you’ll see money flowing into those names.”
Holmes pointed out that U.S. Global Investors’  gold-mining exchange-traded fund, the Go Gold and Precious Metal Miners ETF  (GOAU), includes 28 companies considered to be “showing revenue growth,  cash-flow growth, free cash flow, and a high return on investor capital in  every quarter.”
Besides producers such as Newmont, Holmes  commented that streaming and royalty companies such as Franco-Nevada and  Wheaton Precious Metals have been outperformers due to their strong cash flow.  For instance, Wheaton’s earnings report last week showed $502 million in  operating cash flow during 2019.
Meanwhile, prices of base metals have been hit  hard with other so-called risk assets, with market participants factoring in  expectations for weaker industrial demand as the coronavirus slows the global  economy. For instance, Holmes pointed out that BMW is curtailing production of  autos, which will be a hit to demand for copper, used in electrical wiring.
“But as you go  through the next wave [of selling in shares of these companies], you’re going  to get some great buys,” Holmes said.
Furthermore, new forms of demand may start to  materialize, he continued.
“Metals like  copper are going to become much more significant in health care,” Holmes said.  “The Israelis are coming out with ionized copper to spray on your clothes.  You’re going to get more countertops made [with copper] because viruses can’t  attach themselves….I think you’ll get a sea change after this paranoia ends.”
