Shares in silver and gold miner Fresnillo ( FRES ) have tumbled to their lowest in almost four years as it fails to capitalise on a soaring silver price.
The Mexican miner is one of only a few pure-play silver producers in the world, but reported a 10% fall in production to 27.6moz in the six months to 30 June.
It also reported a 7.5% decline in the price realised for the metal as it was hit by operational setbacks.
Gold production was also down, dropping 7% to 432 koz. Although selling prices remained flat, its cost of sales rose 30% to $796.5m as it grappled with depreciation and higher production costs.
This catalogue of errors led the firm to report a 10% drop in adjusted revenues to $1.07bn and a massive 69% plunge in profit to $70.9m.
Despite the company warning the market two weeks ago about challenging conditions and lowering its full-year production guidance, the shares were down over 21% by mid-afternoon to 627p.
According to broker Numis, earnings of 9.5 cents per share missed the market consensus of 12.5 cents per share.
Fresnillo also cut its interim dividend to 2.6 cents per share compared with 10.7 the previous year. To add insult to injury, it warned that production could be lower in 2020 and 2021 and has put the brakes on some of its exploration plans.
The news comes as silver prices rally with investors looking for cheaper precious metals as the price of gold hits multi-year highs. Silver is up 15% since May and is tipped to continue rising for similar reasons to the rally in gold.
Fresnillo has had a tough year driven by a multitude of problems, including lower than expected ore grades and ore throughput at its Fresnillo mine, a delay in the construction of a leaching pad at its Herradura mine and lower ore throughput at its dynamic leaching plant.
Numis said that the majority of increased costs the firm faced ‘look here to stay’, so any margin improvement will have to come from better grades of the metals it digs out of the ground and higher production volumes.
