Written by Silver City Daily Press on June 26, 2020
Plaza Hotel Executive Chef Andres Padilla prepares a plate during Ambar restaurant’s first dinner service June 17.
El Paso has long been a magnet for enterprising New Mexicans, and the city’s central plaza is fronted by the just-reopened Plaza Hotel, originally opened in 1930 as one of the first Hilton Hotels — a chain founded by San Antonio, N.M., native Conrad Hilton.
After changing hands and names, the 19-story building, which was once the tallest building in El Paso, sat vacant from the 1980s until last week, when the hotel reopened after years of renovation by businessman Paul Foster — himself a native of Lovington, N.M. Foster, the former owner of Western Refining, poured $78 million into the renovations, including 130 hotel rooms, a ballroom and meeting facilities, a ground floor bar and restaurant and another on the rooftop, in the former penthouse suite that was once home to movie star Elizabeth Taylor.
But when it came to opening the doors and beginning to make those millions back, Foster and his management team faced the difficult task of attracting a world-class chef to their facility. Perhaps it was no surprise that they ended up turning to a New Mexican — this time, one from Grant County.
“We were lucky enough to get him,” said Plaza Hotel General Manager Wolfgang Jonas, who hired on Executive Chef Andres Padilla to open and run the hotel’s kitchens. “I just want to make sure to say that we were fortunate — and I tell him every day.”
Padilla grew up in Silver City, and graduated from Silver High School in 1999 before studying hospitality management at New Mexico State University in Las Cruces. After graduating from the Scottsdale Culinary Institute, he worked his way up in a Phoenix-area restaurant before making a sudden move to Chicago.
“I left an executive sous chef position in Phoenix and Scottsdale of a hotel, I was like 24, making amazing, at the time, it was like $38,000 a year — but I was like, ‘This is amazing money as a young, single guy,’” Padilla said. “I was dating a girl, and she was like, let’s move. I was like, all right, that’s great.”
He worked for about a year as a restaurant line cook in Chicago before seeing an ad for a sous chef at Topolobampo — famed chef Rick Bayless’ second restaurant in the city.
“I was like, ‘I’m not going to get hired, but I’ll try,’” Padilla said. “So I sent my résumé, got an interview, had a 15 minute interview with Rick. … And I was like, ‘Wow, that went horrible.’ It was worth a shot, though.”
Padilla’s phone rang later that day, however, and Bayless invited him to the kitchen for a stage, pronounced “STA-zhe” — “basically, like a working interview — go work a service,” Padilla said. “It’s for both sides. It’s to see how you work, and see how you work with them. You can’t really do a great job, because you don’t know the menus and everything, but it’s mostly just to kind of see how you fit.”
Padilla was ultimately hired by the restaurant, and over the next decade, he worked his way up to culinary director of Bayless’ group of a half-dozen different Chicago-area restaurants, as well as an airport location and several locations inside Macy’s department stores.
During Padilla’s tenure with the restaurants, the Bayless empire continued to shine. He was promoted to chef de cuisine of Topolobampo just after it was awarded a coveted Michelin star, which the restaurant maintains to this day. He was specifically called out in a 2014 four-star review of the restaurant by Chicago Tribune food critic Phil Vettel, who cited what he called Padilla’s “triumphs of technique and scholarship that stimulate the mind as much as they do the palate.”
He also met his wife, a Chicagoan, bought a house and began a family, all the while adding more to his plate at work.
Bayless “was like my mentor. I worked for him for 12 years as a chef,” Padilla said. “I mean, that’s an eternity [in the restaurant business] — but the only thing was that I was just kind of burning it at both ends. And we just had a third child, and you know, I was trying to get to that work-life balance for the family and everything like that. And it’s just like, it just kind of was going in the opposite direction.”
Throughout his time in Chicago, Padilla had maintained his connection to southern New Mexico — besides visiting his parents in Silver City, he returned annually to cook for a benefit for NMSU. On his trip to Las Cruces just more than a year ago, he began to fantasize about the possibility of moving closer to home.
“I’ve always been the city boy, always like, I’ve always loved the city,” Padilla said. But “New York City was too crazy. Los Angeles, not my style. I mean, Chicago, I loved — I mean, it became my home. I met my wife there. You know, I started a life in Chicago.
“But when I came back, there was something about this last time,” he continued. “And I was like, things have really changed. And I remember coming through El Paso and saying, ‘El Paso’s different.’ Like, it looks better.”
He returned to Chicago and tried to put the thought out of his mind.
“I would never ask my wife to leave,” Padilla said. “I would never ask her to come back because it’s like, her parents are there, … her grandparents were there.
“But one day my wife and I were going to her parents’ house, and she, out of the blue, was like, ‘Well, we should move to Las Cruces,’” Padilla remembers. “And I said, ‘What?’ And she’s been to Cruces, she’d been to Silver, and she loves it here, you know?”
His wife, a registered nurse, immediately had job offers in the Las Cruces area, but things were a little more difficult for Padilla, who initially found openings mostly in nursing home kitchens.
“I wasn’t doing it like really hard, because I was like, she’s messing around,” he said. “And then she would send me text messages at work, and she’d be like, ‘We can buy this house!’ And she showed me a house in Cruces that we could buy — ‘We could buy this house.’ So now it’s like, ‘Wow, she’s not messing around.’ So then I started looking harder.”
The first response Padilla got was from a New Mexico hospitality group that wanted him to split his time between an Albuquerque project and Las Cruces. Just before he officially agreed to that deal, he reached out one more time to the management of the Plaza Hotel, one of the first places he had applied.
“And I said, you know, I sent my résumé about a week ago to this property,” Padilla said. “And I’m just curious — I hadn’t heard anything back, a yea or nay. I just want to know like, you know, if not, just so I can, like, move on, take it off the list.
“I got a phone call minutes later,” he continued. “And they were like, we found you, we had lost your résumé. … Later on that day, I talked to our general manager, and later on that day, I talked to the consultant chef who was on the project. And later on that day, I talked to the director of restaurants and bars in Philadelphia. Wow. And they said, ‘We would really love for you to be here.’”
Padilla made arrangements to fly out to prepare a five-course tasting meal for Foster, Jonas and the rest of the hotel’s management team at Anson 11, another restaurant Foster owns, just across the street from the Plaza. The deal was sealed shortly thereafter.
“I did my tasting on August 5, which was a Monday afternoon, and they asked me to do five courses,” he said. “I did 10. And I get done with the tasting, and everybody sits down and they’re like, ‘Thank you so much.’ I got my critiques that they wanted to give me. Then it kind of was this game. It was like this game of around the horn that was like telling me why I should take this job.”
General Manager Jonas remembers that first dinner well.
“He backed what he said he could do,” Jonas said. “Everything was done by him. And he stood in front of us — it was not just us tasting his food, but he spoke about it. Mr. Foster was present at that tasting, and so was his daughter. And, you know, [Padilla] would just talk about every dish. I don’t know if you have ever gone into a restaurant, and you remember the experience that you have — the description of every dish that you eat, and the person who is describing it to you, and your mouth is already waiting for it.”
“And it came down to the representative for the owner and his words,” Padilla remembers. “I’ll never forget it. His words were like, ‘Well, you’re like a gift from God.’ And that was at that moment. I was like, ‘Those words equal amazing bargaining power.’ Right? And this was immediately followed by, ‘Let’s not talk about money right now. Let’s talk about, you know, the reasons — you know, love.’”
Padilla flew back to Chicago, and when he landed, messages were already waiting for him
“Even before I got off the plane, they were already offering me more money,” he said. “I also kind of started falling in love with them. This relationship started with them because there’s a real sense of team. You know, I’m huge on culture, and the culture felt really good and everything. And I thought, well, I think this is going to be a good fit. So I called my wife, and I said, ‘It looks like I’m going to take the El Paso job.’”
The family packed up their home and drove to El Paso on Sept. 1 — followed a short time later by Padilla’s Chicago in-laws, who have purchased the lot across from his house and are building a home.
“You know, they were here in the wintertime,” he said. “I took them to Silver City right around Christmas when it was snowing, you know? And it was just a bunch of snow. And they were like, ‘Oh, this is so cool.’ I was like, it doesn’t snow here much. You brought this stuff. You totally brought this. But they still fell in love with it.”
After a friends-and-family meal last Tuesday, June 16, the Plaza Hotel and Padilla’s main restaurant, Ambar, opened to a sold-out dinner service Wednesday night. His menu, featuring cuisine from across Mexico, might seem foreign to the Grant County palate — but Padilla insists his roots show through in the food.
“The green chile soup,” he gives as an example. “So it was basically a version of my enchilada recipe growing up. Right? We used canned cream of mushroom soup, green chiles. So basically, it’s all those ingredients, but I make it my own. The enchilada sauce in the morning on the breakfast is very similar to that soup. So you know, I think there’s certain foodstuffs that stick with me.”
Padilla believes that Mexican cuisine has reached its time on the international stage — and he’s looking to use his El Paso restaurant to advance it further.
“It’s been the sleeping giant of the world for so long, because it’s always been considered as ‘Mexican food,’ and it’s like, you know, this ethnic food. What’s really happening now, and it has been happening over the last 10 years, is it’s really changed,” he said. “It’s a cuisine. It’s not like, you know, Ethiopian food, right? Which is an ethnic food. It’s turned into this mainstream cuisine, like what French and Italian was 20 years ago, right now is what Mexican is.”
But changing the perception of what food from Mexico should be can be difficult in a region that’s so accustomed to its own regional version, Padilla pointed out.
“Especially when you have the people from Mexico that are on the border, right?” he said. “They look at some of these dishes and say, ‘Well, that’s not Mexican.’ The reality is, actually, it’s super Mexican. The thing is, a lot of people don’t get to travel outside of their region. And the thing about Mexican flavors it’s so regional. What’s up here in the north is so different from Oaxaca, Guerrero, Chiapas. And even within just those three states, that cuisine varies.”
That Mexico-wide outlook is exactly what the hotel’s owners were looking for in their restaurants, specifically because it is different from most of the other Mexican food found in El Paso.
“His cuisine is from many areas of Mexico, and I think that’s also what distinguishes him from others — he’s not only cooking, you know, northern-style, but he’s going to the center of Mexico, and then, you know, to different locations. So he’s got a little bit of everything,” Jonas said. “The ingredients that he uses for most of his food — as I see the bills — are very high-end, and he doesn’t believe in cutting corners, which, you know, really reflects in his cooking.”
And although the days have been long over the past few months — and look to remain so at least until after the rooftop restaurant La Perla opens this fall — Padilla says he already feels happier than he has in years.
“My end game was about work-life balance,” Padilla said. “My dad … he’s going to be 90 in August, you know? So to be able to have that time with them, and be close to him, and I can be there in two and a half hours and all that. My mom’s still cutting hair in Bayard — still. She opened back up after COVID, and I’m like, ‘Mom, you told me you were gonna retire.’ And she’s like, ‘I still feel good. And it keeps me going.’ My dad, my dad retired, and he gets to the golf course all the time.”
And no matter where he lived, Padilla said, his Grant County roots have kept him grounded.
“It’s the humility of this really naive kid” growing up in Silver City, he explains. “I used to go to Tucson all the time, and El Paso, and maybe once in a while, go to California. [I’ve gone from that] to having been all over the world, cooking all over Mexico. I’ve been to China, I’ve been to Europe. I’ve been everywhere. And guess where I am? I’m right back home.
“It’s funny. I could have died, died to get out of there,” he continued. “I’m not technically back in Grant County, but, I mean, I’m so close. I have to have a little bit of city in me — just a little bit — but you know what, my time at home now with my parents and going to Silver City is priceless, and being able to be happy about that.
“I couldn’t ask for a better life, you know, and then, it’s so funny how I ended up right back at home,” he said. “It’s all about that full circle.”
