Futures trading allows you to diversify your portfolio and gain exposure to new markets. Qualified investors can trade over 70 futures products virtually 24 hours a day, 6 days a week through TD Ameritrade Futures and Forex, LLC. Get access to powerful platforms, technical studies, immersive education, futures trading support, and paperMoney® to practice your strategy at no extra charge. Whether you're new to futures or a seasoned pro, we offer the tools and resources you need to feel confident trading futures.
Micro E-mini Index Futures are now available. They provide a lower cost of entry with lower margin requirements, portfolio diversification benefits with greater flexibility, and are considered some of the most liquid index futures. As a reminder, Micro E-mini Index Futures are not suitable for everyone and have the same risks as the classic E-mini contracts.
Explore articles , videos , webcasts , and in-person events on a range of futures topics to make you a more informed trader.
Our futures specialists have over 100 years of combined trading experience. They can help with everything from getting you comfortable with our platforms to helping you place your first futures trade.
Our cutting-edge online trading platforms offer an integrated futures trading experience that allows you to manage your trades better.
Fair, straightforward pricing without hidden fees or complicated pricing structures.
Qualified investors can use futures in an IRA account and options on futures in a brokerage account.
Futures trading doesn't have to be complicated. Our futures specialists are available day or night to answer your toughest questions at 866-839-1100.
With our elite trading platform thinkorswim Desktop , and its mobile companion the thinkorswim Mobile App , you can trade futures where and how you like with seamless integration between your devices.
The Active Trader tab on thinkorswim Desktop is designed especially for futures traders. With its easy-to-use bid/ask price ladder, one-click order entry, fully customizable charting and advanced order types that helps you identify trends, exit and entry points, it's the next step to advance your futures trading.
The thinkorswim Mobile App is the must-have mobile app for futures traders. Place trades, access technical studies and drawings on charts, explore education, and contact support, all from the palm of your hand with the leader in mobile trading**.
