Gold rate eases amid upbeat economic data, optimism over vaccine
A Covid-19 vaccine developed by German biotech firm BioNTech and US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer has shown potential and was found to be well tolerated in early-stage human trials.
Globally, gold prices slipped easing from a near eight-year high hit in the previous session, as strong US data and hopes for a potential Covid-19 vaccine dented safe-haven sentiment.
NEW DELHI: Gold and silver saw profit booking in the morning session on Thursday but fast rising Covid-19 cases kept the losses in check. Optimism over a potential vaccine and better than expected economic readings lifted investors' appetite for riskier assets.
A Covid-19 vaccine developed by German biotech firm BioNTech and US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer NSE 5.24 % has shown potential and was found to be well tolerated in early-stage human trials.
Meanwhile, the total number of coronavirus patients in India reached over 6 lakh while fatalities climbed above 17,800 levels.
Gold futures were down 0.14 per cent or Rs 68 at Rs 48,199 per 10 grams. Silver futures dipped 0.21 per cent or Rs 106 to Rs 49,318 per kg.
Gold in the national capital zoomed Rs 647 to Rs 49,908 per 10 grams on Wednesday in line with gains in the international prices of the precious metal, according to HDFC Securities . Silver also jumped Rs 1,611 to Rs 51,870 per kg.
Retail gold prices in Mumbai breached the Rs 50,000-per-10gm mark on Wednesday. This is the first time the price of the precious metal, with which Indians associate sentimentally, crossed the psychologically important level.
Globally, gold prices slipped easing from a near eight-year high hit in the previous session, as strong US data and hopes for a potential Covid-19 vaccine dented safe-haven sentiment.
Spot gold fell 0.2 per cent to $1,767.11 per ounce by 0034 GMT, after touching $1,788.96 on Wednesday — its highest since October 2012. US gold futures fell 0.2 per cent to $1,777.30.
Meanwhile, The U.S. House of Representatives passed legislation on Wednesday that would penalise banks doing business with Chinese officials who implement a national security law.
Hong Kong police fired water cannon and tear gas and arrested more than 300 people on Wednesday as protesters took to the streets in defiance of sweeping security legislation introduced by China to snuff out dissent.
Palladium gained 0.3 per cent to $1,909.70 per ounce, while platinum fell 0.2 per cent to $813.94 and silver rose 0.2 per cent to $17.97.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
