Gullewa is a low-profile exploration company which holds shares in other gold explorers.
Significant gold intercepts, including 1.6m grading 124.4 grams per tonne (g/t), sent Central Iron Ore’s TSX shares rocketing from 2 Canadian cents to 16.5 Canadian cents.
Gullewa also has a 1 per cent royalty on a WA gold mine called Deflector, owned by Silver Lake Resources (ASX:SLR) . In FY19, the minnow received a handy ~$1.67m in royalty payments from Deflector production.
This old chestnut. De Grey has uncovered more broad, high-grade extensions at the Hemi gold discovery including 41m grading 6.8g/t.
That’s thick and high grade.
This zone of high-grade gold, called Aquila, remains open at depth and along strike to the east, meaning De Grey still hasn’t hit the edges of this large structure.
This time last year De Grey shares we worth 9c for a market cap of about $38m.
Hemi – a brand new type of gold deposit in the Mallina Province of WA – has since sparked a ~700 per cent increase in the explorer’s share price.
This Argentinean lithium-gold play is spreading its wings, announcing this week it was running the ruler over some new gold and tungsten projects in Finland and Sweden.
At the Tampere permits in Finland, previous drilling returned numerous thick, shallow and high-grade intersections like 11.5m grading 19.4g/t, 30.6m from surface.
Following a capital raise, Dark Horse will commence a “complementary” drilling program to test these results reported by project vendor Sotkamo.
Gold opportunities in other favourable mining jurisdictions are also being considered for acquisition, the company says.
One of De Grey’s close neighbours in the Mallina Province of WA.
“We are looking for certain things, similar looking targets in the geophysics to Hemi,” Golden State managing director Mike Moore says.
DGO not only holds exploration ground near Hemi – it is also one of De Grey’s largest shareholders.
In early June the explorer said a maiden drilling program at a project near Hemi had failed to hit any “ore grade gold intersections”. But there’s still hope.
“Analysis of De Grey’s Hemi results shows that gold mineralisation is best developed at depths greater than DGO drilled and that the current size of Hemi could fit between DGO’s first pass line spacing,” DGO exec chairman Eduard Eshuys says.
