With businesses shut in several cities in India amid rising threat of Covid-19, the economic situation remains precarious.
Spot gold markets remained shut due to the lockdown to prevent spread of COVID-19, according to HDFC Securities.
Bullion counters slipped on Thursday as traders resorted to book profits at high levels even as coronavirus cases in India continued to rise and an extension in lockdown raised recession fears.
With businesses shut in several cities in India amid rising threat of coronavirus, the economic situation remains precarious. The number of reported Covid cases were at 12,380, as per the government data.
Gold futures were down 0.23 per cent or Rs 108 to Rs 46,602 per 10 grams. Silver futures fell 0.87 per cent or Rs 381 to Rs 43,650 per kg.
Spot gold markets remained shut due to the lockdown to prevent spread of COVID-19, according to HDFC Securities .
Globally, gold prices inched higher on Thursday as fears of a deep global recession due to the novel coronavirus outbreak were heightened by bleak U.S. economic data, while a stronger dollar limited the metal's gains.
Spot gold gained 0.1 per cent to $1,717.20 per ounce by 0036 GMT. U.S. gold futures were up 0.3 per cent at $1,745.70.
Holdings of the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund , SPDR Gold Trust , rose 0.4 per cent to 1,021.69 tonnes on Wednesday.
Palladium gained 0.3 per cent to $2,185.93 an ounce, while silver slipped 0.6 per cent to $15.38 and platinum fell 1.1 per cent to $770.80.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
