Gold rate on Monday traded marginally up by Rs 22 to Rs 45,063 per 10 gram in the national capital amid concerns of global economic slowdown.
Bullion counters gained in the opening trade on Wednesday as coronavirus continued to infect people unabated across the world.
The total number of infected cases in mainland China rose to 80,778 as of Tuesday, while more than 116,000 people have been infected globally.
Gold futures gained 0.07 per cent or Rs 30 to Rs 43,770 per 10 grams while silver futures added 0.75 per cent or Rs 348 to Rs 46,470 per kg.
Gold on Monday traded marginally up by Rs 22 to Rs 45,063 per 10 gram in the national capital amid concerns of global economic slowdown. Silver prices fell by Rs 710 to Rs 47,359 per kg as compared to the previous close of Rs 48,069 per kg.
Globally, gold prices rose on Wednesday after a steep fall in the previous session, as doubts about a stimulus package proposed by the US President Donald Trump to soften the economic impact of the coronavirus epidemic weighed on risk sentiment.
Spot gold was up 0.4 per cent at $1,656.37 per ounce by 0242 GMT, having fallen nearly 2 per cent on Tuesday on hopes for global stimulus measures. U.S. gold futures slipped 0.2 per cent to $1,656.70.
Holdings in the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, SPDR Gold Trust , fell 0.2 per cent to 962.03 tonnes on Tuesday.
Meanwhile, palladium fell 0.6 per cent to $2,404.58 per ounce, while platinum was up 0.8 per cent to $875.37. Silver rose 1.3 per cent to $17.08 per ounce.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
