Globally, gold prices fell on Friday as the dollar firmed, although they remained close to a more than one-week high.
Spot gold markets remained shut due to the lockdown to prevent spread of COVID-19, according to HDFC Securities.
Gold and silver extended their rally to Friday as fast rising Covid-19 cases in India in spite of strict lockdown measures, expedited inventors’ rush to safety.
Total number of coronavirus patients in India have surpassed 23,000, according to the government data. Meanwhile, there is no concrete decision on economic stimulus that the government has promised, which is giving anxiety to investors.
Gold futures were up 0.17 per cent or Rs 78 to Rs 46,505 per 10 grams. Silver futures added 0.17 per cent or Rs 69 to Rs 41,875 per kg.
Spot gold markets remained shut due to the lockdown to prevent spread of the novel coronavirus, according to HDFC Securities .
Globally, gold prices fell on Friday as the dollar NSE -0.27 % firmed, although they remained close to a more than one-week high scaled in the previous session following bleak economic data and a latest round of stimulus in the United States.
Spot gold declined 0.4 per cent to $1,724.04 per ounce, having risen as much as 1.5 per cent to a more-than one-week high of $1,738.58 on Thursday. US gold futures gained 0.1 per cent to $1,747.80. The metal's weekly gain so far stood at 2.4 per cent.
Against key rivals, the US dollar was holding close to a more-than two-week high scaled in the previous session, while Asian equities faced a bumpy session on Friday.
Palladium fell 0.5 per cent to $1,970.18 per ounce and was on track to post its fourth straight weekly decline.
Platinum gained 0.7 per cent to $760.68 an ounce, while silver eased 0.6 per cent to $15.21.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
