Gold stocks: a straight run to fresh highs?
Stewart Thomson Wednesday July 01, 2020 13:13
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
With  a new tail wind of significant ETF tonnage growth, gold bullion continues to  sport the best charts of all the major asset classes.
Double-click to enlarge.  The $1800 area is significant resistance and  gold arrived at this resistance zone as its weak price season began.
Rather  than selling off in a major way, the price action has been neutral and bullish  price patterns are in play.
Gold  could trade sideways for longer than most bulls believe, but I’ve argued that  gold stocks can rally higher anyways, given the enormous cash flows that many  miners are pulling in now.
Double-click to enlarge this GDXJ  breakout chart.
Note  the buy signal in play on my 14,7,7 Stochastics oscillator at the bottom of the  chart.  Volume is also picking up nicely.
Double-click to enlarge this bear wedge  Dow chart.  My base case is that the “Creep  State” (govts and central banks) will support the US stock market enough to  push it to new highs, but without that Creep State support, the Dow would  immediately implode… and the implosion would be much worse than it was in 1929.
While  gold stocks don’t get the direct support from government and central banks that  the “poster boy” stock markets get, they do benefit indirectly.
In  2009, the Fed coined the term, “green shoots”, and institutional money  managers loved it.  They believed that Fed  money printing and government debt would empower the economy.
Now, the same money managers  talk of a “zombie” stock market, where money printing and government  borrowing are ultimately destructive actions that open the door to a 1929-style  wipeout.
As institutions lose trust in  the ability of government and central banks to “print” the economy and  stock market higher, they are steadily turning to gold bullion.
I’m adamant that they will  turn to gold stocks once they are comfortable with bullion.
When will that happen?  When will institutional money managers surge  into gold stocks and silver stocks?
For the answer to that  question. Double-click to enlarge this long-term  gold chart.  Here’s the bottom line:
A rise above $2000/ounce for  gold would create worldwide news headlines, and at that price level…
Gold miners would look like  cash cows on steroids!
As institutional money  managers become more concerned about the stock market, it will be carried  higher mainly by individual investors who believe government propaganda about a  V-bottom for “the mightiest economy of all time”.
An economic U-top (and maybe  even a V-top) is really what is in play, and more and more institutional money  managers are expressing their horror.
I don’t believe the Fed or  government really cares about the “little guy”. When the stock market gets into trouble with  small investors carrying the load, especially trouble related to a rise in inflation, the Fed will likely stop supporting the market, and leave individual  investors to burn.
In 2009, Ben Bernanke said, “I  see green shoots!”  In 2021, Jay  Powell may say of burning individual US stock market investors, “let them  eat cake”.
Double-click to enlarge this GDX  advance/decline line chart.  A bull wedge  breakout looks to be in play, and the GDX price line has broken out of a  drifting rectangle.
For a closer look at the GDX  chart. Double-click to enlarge.  Yesterday, a small bull pennant formed and GDX  rallied above the $34.92 high.  A close  above $35 today would be particularly impressive.
Once key senior stocks trade  above their June 11 highs, I believe the gold stock consolidation/correction  will have run its course.
From there, a rise to and  above the 2020 highs would be the next exciting event… for most of the world’s  gold and silver miners!
