Globally, gold prices edged up on Tuesday after notching a more than one-month high in the previous session.
SPDR Gold Trust, the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, said its holdings rose 0.6 per cent to 1,166.04 tonnes on Monday from 1,159.31 tonnes on Friday.
NEW DELHI: Gold and silver saw profit booking in the opening trade on Tuesday even as Covid-19 patient count surged across the world, making the job of governments very difficult to ensure economic recovery.
Total number of Covid-19 patients in India reached over 4.4 lakh while fatalities climbed above 14,000 levels. New infections spiked in Latin America, particularly in Brazil.
Gold futures were down 0.01 per cent or Rs 5 at Rs 47,939 per 10 grams. Silver futures shed 0.40 per cent or Rs 193 to Rs 48,307 per kg.
Gold prices in the national capital fell Rs 85 to Rs 48,811 per 10 gram on Monday amid rupee appreciation, according to HDFC Securities. Silver, however, rose Rs 144 to Rs 49,880 per kg.
Globally, gold prices edged up on Tuesday after notching a more than one-month high in the previous session, as Covid-19 cases around the world surged and nervous investors opted for safe-haven assets.
Spot gold was up 0.2 per cent to $1,758.03 per ounce as of 0124 GMT. Prices hit $1,762.84 per ounce on Monday, its highest level since May 18. U.S. gold futures edged 0.2 per cent higher to $1,770.10 per ounce.
Gold is often used as a safe store of value during times of political and financial uncertainty.
SPDR Gold Trust, the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, said its holdings rose 0.6 per cent to 1,166.04 tonnes on Monday from 1,159.31 tonnes on Friday.
Palladium fell 0.5 per cent to $1,928.26 per ounce, platinum dropped 0.6 per cent to $817.40. Silver eased 0.2 per cent to $17.79 after hitting a more than one-week high on Monday.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
