Gold futures were down 0.99 per cent or Rs 429 to Rs 43,113 per 10 grams.
With businesses shut in several cities in India amid rising threat of coronavirus, investors are wary of betting on any asset class.
Gold dipped on Friday on profit booking and as investors preferred to sit on cash while coronavirus cases continued to rise in India.
With businesses shut in several cities in India amid rising threat of coronavirus, investors are wary of betting on any asset class.
Gold futures were down 0.99 per cent or Rs 429 to Rs 43,113 per 10 grams. Silver futures were up 0.02 per cent or Rs 7 to Rs 41,329 per kg.
Spot gold markets in the country remained shut on Thursday due to countrywide lockdown to prevent spread of Covid-19, according to HDFC Securities. The country is undergoing a 21-day lockdown announced on Tuesday to curb the spread of coronavirus.
Globally, gold eased as some investors booked profits after prices hit a two-week high in the last session amid hopes for further stimulus to curb the coronavirus' economic toll, but the metal was headed for its best weekly gain in more than 11 years.
Spot gold slipped 0.5 per cent to $1,621.07 per ounce by 0035 GMT, having risen to its highest since March 12 on Thursday.
The metal was up 8.2 per cent for the week, its biggest since December 2008, on weak US unemployment data and the Federal Reserve's unprecedented economic stimulus measures.
US gold futures fell 0.8 per cent to $1,638.80.
China's net gold imports via Hong Kong fell 51.1 per cent in February, compared with the previous month, as the epidemic stalled activity in the country, data showed.
SPDR Gold Trust, the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, said its holdings rose 0.46 per cent to 953.54 tonnes on Thursday.
Palladium gained 0.2 per cent to $2,335.33 per ounce, platinum slipped 0.5 per cent to $732.21, while silver eased 0.2 per cent to $14.35.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
