Gold rate slips amid rush for cash, silver gains
Gold futures were down 1.03 per cent or Rs 427 to Rs 40,952 per 10 grams.
With businesses shut in several cities amid a rising threat of coronavirus, investors are wary of betting on any asset class.
Gold paused its gaining streak on Wednesday while silver gained on investor preference to sit on cash as India went under a lockdown.
With businesses shut in several cities amid a rising threat of coronavirus, investors are wary of betting on any asset class.
Gold futures were down 1.03 per cent or Rs 427 to Rs 40,952 per 10 grams. Silver futures were up 0.73 per cent or Rs 297 to Rs 40,821 per kg.
Spot gold markets in India remained shut on Tuesday due to lockdown in major states, according to HDFC Securities. The central and state governments in the country have decided to lock down several districts from where Covid-19 cases have been reported in order to break the chain of transmission.
Globally, Gold prices inched up in volatile trade on Wednesday, as growing hopes for a massive US economic stimulus package to stem the coronavirus outbreak's economic toll offset liquidation by investors looking for cash and to cover losses in other assets.
Spot gold was up 0.1 per cent at $1,611.73 per ounce by 0230 GMT, after rising as much as 1.6 per cent earlier in the day. The metal jumped more than 3 per cent in the previous session.
US gold futures climbed 0.8 per cent to $1,673.60.
Indicating investors' appetite for gold, holdings in the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, SPDR Gold Trust, rose 1.3 per cent to 935.98 tonnes on Tuesday.
Among other precious metals , palladium climbed 0.6 per cent to $1,942.87 an ounce and platinum gained 2.1 per cent to $722.55. Both the metals surged more than 10 per cent in the previous session on the back of a lockdown in major producer South Africa.
Silver rose 0.2 per cent to $14.29 per ounce.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
