Gold futures fell Monday to settle at their lowest since December, and silver futures finished at their worst level in over a decade, as the Federal Reserve’s emergency decision to slash interest rates failed to stem losses in the stock market, sending traders scrambling for cash.
Prices for the precious metals, however, managed to significantly cut their losses by the settlement, as short covering kicked in. Gold had dropped more than 4% to hit the day’s low, and silver dropped by as much as 19%.
Traders were “exiting everything which is giving them profit,” said Chintan Karnani, chief market analyst at Insignia Consultants, with a technical selloff triggered when gold fell below $1,500.
However, gold’s inability to fall below key support at $1,440 “resulted in short covering and subsequent buying in gold,” including good physical demand in Asia, he told MarketWatch.
Gold for April delivery US:GCJ20 on Comex lost $30.20, or 2%, to settle at $1,486.50 an ounce—the lowest finish for a most-active contract since Dec. 20, according to FactSet data. Prices had dropped by more than 4% from Friday’s settlement to touch an intraday low at $1,450.90.
May silver US:SIK20 tumbled $1.684, or nearly 12%, to $12.816 an ounce following an intraday low at $11.77. Prices for the white metal ended at the lowest since July 2009.
Gold rallied late Sunday after the Fed, in a surprise Sunday night decision, slashed its benchmark interest rate nearly to zero and implemented a bond-buying program, known as quantitative easing, of at least $700 billion. But gains soon gave way to losses as equities failed to find support in the wake of the move.
“There is more or less a global lockdown” in the wake of the spread of COVID-19, said Kanarni, in an early Monday market update. “There was a mad rush for cash. Traders and investors alike sold everything which could generate cash.”
U.S. stocks on Monday triggered circuit breakers that temporarily halted trading for 15 minutes. The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
was down by more than 2,300 points, or 10%, as gold futures settled Monday.
While looser monetary policy and pressure on assets perceived as risky, like stocks, would both normally be seen as a positive for gold, the metal has seen weakness in recent sessions on apparent forced liquidation that has seen leveraged investors dump positions en masse.
Despite the “explosive levels of risk aversion,” investors seem to be “adopting a ‘sell what you can mentality’ to cover steep losses in stocks and this has certainly left gold in the direct firing line,” Lukman Otunuga, senior research analyst at FXTM, told MarketWatch. “The precious metal’s fate seems to be tied to global stocks, with further losses expected as [the] stock market plunges deeper into the abyss.”
Other metals dropped sharply on Comex, with May copper US:HGK20 down 2.9% at $2.3925 a pound. April platinum US:PLJ20 lost almost 12% to $657.70 an ounce, while June US:PAM20 shook off earlier declines to finish up 0.3% at $1,514.10 an ounce.
