Last Updated at August 1, 2019 02:23 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
In an unusual development, gold and silver futures in the near and far months are trading at a spread of between 2 per cent and 3 per cent, a historic high. In silver, very high spreads were seen last year in April-May; it had later moderated and has re-emerged.
Traders and vyaj badla (a financing mechanism on the BSE exchange, where money is provided for financing carry-forward deals) players in bullion were squeezed and were rolling over deliveries to the next contract. Gold’s August (maturing on 5th) contract is entering the delivery tender period from Thursday. Those not ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
