Gold prices dip as economies reopen; silver gains
Spot gold climbed 0.2 per cent to $1,704.26 per ounce by 0100 GMT.
Physical gold demand improved in top hub China last week as buyers took advantage of hefty discounts, while activity remained muted in other hubs due to lockdowns and holidays.
NEW DELHI: Bullion counters were trading on a mixed note in Monday's session as fast rising coronavirus patient count, especially in hotspots like Mumbai, increased worries but reopening of economies kept the mood upbeat.
Businesses and citizens in less affected areas in India are enjoying relatively more freedom in movement. Meanwhile, the total number of Covid-19 cases rose sharply to 62,939 with 2,109 deaths.
Gold futures were down 0.06 per cent or Rs 27 at Rs 45,785 per 10 grams. Silver futures gained 0.50 per cent or Rs 218 to Rs 43,511 per kg.
With retailers starting to open their shops in green zones, the gems and jewellery industry is slowly inching back towards normalcy, but is witnessing just 20-25 per cent sales.
Globally, gold held above the key $1,700 per ounce level on Monday as a new wave of Covid-19 infections in some countries kept the safe-haven metal underpinned, despite firmer equities and a stronger dollar.
Spot gold climbed 0.2 per cent to $1,704.26 per ounce by 0100 GMT. U.S. gold futures eased 0.4 per cent to $1,707.70.
Physical gold demand improved in top hub China last week as buyers took advantage of hefty discounts, while activity remained muted in other hubs due to lockdown and holidays.
Speculators decreased their bullish positions in COMEX gold contracts in the week to May 5, the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) said on Friday.
Palladium gained 0.7 per cent to $1,895.21 an ounce, platinum rose 0.7 per cent to $770.66, silver climbed 0.4 per cent to $15.51.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
