Golf is back on Staten Island: Silver Lake is open for business after pandemic
Silver Lake golf course and The Veranda overlooking the course are open for business. (Staten Island Advance/Pamela Silvestri)Staff-Shot
There was sounds of clubs hitting golf balls and folks just having fun Tuesday as one of Staten Island’s three New York City-run public golf courses was back in business.
After a three-month hiatus because of the coronavirus pandemic, Silver Lake was given the green light to open Monday by the city.
Meanwhile, phone calls went unanswered at South Shore and LaTourette, the Island’s other two public courses, and they were both listed as “temporarily closed” on the New York City Parks website of Tuesday afternoon. South Shore and LaTourette are run by the American Golf Corporation.
It was a different story at Silver Lake, where the parking lot was full and golfers could be seen playing the course.
“The golfers are very happy we are open again,” said Silver Lake employee Pat Sansone. “It’s been long overdue. We have about 200 golfers on the sheet for today which is very busy.”
In order to play at Silver Lake, Sansone said there are some COVID-19 restrictions in place.
1. Golfers must pre-pay and book their tee times online.
2. There’s a 12-minute lag between starting times.
3. Golfers may go out in foursome, but must use their own carts.
4. Golfer must wear must wear face masks until they get to the first tee.
Sansone said golfers may walk the course if they don’t want to use a cart.
Golfers can have lunch on the course with grab-and-go foods that Silver Lake sells.
Sansone also said The Veranda at Silver Lake is open for outdoor dining after golfers come off the course.
At least one golfer was thrilled to be on the course Tuesday at Silver Lake.
“It was great to get out on the course,” said a golfer who would only identify himself as Mike. “The courses should have been open weeks ago. I understand the government wants to protect people from the virus but golf in general is socially distant. It’s done outdoors on vast courses and people are socially distancing to begin with.
“My game was a bit rusty after not golfing for months. But it will all come back.”
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
