A classic design reimagined as a modern automatic chronograph.
Today, we’re going hands-on with what just might be my personal favorite new TAG Heuer Carrera of the last two decades or so. It’s been introduced to mark TAG Heuer’s 160th anniversary, which I think says something about what the simple, round, minimalist Carrera means to TAG Heuer. But before we dig into this new watch, let’s quickly go over the watch that inspired it.
Like many TAG Heuer chronographs from the '60s and '70s, the Carrera takes its name from a motorsport event or place-name. But while Monaco, Silverstone, and Monza are storied to the point of being household names, Mexico’s Carrera Panamerica – the dangerous and often deadly race for which Jack Heuer named his legible round chronograph – is somewhat less so. Maybe I'm a tad biased coming from the world of watches, but I think the TAG Heuer Carrera has eclipsed its namesake event in renown. In any event, the drivers, the race, and the way the name Carrera rolls off the tongue have become immortalized in the name of one of the most iconic watches of the 20th century.
The Carrera 160 Years Silver Limited Edition.
The first Carrera was an unfussy tool watch that prized legibility. It's as minimalist as any chronograph made at the time and even eschewed the busy scales and tracks that often cluttered driving chronographs of the day. Mr. Heuer had studied electrical engineering at university, and he carried an engineer's sensibility through to the watches he created. If one compares Jack Heuer watches to those that preceded his tenure at the helm of his family’s company, you will often see his distinct fingerprints, the result of time spent analyzing the displays and dials of technical instruments.
The ability to read a chronograph instantly to the fraction of a second is one such hallmark, as is the clever use of space. Take, for example, the angled rehaut of the Carrera, a part that separates the dial from the inside of the crystal. In Heuer’s Carrera, it’s  printed with the seconds / minutes scale – a clever use of space that effectively expands the interface without enlarging its footprint.
The Carrera 160 Years Silver Limited Edition, of which 1,860 pieces will be made, is not an exact recreation of the ref. 2447S that inspired it, but it is close. The differences mainly come down to the use of the automatic Heuer 02 chronograph movement rather than a vintage hand-wound Valjoux 72. Most obviously, it necessitated a slightly larger form factor of 39mm vs the 36mm 2447S. (This isn't the first 39mm Heuer 02-equipped no-date Carrera with design inspiration coming from the early '60s. You may recall 2018's Carrera 02 By Fragment Design Hiroshi Fujiwara, which took inspiration from the black-dialed 2447NT.) Moreover, the arrangement of the sub-dials has been slightly tweaked from that of the 2447S, also because of the design of the Heuer 02 movement. The original 2447S has the positions of the 12-hour counter and the running seconds swapped from what we see above.
The 39mm case feels like an excellent diameter for a modern chronograph, and I think it looks absolutely fantastic on the wrist.  The Carrera 160 Years Silver Limited Edition is a bit thick in relation to its diameter. If you view it from the side in the below images, I think you can see what I mean. I wasn't able to take a precise measurement with calipers for this review, but our friend and HODINKEE contributor Jeff Stein has reported the thickness to be 14.5mm over at the Heuer enthusiast site On The Dash. I do think that the presence of the pushers and the wrist-hugging downward slope of the angular lugs act to mitigate this quality somewhat.
Of course, this watch's relative thickness is not the whole story. Far from it. The Carrera 160 Years Silver Limited Edition is a modern, automatic, in-house, column-wheel chronograph that has been designed to pay homage to a classic Heuer design, and it does so very, very well. The Caliber Heuer 02 runs at a modern rate of 28,800 vph while providing a power reserve of 80 hours. As you can see below, it's been fitted with a special rotor.
One of my favorite things about the Carrera 160 Years Silver Limited Edition is its dial, which pays a fitting and effective homage to the 2447S, particularly given the already-mentioned constraints of using a modern automatic movement. The uncluttered harmony that attracts many vintage watch lovers to the early '60s classic Carrera feels present in this watch, and all of the distinctive elements of early Carreras are there, right down to the simple, old-school Heuer logo and the divisions for the seconds printed along the rehaut. The hands and markers are of slightly different proportions compared to the original, and it looks like there is more lume used (in the new version, it's modern Super-LumiNova, of course).
The fancy alligator strap and modern steel folding clasp do feel a bit too luxe and contemporary on the Carrera 160 Years Silver Limited Edition. At its launch in 1963, the 2447 cost less than $100. If there is a disconnect between the strap and watch, it's surely an easy fix, though. How cool would it be to put this guy on something with a bit more of a vintage vibe, like, say, the racing strap seen on the above 2447SD toward the top of this article?
I think the TAG Heuer Carrera 160 Years Silver Limited Edition is a welcome reminder of what a classically designed, uncluttered chronograph can look like. Its absence of a tachymeter bezel or any other scale makes it a fine candidate as an everyday watch, and one that could be enjoyed as much by vintage watch lovers as by folks who just dig mid-century modern design. We often feel an urge to put things, and that includes watches, into boxes – this one's dressy, that one's a sport watch. But I think that this most recent Carrera re-edition defies attempts to be strictly categorized. Sure, we happen to know that it was named after a motorsport event, but I think the original Carrera is much more than its name suggests.
The TAG Heuer Carrera 160 Years Silver Limited Edition. Ref. CBK221B.FC6479. Stainless steel case measuring 39mm by about 14mm in diameter. In-house Caliber Heuer 02 automatic column-wheel chronograph with vertical clutch, with anniversary rotor running at 28,800 vph in 33 jewels. Silver colored dial with applied markers and lume on hands and plots. Water resistant to 100 meters. Black alligator strap with stainless steel folding clasp.  Price: $6,450. For more, visit TAG Heuer .
