Rocket Lab has few local shareholders because of a lack of available investors.
OPINION: Covid-19 has been a massive storm for most New Zealand businesses.
But every cloud has a silver lining. And ironically, because of Covid-19, the long-term opportunities for New Zealand’s economy have actually improved.
That’s a big claim, but here’s why I’m more optimistic than ever about our economy, and the long-term outlook for business.
For decades our economy has suffered from three big headwinds – the tyranny of distance, a lack of capital and infrastructure, and low productivity. Covid-19 impacts all of these positively.
Let’s start with the tyranny of distance.
New Zealand has always been viewed as very small and very far away. The result is many export focussed businesses have been running hard to stay competitive in overseas markets.
Covid-19 changes that, because distance matters a lot less via Zoom.
A software developer in Hamilton commented to me recently that major international prospects had got used to doing business via video conference, and had simply stopped caring that he was based in New Zealand.
This is a very big deal for New Zealand business, because it means the further away you are, the closer you get.
Winning in business is about relative competitiveness, and widespread acceptance of video conferencing during Covid-19 has just moved New Zealand up another notch.
Technology transforming New Zealand is not new.
The internet is probably a big reason why New Zealand has been climbing up the OECD rankings in the last 20 years. And as far back as 1882 we benefited massively from refrigerated shipping.
Lack of capital has been our second headwind. That is changing rapidly, and Covid-19 will accelerate this.
Sam Stubbs: "The availability of capital, with the will to spend it post Covid-19, will finally kickstart much of the infrastructure we need."
Venture capital is a key component of future productivity and wealth.
New Zealand has traditionally been bereft of investors in high-risk/high-return investments. Just before Covid-19, the winds of change were blowing, with $400 million already committed by the Government and KiwiSaver managers.
And now that Covid-19 has helped collapse interest rates worldwide, many more investors will be seeking higher returns via riskier investments, including start up and rapidly expanding businesses.
When bank deposits pay as little as they do now, it makes perfect sense.
Capital for expansion will be much more available too. The Government has plenty of fiscal horsepower, with relatively low debt levels even after Covid-19 spending. And local KiwiSaver savings, plus the NZ Super Fund, iwi and the ACC, will give New Zealand a rising tide of local savings, reaching over $400 billion by 2030. This is a vast amount, and will lift any business fit to float.
For New Zealand, a new appetite for risk, and a rising tide of capital, will be a windfall for our entrepreneurs.
For years they’ve been complaining about lack of local investors, and anyone with scale. They were right, it’s the reason Rocket Lab has so few local shareholders. But it’s changing now, with Covid-19 accelerating it.
The availability of capital, with the will to spend it post Covid-19, will finally kickstart much of the infrastructure we need. Governments could choose to go it alone, or do it as public-private partnerships, but either way it looks like it’s finally going to happen. We will all be far better off for it, because infrastructure spending is rarely regretted.
The third headwind is lack of productivity, a thorny problem. Better access to global markets, and more capital, will help. But ultimately productivity is about people.
And as good as Kiwis are, there in an important opportunity here for a post Covid-19 immigration policy which values skills more than ever. The focus must be on quantity, not quality.
Thankfully, the best talent globally increasingly wants to work here. And if New Zealand isn’t a more attractive place for high value immigrants post Covid-19, I’ll eat your hat.
We can also increase the productivity of our natural assets. Covid-19 has exposed the perils of high volume tourism. Before the borders open, we have time to start planning a switch in focus from high volume, to high value, tourism.
We need to be a luxury brand in eco-tourism, more Waterford than Walmart. Privately owned African game parks provide some lessons in getting the best returns from a unique environment.
Covid-19 could be a genuine windfall for New Zealand business, with the tyranny of distance diminished, capital easier to find and productivity increased. But to achieve what’s possible, we need to accept that the Covid-19 storm clouds will finally blow over, and see the solid silver lining in them.
Sam Stubbs is the founder of KiwiSaver provider Simplicity.
