Washington: After long resisting wearing a mask in public, President Donald Trump said he thinks it makes him look like the Lone Ranger ... and he likes it.
In a coronavirus messaging shift, Trump told the Fox Business Network on Wednesday that he would have no problem wearing a mask in public and supported another round of direct stimulus payments as part of a potential phase four relief package.
US President Trump has long dismissed the need for him to wear a mask in public.
Trump’s comments came a day after Republican lawmakers suggested that the President wear a mask in public to set a good example for Americans. Dr Anthony Fauci, the head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, also warned that the daily increase of new cases in the US, presently at around 40,000, could reach 100,000 if people failed to adhere to social distancing guidelines and wearing masks.
The United States President, however, has long resisted being photographed in a mask.
In early April, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a recommendation that people wear cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures were difficult to maintain. But Trump undercut the CDC guidance at the time by stating that he would not be following it, suggesting it would be unseemly for the commander-in-chief to wear a mask as he meets with heads of states.
Clayton Moore in his role as The Lone Ranger, crusading against villains on his horse Silver.
On Wednesday, he sounded a different tone, saying, “I had a mask on. I sort of liked the way I looked. Okay. I thought it was okay. It was a dark black mask, and I thought it looked okay".
“It looked like the Lone Ranger,” he said, a reference to the fictional law-and-order character from the American old west who wore a black eye mask. "I have no problem with that, and if people feel good about it, they should do it.
“If I were in a tight situation with people, I would absolutely."
The Lone Ranger and his Native America friend, Tonto.
A fictional character, the Lone Ranger was a former Texas ranger fighting outlaws with his Native American friend Tonto. He was known for his catchphrase - Hi-ho, Silver! Away! - when he wanted his horse Silver to gallop away. The Lone Ranger first appeared in radio serials in the 1930s before the masked character became a fixture on US television in the 1950s with several movies also made.
In recent days, many Republicans and members of the White House coronavirus task force team have been more outspoken in advocating for Americans to wear face masks in public settings as infections have surged in huge swathes of the south and west of the country.
White House senior adviser Kellyanne Conway on Wednesday noted that Trump is regularly tested for the coronavirus, as are his aides. White House visitors and members of the media who are in close proximity to him and Vice President Mike Pence are also tested.
