When Roberts told ESPN last week that the players might not even vote on a plan to return to play, that statement caught some agents by surprise and left them reviewing the union's bylaws, which do not require such a vote.
It's not that Roberts, who recently has been holding calls with every team to provide information and receive feedback, is trying to hurry the process. It's that Silver has made sure Paul and Roberts have had a seat at the table over the past three months as all this has unfolded. The union recently formed a players' committee, led by Paul and joined by Kyle Lowry , Dwight Powell , Russell Westbrook and Jayson Tatum , to further consult with Silver and some of his top officials as the process unfolds. In this way the union has, in some respects, voted along the way.
One such example is the union's preference to allow some family into a quarantined campus, which the league has made a priority for weeks as it has pieced plans together.
This is a contrast to what has happened in similar negotiations, like with Major League Baseball, in which the trading of proposals for a return-to-play model has been acrimonious . It's possible the NBA's talks could turn that way eventually -- especially as matters of compensation come to the forefront -- but Silver's inclusion of the union along the way might give him a better chance of reaching an agreement despite the unpleasant nature of the issue.
When holding a call with all players several weeks ago, Silver listened to virus-related concerns and vowed to tell teams not to pressure players to return to facilities after it was raised as a concern. But he was also frank about the league's financial position to prepare everyone for tough concessions ahead.
The league has the right to cancel the remaining 259 regular-season games, potentially wiping out more than $600 million in salaries (players are already having their paychecks docked to prepare for this). Yet despite having that hammer outlined within the current labor deal, Silver needs to get the union to agree to issues not covered by the CBA: playing games in the summer, entering a quarantine for weeks and adding some playoff play-in games for which there is no established salary structure.
A big reason Silver has been so popular is because the NBA has enjoyed massive revenue growth during his tenure in the wake of the $24 billion media rights deal he negotiated in his first months in the role in 2014.
When the NBA made that deal, rookies made a minimum of $500,000 and most veteran players made a minimum of $1.4 million. Today the rookie minimum is $900,000 and the most veteran players make at least $2.5 million. By 2014, only two star players had ever earned over $30 million in one season: Michael Jordan (twice) and Kobe Bryant (once). This season, 20 players were contracted to earn more than $30 million.
In the same time frame, average team values have increased from $630 million to $2.1 billion, per Forbes . Three teams have sold for more than $2 billion, and owners have seen borrowing power against their equity rise from $175 million to $325 million per team.
But now comes the pivot of how to manage money going out the door instead of coming in. The league might have to revamp how teams share revenue with each other and how players share money with owners. Silver might simply have to say no to some people. He might have to deal with players and their family members testing positive for the coronavirus because of an attempt to finish the season.
This is unfamiliar territory and a stress test to Silver's way of doing business. By the time next season comes, if the relationships the NBA commissioner has cultivated with all parties come away unscathed, it will be a minor miracle.
