Simply Wall St April 15, 2020
Unfortunately, investing is risky – companies can and do go bankrupt. On the other hand, if you find a high quality business to buy (at the right price) you can more than double your money! For example, the Silver Mines Limited ( ASX:SVL ) share price has soared 127% in the last year. Most would be very happy with that, especially in just one year! It’s also up 44% in about a month. Unfortunately the longer term returns are not so good, with the stock falling 41% in the last three years.
With just AU$63,635 worth of revenue in twelve months, we don’t think the market considers Silver Mines to have proven its business plan. So it seems that the investors focused more on what could be, than paying attention to the current revenues (or lack thereof). For example, investors may be hoping that Silver Mines finds some valuable resources, before it runs out of money.
We think companies that have neither significant revenues nor profits are pretty high risk. There is usually a significant chance that they will need more money for business development, putting them at the mercy of capital markets to raise equity. So the share price itself impacts the value of the shares (as it determines the cost of capital). While some such companies go on to make revenue, profits, and generate value, others get hyped up by hopeful naifs before eventually going bankrupt. Some Silver Mines investors have already had a taste of the sweet taste stocks like this can leave in the mouth, as they gain popularity and attract speculative capital.
Silver Mines had cash in excess of all liabilities of AU$5.3m when it last reported (December 2019). That’s not too bad but management may have to think about raising capital or taking on debt, unless the company is close to breaking even. Given the share price has increased by a solid 91% in the last year , it’s fair to say investors remain excited about the future, despite the potential need for cash. You can see in the image below, how Silver Mines’s cash levels have changed over time (click to see the values).
It can be extremely risky to invest in a company that doesn’t even have revenue. There’s no way to know its value easily. One thing you can do is check if company insiders are buying shares. If they are buying a significant amount of shares, that’s certainly a good thing. You can click here to see if there are insiders buying.
Investors should note that there’s a difference between Silver Mines’s total shareholder return (TSR) and its share price change, which we’ve covered above. Arguably the TSR is a more complete return calculation because it accounts for the value of dividends (as if they were reinvested), along with the hypothetical value of any discounted capital that have been offered to shareholders. Silver Mines hasn’t been paying dividends, but its TSR of 127% exceeds its share price return of 127%, implying it has either spun-off a business, or raised capital at a discount; thereby providing additional value to shareholders.
It’s good to see that Silver Mines has rewarded shareholders with a total shareholder return of 127% in the last twelve months. That certainly beats the loss of about 18% per year over the last half decade. This makes us a little wary, but the business might have turned around its fortunes. It’s always interesting to track share price performance over the longer term. But to understand Silver Mines better, we need to consider many other factors. Even so, be aware that Silver Mines is showing 5 warning signs in our investment analysis , and 1 of those is concerning…
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of companies we expect will grow earnings.
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on AU exchanges.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
