Buying shares in the best businesses can build meaningful wealth for you and your family. While not every stock performs well, when investors win, they can win big. Just think about the savvy investors who held Silver Lake Resources Limited ( ASX:SLR ) shares for the last five years, while they gained 769%. And this is just one example of the epic gains achieved by some long term investors. On top of that, the share price is up 50% in about a quarter. The company reported its financial results recently; you can catch up on the latest numbers by reading our company report .
It really delights us to see such great share price performance for investors.
To quote Buffett, 'Ships will sail around the world but the Flat Earth Society will flourish. There will continue to be wide discrepancies between price and value in the marketplace...' One way to examine how market sentiment has changed over time is to look at the interaction between a company's share price and its earnings per share (EPS).
During the last half decade, Silver Lake Resources became profitable. That kind of transition can be an inflection point that justifies a strong share price gain, just as we have seen here. Given that the company made a profit three years ago, but not five years ago, it is worth looking at the share price returns over the last three years, too. We can see that the Silver Lake Resources share price is up 155% in the last three years. In the same period, EPS is up 37% per year. That makes EPS very close to the 37% share price growth, each year, over the same period. So you could reasonably conclude that investor sentiment towards the stock has remained pretty steady, over time. There's a strong correlation between the share price and EPS.
It is of course excellent to see how Silver Lake Resources has grown profits over the years, but the future is more important for shareholders. Take a more thorough look at Silver Lake Resources's financial health with this free report on its balance sheet .
It's good to see that Silver Lake Resources has rewarded shareholders with a total shareholder return of 129% in the last twelve months. Since the one-year TSR is better than the five-year TSR (the latter coming in at 54% per year), it would seem that the stock's performance has improved in recent times. Given the share price momentum remains strong, it might be worth taking a closer look at the stock, lest you miss an opportunity. I find it very interesting to look at share price over the long term as a proxy for business performance. But to truly gain insight, we need to consider other information, too. Take risks, for example - Silver Lake Resources has 3 warning signs we think you should be aware of.
If you are like me, then you will not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on AU exchanges.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
