eOption takes a barebones approach to marketing. It offers cut-rate pricing in exchange for traditional trader services.
If you can do without adequate research and platform resources, you can trade your silver-related stocks and ETFs for $0 and options for $0.10 per contract . You must make at least 2 trades a year to avoid the $50 inactivity fee. eOption is not a boutique broker so it doesn’t offer futures or CFDs.
Silver has some distinct advantages as a tradable investment:
It’s cheaper than gold. You can get just as much crisis protection from silver as you would from gold at 1/17th the price.
You can sell it in smaller increments. Sometimes you may need to sell off some investment assets to cover an expense. Instead of selling a whole ounce of gold, you can cash in a much smaller denomination of silver.
It’s a bullish asset. In a bull market, silver prices move up much faster than gold.
It’s better than money. This is a good reason to own some physical silver. Silver and gold are the truest forms of money because you can’t readily reproduce them. Silver is original and rare.
Some of the silver attributes contribute to its disadvantages. Most of the disadvantages apply to physical silver ownership:
It’s a poor earner. Silver is primarily a safeguard investment. For appreciable returns, it doesn’t perform as well as real estate and other investments.
It’s not liquid. It’s rare that you can trade physical silver for on the spot goods. You need to convert physical silver into cash, and this may take a while.
Theft is possible. Holding physical silver comes with the risk of it being lost or stolen.
Is Silver Right for You?
Silver is like any other investment — there are no guarantees and it’s risky. An investment in silver can help you offset losses in a financial crisis. Decide whether you are looking for a solid long-term investment with safeguarding features. If that’s your aim, silver may be right for you.
Looking for stocks that are about to breakout for gains of 10%, 15%, even 20% potentially or more? The only problem is finding these stocks takes hours per day. Fortunately, Benzinga's Breakout Opportunity Newsletter that could potentially break out each and every month. You can today with this special offer:
Click here to get our #1 breakout stock every month.
Finding the right financial advisor that fits your needs doesn't have to be hard. SmartAsset's free tool matches you with fiduciary financial advisors in your area in 5 minutes. Each advisor has been vetted by SmartAsset and is legally bound to act in your best interests. If you're ready to be matched with local advisors that will help you achieve your financial goals, get started now .
