The Silver Shadow was first delivered to a dealer in Hamilton, Ontario and appears to have had considerable use. Records that came with it indicate that it was driven for nearly 6,000 miles between May and October of 1977. The next owners were a well-known family on Vancouver Island and then it went to Cranbrook in 1989 with 55,000 miles on the odometer. Rathgeber took custody of it at 63,000 miles and has enjoyed adding another 3,000 to the total.
“When I brought it home, I went through it front to back,“ Bill says. “I changed the oil and changed the filters and changed the spark plugs.” This last, he notes, was a lot bigger job than it sounds. “Six of them were changed out in a half-hour. The other two took two days and three of us working on it. They’re very difficult to get at. I would describe it as a cross between an industrial engine and an aircraft for working on.”
“When I first got it, the light blue leather upholstery looked pretty clean. I bought some good leather cleaner and conditioner and the rags came out black!” Rathgeber says. “Every spring now it gets a full cleaning and conditioning.
“It’s a wonderful car to drive – smooth, silent and it will cruise all day at well above the speed limit,” he says. “It’s quite torquey. At any speed, if you stomp on it, you know there’s a big V8 under there.” Adequate power, indeed!
“It’s a heavy car, but, because of the hydraulic suspension, when you throw it into a curve, it starts to lean and then firms itself up halfway through. It kind of catches itself. I’ve had big cars in the past and this thing would outhandle any of them.”
Bill takes the car to many show-and-shines each summer. “Most people have never even touched one or looked under the hood,” he says. At shows, the Silver Shadow always has the hood up and it’s just fine if people want to sit in it. “Fingerprints wipe off,” Bill says.
Perhaps his best car show experience was winning the ‘Best European’ trophy against a strong class of newer exotics at a show in 2018. “I beat all the rich guys,” he laughs. The fact was, though, that while the exotic cars cost hundreds of thousands of dollars – none of them was a Rolls-Royce.
“She’s an old grand dame that I’ve named ‘Camilla’ and I suspect she’s going to be part of our family for a good number of years to come,” Bill says. “Put the window up and the world goes away. All you can hear is the clock ticking.” After waiting for so long, owning the Rolls-Royce has still surpassed his expectations. “You don’t really know what they are until you’ve lived with one.”
