Written by Geoffrey Plant on June 9, 2020
Silver City continues to find itself at the political epicenter of the coronavirus pandemic in New Mexico.
Grant County attorney Jonathan Diener isn’t sure that New Mexicans can be required to wear a face covering — even while on the job at businesses open under the conditions set out by Gov. Michelle Lujan Grisham’s public health order — but the Jalisco Cafe’s lawyer is certain that he doesn’t want to wear one in court when in-person jury trials and other proceedings open up. That’s predicted to happen as early as June 15.
“I was ordered to wear a mask to a hearing,” Diener said. “I don’t like wearing a mask, and some doctors agree that it is not a healthy thing. It’s unpleasant and uncomfortable.”
Diener began advertising for a class action lawsuit challenging the mandate that employees wear a mask on the job in the Daily Press a little more than a week ago. So far, no one has joined the proposed action, which seeks relief from Lujan Grisham’s mandate that employees wear masks while dealing with the public.
“If the people working in places that are open feel the same — it’s not clear to me the governor has authority to make employees wear them,” Diener said, adding that his challenge to the face covering mandate has standing under basic civil liberty laws.
“Is it a reasonable enactment? Or is it baseless and ineffectual?” Diener asked. “Say the governor made you wear a heavy winter coat in winter, for example. No governor can tell you, ‘This is what you must wear.’”
Diener also represents the owners of the Jalisco Cafe in their challenge to the state’s public health order.
“The restrictions imposed by the order are in place to protect consumers from exposure to conditions that present substantial danger of illness,” the complaint continued. “Dining has an imminent threat of exposing the public, and the staff to the COVID-19 disease.”
“As of 10 days ago, there were 10 states opening up for dine-in,” Diener told the Daily Press on May 29. “Is there something different about New Mexico? There’s nothing different about New Mexico. The governor decided to make an order that one size fits all.”
According to court documents, the leading expert witness secured by Diener in the restaurant’s legal challenge is one of the more controversial figures in the media during the pandemic, Knut Wittkowski.
Wittkowski’s actual background has been subject to dispute since April, when he came to the fore in countless media interviews, but he is a career academic with years of experience. Wittkowski plugs his bona fides in what is at least the periphery of serious epidemiological studies over more than 20 years.
What will Wittkowski testify to as an expert witness in the Jalisco Cafe case?
“Basically, he’s saying there’s no need for the shutdown — and certainly not by May 25,” Diener said. “The way you deal with viruses is by herd immunity. The deaths were already declining — and were none in Grant County — by the time [Gov. Lujan Grisham] put in her shutdown orders. The deaths were already declining; especially by May 15, when she renewed the last one. That’s why Jalisco’s is being sued.”
Diener declined to connect the Daily Press with Wittkowski, or describe the expert witness’s fee. Diener said he did not know how many legal challenges Wittkowski has engaged in as an expert witness on the novel coronavirus.
Wittkowski did not respond to a request for comment by the Daily Press.
What is clear from Wittkowski’s online activity, however — some of which has been taken down by YouTube — is that he believes the pandemic will only become manageable once it’s run its course and herd immunity is established.
That’s the argument that Diener presents in his response to the Environment Department’s complaint against the restaurant, where he states, basically, that Lujan Grisham shut down New Mexico’s economy too soon.
“There was no substantial danger of illness, serious physical harm or death to consumers at Jalisco,” Diener writes in his June 4 response to the Environment Department’s complaint, which officially suspended the cafe’s food service permit May 22.
“The fact that Jalisco may not have complied with a New Mexico Department of Health order prohibiting restaurants from serving dine-in customers is not proof that Jalisco presented a substantial danger of illness, serious harm or death to its customers, or would do so,” Diener continued. “That proof would have to come from showing that conditions at Jalisco actually presented that danger, or will do so in the future.”
Diener and expert witness Wittkowski say that’s impossible to prove.
“Also, the position is that it is moot,” Diener said. “Dine-in is now allowed. There’s no reason to enjoin them.”
Owners of the Jalisco Cafe declined to comment through restaurant management for this story Monday evening.
The Jalisco Cafe hearing has been postponed until June 10, according to the most recently filed court documents in the case — which is also on its third judge. Silver City District Court Judges Tom Stewart and Jim Foy recused themselves, and the case is now assigned to Judge Jarod K. Hofacket of Deming.
Above all, Diener insists he doesn’t want to wear a mask to court — whether it’s to defend the owners of the Jalisco Cafe or for any other of the many cases the experienced trial lawyer is litigating.
“Looks like people are just resigned to it,” Diener said Sunday. “I asked an employee at Walmart what it was like to wear the mask. She said: ‘I can’t breathe.’”
Regardless of the public’s interest in the class action — for which Diener has so far gathered no members — when either matter comes before the court, it will most likely be by telephone. If there’s an in-person hearing in the Sixth Judicial District, all parties will be required to wear masks, according to an order issued May 16 by the chief justice of the state Supreme Court, Judith Nakamura.
“The use of a mask or other protective face covering that covers the nose and mouth shall be required by anyone entering and while in a courthouse, judicial building, or other physical space used, occupied, or operated by the New Mexico Judiciary,” Nakamura wrote.
Nakamura excepted from the order “young children who are unable to remove the face covering without assistance; anyone who has trouble breathing; or anyone who is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove a face covering without assistance.”
Barry Massey, public information officer for the New Mexico Administrative Office of the Courts, told the Daily Press that June 15 might see in-person jury trials resume, but did not say anything about the face covering requirement being lifted.
“There is no specific timeline for the expansion of in-person hearings, other than jury trials may resume in some locations starting June 15,” Massey said. “No district court has yet to receive approval for jury trials, however. The Sixth Judicial District Court has submitted a plan to the Supreme Court for resuming jury trials in its district and magistrate courts. That plan is under review.”
Geoffrey Plant may be reached at geoff@scdaily press.com.
