Pandora says it will stop using newly minted silver and gold by 2025.
Pandora , Copenhagen, Denmark, the world’s largest jewelry brand, says it will stop using newly mined precious metals silver and gold in its jewelry by 2025 and only buy from recycled sources. The company says the move will reduce carbon emissions by two-thirds for silver and by more than 99 percent for gold.
“Silver and gold are beautiful jewelry materials that can be recycled forever without losing their quality,” CEO Alexander Lacik says. “Metals mined centuries ago are just as good as new. They will never tarnish or decay. We wish to help develop a more responsible way of crafting affordable luxury like our jewelry and prevent that these fine metals end up in landfills. We want to do our part to build a more circular economy.”
Today, 71 percent of the silver and gold in Pandora’s jewelry comes from recycled sources. Shifting completely to recycled silver and gold will reduce CO2 emissions, water usage and other environmental impacts. The carbon emissions from sourcing recycled silver are one-third those of mined silver, while recycling of gold emits approximately 600 times less carbon than mining new gold, according to life cycle assessments.
“The need for sustainable business practices is only becoming more important, and companies must do their part in response to the climate crisis and the depletion of natural resources. For many years, Pandora has used recycled metals in our designs. Now we are ready to take the next step and stop using mined silver and gold altogether. This is a significant commitment that will be better for the environment and make our jewelry more sustainable,” Lacik says.
Silver is the most used material in Pandora jewelry, accounting for slightly more than half of all purchased product materials measured by weight. Pandora also uses smaller volumes of gold, palladium, copper and manmade stones such as nanocrystals and cubic zirconia.
The company says roughly 15 percent of the world’s silver supply comes from recycled sources, with more than half of this material coming from industrial sources, where it is used in chemical production, electronics and for other purposes.
Pandora says it will work with its suppliers to guarantee sufficient supply of responsibly sourced recycled silver, certified according to leading supply chain initiative standards, such as the London-based Responsible Jewellery Council. The company also says it will engage with key stakeholders in the supply chain to explore opportunities for increasing the availability of recycled silver and improve production standards.
The campaign continues to grow.
The campaign that is designed to expand market demand for recycled resins and improve plastic recycling in North America has announced new commitments during the June 2020 Association of Plastic Recyclers (APR) Member Meeting held virtually in light of the COVID-19 health crisis. Developed by the APR, Washington, The APR Recycling Demand Champions Campaign helps to drive investment in and increase the supply of postconsumer resin (PCR). The campaign is a companion to the recently launched Government Recycling Demand Champions Program.
Originally announced in October 2017 with 10 participating companies, that number grew to 20 companies in 2018 and resulted in more than 30 million pounds of new demand for PCR, APR reports in a news release. Currently, 40 companies are participating and will report their impact in October. The seven companies below are the first, to date, that will report their impact in 2021:
"We commend these companies for continuing and even expanding their commitment to plastics recycling during the current trying times,” comments Steve Alexander, APR president and CEO. “The pandemic, and our nation’s response to it, exacerbated and accelerated trends already happening in all industries. And recycling is no exception. For recycling to work, consumers start the chain by putting their recyclable products in the bin, and companies at the end of the chain buy and use that recycled material for new products. That end-of-chain demand drives the entire system.”
The campaign includes any and all new volume PCR use. This can be achieved through purchasing “work in process” (WIP) goods that contain PCR for manufacturing facilities, developing a new application for PCR and increasing PCR use in a current application.
APR, in partnership with the Northeast Recycling Council (NERC), recently expanded the scope of the campaign beyond the private sector to include government entities. APR hosted a webinar about this campaign in late May. Click here to access a recording of the session, as well as the presentation slides.
“We look forward to the continued growth and expansion of this important campaign,” says Liz Bedard, director of the APR Olefins/Rigids Plastic Recycling Program. “Instead of allowing a crisis to force them to back off of sustainability goals, these companies exemplified a continued commitment to their prepandemic efforts. They recognize that a strong and effective recycling chain represents the best available environmental option to reduce greenhouse gases and other pollution, save energy and eliminate ocean plastics.”
Metallo is known for processing recyclables with low metals content.
Aurubis AG , headquartered in Hamburg, Germany, has completed its purchase of Metallo Group from investment firm TowerBrook Capital Partners. The transaction closed May 29, and June 1 marked the start of Aurubis’ consolidation of Metallo. The purchase price was 380 million euros, or $431 million. Aurubis says the Metallo name, which is well-established in the recycling sector, will be retained.
With the Metallo acquisition, the Aurubis Group, a leading global provider and recycler of copper and other nonferrous metals, is gaining a second location in Belgium that is in Beerse, with about 450 employees, in addition to its existing location in Olen, Belgium. It also is gaining a location in Berango, Spain, in the province of Biscay, which employs about 90 people.
The EU competition authorities issued approval of the acquisition May 4.
Roland Harings, Aurubis AG executive board chairman, says in a video released to all the company’s employees June 2, “A little over a year after the announcement, we can now welcome all of our Metallo colleagues to the worldwide Aurubis family. We will integrate the Metallo production sites to form an optimized production network of our plants in Hamburg, Pirdop [Bularia], Lünen [Germany] and Olen together with Beerse and Berango. This will lead to more than 1 million tons of recycling capacity for secondary material.”
Harings emphasizes, “This acquisition represents an important step in the implementation of our multimetal strategy. Our stated goal is to become one of the most efficient and sustainable smelter networks in the world.”
“I’m sure I speak for all Metallo employees when I say that we are very pleased to become part of Aurubis and to bundle our experience spanning a combined total of more than 250 years,” says Dirk Vandenberghe, CEO and director of Metallo. “Metallo specializes in processing recycling materials with low metal contents, with a focus on tin, lead, nickel, zinc and copper. We have a ‘zero waste’ approach—even as the compositions of the input materials become increasingly complex. As part of Aurubis, we want to continue processing all of the input materials into valuable products, making an important sustainability contribution as one company.”
“The Metallo-Aurubis merger is not just a very positive move for the two companies, it is great news for the recycling industry and Europe,” Patrick Verschelde, chairman of the board of directors of Metallo, says. “The add-ons of Metallo technologies and expertise to those of Aurubis will allow the expanded Aurubis Group to treat even more complex materials in order to return to the value chain base metals which are very much in demand in Europe.”
Aurubis is financing the purchase with borrowed capital.
