Looking for silver lining in the dark clouds? India has plenty
We manufactured a crisis much before the pandemic hit the financial world.
To summarise, for anyone who can see beyond few quarters, there is not one Silver Lining, but a bunch them for India in these dark clouds.
Even if you find a silver lining, the world is likely to look the other way in the current mood of gloom and doom. But if it is bunch of lines, it becomes hard to ignore, however dark the mood is. India ’s macros seem to be in one such silver spot. The credit goes to our policy makers .
We manufactured a crisis much before the pandemic hit the financial world. Ironically, that is coming around to help us now. It may now seem strange that our macros are relatively stronger, precisely because we accidentally prepared for it with self-inflicted blows (credit and NBFC crisis triggered by ILFS) during the boom times when global markets were going through exuberant times.
Looking ahead, such manufactured blows might ironically soften the pain from the pandemic crisis. Who says, mis-steps always end in misery? Sometimes, they surprise with positive outcomes. Look to India’s relative macro advantage in this pandemic crisis as a piece of evidence for that.
Let us start with India’s macro position in the earlier crises. Every time a crisis hit India in the past, it faced with weaker macros in terms of high inflation, high interest rates, low forex cover and high current account deficit. Since India was in sync with the global top in the earlier cycles, most of its macro metrics were stretched (the economy was overheated), when a crisis hit. That's not the case in the current pandemic crisis.
In this cycle, India did not participate in the global boom by being out-of-sync with the global growth for an extended period of time (two years+) because of self-inflicted pains (or mis-steps). As a result, our macro metrics are more moderate, not overheated or stretched. That gives a lot of elbow room for both fiscal and monetary stimulus. To understand this more, let us go back in time and look at Global Financial Crisis of 2008 in a few data points:
Inflation at CPI level hit a high of 10.45% in October 2008, with inflation averaging around 8.8% level in 2008. Current CPI is at a much more comfortable level and is hovering around 5%. That points to a lot more head room for monetary policy actions for RBI in the current crisis.
In 2008, India’s forex reserves were barely adequate for two years of trade deficit. But now, forex reserves at over $475 billion can cover over four-and-half years of trade deficit. One reason why the rupee is more resilient in the current crisis compared with peer country currencies is this strength. Currencies like Mexican peso, rand (South Africa) and real (Brazil) have crumbled over 25 per cent this calendar year (since January 1, 2020). In contrast, the rupee, with the fall of just over 7 per cent, is standing tall among its peers.
It may not be out of place to share the chart (below) from Economist which puts India in the top quartile along with China when it comes to strength of forex cover i.e. reserves as a per cent of external financing needs in a stressed scenario. This chart is quite revealing and reflects the relative strength of India’s macros in the current pandemic crisis.
So far so good. If one adds crude oil dynamics, the whole macro metrics will get a booster shot. Crude connects all of them through its wide reaching linkages i.e. positive impact on inflation, twin deficits (fiscal and current account), forex cover, interest rates etc. During the 2008 GFC, crude was hovering between $60 to $90 a barrel. Now it is at one-third those prices. If this level sustains, it can add another one year to the forex cover (trade deficit cover) discussed above, besides extending the huge headroom for both fiscal and monetary actions (throw in lower inflation and lower twin deficits).
Add to that, the Met’s encouraging forecast (initial) for a normal monsoon this year. That couldn’t have come at a better time. Going beyond macros, India could also be looking at long-term gains from global pushback on China. If that pushback, in terms of developing alternate supply-chain, accelerates, it could help India’s growth immensely even if a small part of diversification flows through India, given its very small and meagre base.
To summarise, for anyone who can see beyond few quarters, there is not one Silver Lining, but a bunch them for India in these dark clouds. It is hard to miss them. This, however, doesn’t mean India will not have a tough and painful slowdown in FY21, or some hiccups in macros, especially fiscal stress in government Budget. Still, the situation is far more hopeful. Happy Value Investing!!!
(ArunaGiri N if Founder CEO and Fund Manager at TrustLine Holdings. Views are his own)
(Disclaimer: The opinions expressed in this column are that of the writer. The facts and opinions expressed here do not reflect the views of www.economictimes.com .)
