The suddenness of the recent correction in broader markets is making many investors wonder if commodities like silver as well as silver miners should be in their portfolios. Let’s take a closer look.
To fully appreciate the price dynamics of silver, it is important to understand the role it currently plays globally. Like gold, it is considered a precious metal and is used as an investment medium in the form of bullion, coins, jewellery, or utensils, i.e., table silverware.
As silver exhibits high levels of electrical and thermal conductivity, it has an important role in industrial production, too. Indeed over 50% of the annual demand comes from industrial applications. But only about 10% to 15% of global gold demand comes from industrial use (i.e., the rest is used in jewellery-making or as investment).
This means that the two metals do not have exactly the same price dynamics. Economic growth can easily affect the price of silver, making it rather volatile.
Currently the price of the metal is around $15.5 per ounce. Since late February, the price of the bullion has become especially choppy — with a downward bias — on worries that the spread of the coronavirus globally may impact industrial demand adversely.
What is the gold-to-silver ratio?
I’d also like to briefly discuss the gold-to-silver ratio. Analysts use it to calculate how many ounces of silver it would take to purchase one ounce of gold.
Although their prices tend to move in the same direction, the pace of price growths and declines is different. As a result, this ratio isn’t stable but it changes remarkably over time.
Currently, the ratio sits over 97. Historically, it has been around 60.
Although the silver price has been falling in recent weeks, gold has recently hit a high for 2020. In fact the gold spot price is up over 20% over the past year, hovering around $1,590 per ounce.
In other words, when we analyze the historical levels of the ratio, silver has been underperforming gold. What could this mean for the price of silver?
If you think that the ratio will eventually revert back to the mean, i.e., toward the 60 level, then either the price of silver would have to go up or the price of gold would have to go down.
My bet is on the price of silver going up in the long run. However, for now, we’re likely to witness high levels of volatility in the metal.
Nonetheless, given the uncertainty regarding the global economic effects of the COVID-19 viral outbreak, your guess is possibly as good as anyone else’s.
Holding physical silver may provide exposure for those looking to hedge against inflation and diversify a portfolio away from equities. In the UK, the Royal Mint Bullion offers the opportunity to buy and sell the physical metal.
Alternatively, investors can consider exchange-traded funds (ETFs), such as the iShares Physical Silver ETC or the WisdomTree Physical Silver.
Finally, a rising tide usually lifts most stocks in an industry. Thus if you believe that the price of the metal may go up in the coming months, then you may want to consider buying into stocks like Fresnillo , one of the largest global producer of silver from ore and Mexico’s second-largest gold miner, or Hochschild Mining which owns mines in Peru.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
tezcang has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has recommended Fresnillo. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
