Fortuna Silver Mines Inc ( FSM ) stock has risen 0.87% over the past week and gets a Bearish rating from InvestorsObserver's Sentiment Indicator.
Fortuna Silver Mines Inc has a Bearish sentiment reading. Find out what this means for you and get the rest of the rankings on FSM!
Sentiment is a very short-term indicator that is entirely technical. There is no information about the health of profitability of the underlying company in our sentiment score.
As a technical indicator, news about the stock, or company, such as an earnings release or other event, could move the stock counter to the recent trend.
Changes in price are generally the best indicator of sentiment for a particular stock. At its core, a stock's trend indicates whether current market sentiment is bullish or bearish. Investors must be bullish if a stock is trending upward, and are bearish if a stock is moving down.
InvestorsObserver's Sentiment Indicator factors in both price changes and variations in volume. An increase in volume usually means a current trend is stengthening, while a drop in volume tends to signal a reversal to the ongoing trend.
Our system also uses the options market in order to receive additional signals on current sentiments. We take into account the ratio of calls and puts for a stock since options allow an investor to bet on future changes in price.
What's Happening With FSM Stock Today?
Fortuna Silver Mines Inc (FSM) stock has gained 8.71% while the S&P 500 is lower by -0.56% as of 10:25 AM on Monday, Jun 22. FSM is up $0.37 from the previous closing price of $4.25 on volume of 3,281,855 shares. Over the past year the S&P 500 has risen 5.17% while FSM is up 54.52%. FSM earned $0.42 a per share in the over the last 12 months, giving it a price-to-earnings ratio of 11.
To see InvestorsObserver's Sentiment Score for Fortuna Silver Mines Inc click here.
Fortuna Silver Mines Inc is a Canada-based precious metals producer. It's business operations comprised of mining and related activities in Latin America, including exploration, extraction, and processing of silver- lead, zinc, and silver-gold and the sale of these products. The company operates the Caylloma silver, lead, and zinc mine in southern Peru and the San Jose silver, gold mine in southern Mexico, and is developing the Lindero gold Project in northern Argentina.
