MAG Silver Corp ( MAG ) stock has gained 7.25% over the past week and gets a Bullish rating from InvestorsObserver's Sentiment Indicator.
MAG Silver Corp has a Bullish sentiment reading. Find out what this means for you and get the rest of the rankings on MAG!
Sentiment uses short term technical analysis to gauge whether a stock is desired by investors. As a technical indicator, it focuses on recent trends as opposed to the long term health of the underlying company. Updates for the company such as a earnings release can move the stock away from current trends.
Sentiment is how investors, or the market, feels about a stock. There are lots of ways to measure sentiment. At the core, sentiment is pretty easy to understand. If a stock is going up, investors must be bullish, while if it is going down, sentiment is bearish.
InvestorsObserver’s Sentiment Indicator looks at price trends over the past week and also considers changes in volume. Increasing volume can mean a trend is getting stronger, while decreasing volume can mean a trend is nearing a conclusion.
For stocks that have options, our system also considers the balance between calls, which are often bets that the price will go up, and puts, which are frequently bets that the price will fall.
What's Happening With MAG Stock Today?
MAG Silver Corp (MAG) stock is trading at $12.72 as of  3:15 PM on Tuesday, Jun 2, a loss of -$0.92, or -6.74% from the previous closing price of $13.64. The stock has traded between  $12.60 and $13.84 so far today. Volume today is 654,546 compared to average volume of 849,539.
To see InvestorsObserver's Sentiment Score for MAG Silver Corp click here.
MAG Silver Corp. is a Canadian advanced stage development and exploration company focused on becoming a top-tier primary silver mining company, by exploring and advancing high-grade, district scale, silver-dominant projects in the Americas. Its principal focus and asset is the Juanicipio Property (44%), being developed in a Joint Venture with Fresnillo (56%). The Juanicipio project is located in the state of Zacatecas in Fresnillo Silver Trend in Mexico, the world's premier silver mining camp. With the expertise of Fresnillo as operator, we are currently constructing and developing the surface and underground infrastructure on the property to support a 4,000 tonnes per day mining operation. As well, an expanded exploration program is in place at Juanicipio with multiple highly prospective targets identified across the property.
