Market's View on Pan American Silver Corp. (PAAS) Stock's Price & Volume Trends
Pan American Silver Corp. ( PAAS ) stock is higher by 6.22% over the past week and gets a Bullish rating from InvestorsObserver's Sentiment Indicator.
Pan American Silver Corp. has a Bullish sentiment reading. Find out what this means for you and get the rest of the rankings on PAAS!
Sentiment uses short term technical analysis to gauge whether a stock is desired by investors. As a technical indicator, it focuses on recent trends as opposed to the long term health of the underlying company. Updates for the company such as a earnings release can move the stock away from current trends.
Sentiment is how investors, or the market, feels about a stock. There are lots of ways to measure sentiment. At the core, sentiment is pretty easy to understand. If a stock is going up, investors must be bullish, while if it is going down, sentiment is bearish.
InvestorsObserver’s Sentiment Indicator looks at price trends over the past week and also considers changes in volume. Increasing volume can mean a trend is getting stronger, while decreasing volume can mean a trend is nearing a conclusion.
For stocks that have options, our system also considers the balance between calls, which are often bets that the price will go up, and puts, which are frequently bets that the price will fall.
What's Happening With PAAS Stock Today?
Pan American Silver Corp. (PAAS) stock is higher by 8.29% while the S&P 500 is down -0.56% as of 10:23 AM on Monday, Jun 22. PAAS is up $2.22 from the previous closing price of $26.79 on volume of 1,504,130 shares. Over the past year the S&P 500 is higher by 5.17% while PAAS is up 117.47%. PAAS earned $0.15 a per share in the over the last 12 months, giving it a price-to-earnings ratio of 189.13.
To see the top 5 stocks in the Silver industry click here.
More About Pan American Silver Corp.
Pan American Silver Corp is a mining company focused exclusively on the exploration and development of silver mines. It produced roughly 22 million ounces of silver in 2011. The company operates primarily in Central and South America. It also sells the byproducts from its silver mining operations, including zinc, lead, copper, and gold. Pan American Silver is based in British Columbia.
