Areas where improvements are noted in 2019 are the following:
UG Mining costs per oz: a decrease of 29% due to the increase in the tonnage extracted,
Cyanidation cost per oz: a decrease of 67% caused by the flotation enriched supply to the plant as, 2019 concentrate grading around 3 000 g/t Ag while, in 2018, the cyanidation received a mill feed grading 278 g/t Ag.
Noureddine Mokaddem, Chairman and CEO comments: « The decrease in our cost to produce silver is significant and is the direct result of the reduction in the consumption of sodium cyanide. After altering our refining process, only 7% of the ore tonnage  now goes to cyanidation. Not only have we gained an efficiency advantage, but the reduction of sodium cyanide usage is beneficial from an environmental and strategic supply perspective. Indeed, we see a great improvement in the environmental aspect of our operations, and change our image of the company with our neighbours and stakeholders. These positive results for the mine are leading us to explore today further opportunities in sales of enriched float concentrate as Zgounder's concentrate is now sought for its premium grade by the Smelters consulted. The production cost decrease of 28% is a result to the introduction of the flotation process: 6.68 $USD/ounce Ag in 2019 versus 9.29 $USD/ounce Ag in 2018 and we are very encouraged by this cost saving achievement.
Under the current performance conditions of each of our flotation and cyanidation units, it is in our interest to expand towards selling the enriched concentrate. This  strategy results in a 81% higher net  margin than the sale of the refined ingots produced from cyanide concentrate.
An airborne topographic drone survey was completed. The following figure shows the new infrastructures in place with increased tailings facility to connect with the new 700 t/d production rate.
The technical content of this news release has been reviewed by Claude Duplessis Eng., from GoldMinds Geoservices Inc, independent Qualified Persons under NI 43-101 standards, based on the information’s received from Maya Gold and Silver (ZMSM subsidiary).
Maya Gold & Silver Inc. is a publicly-traded Canadian company focused on the operation, exploration and development of gold and silver deposits in the Kingdom of Morocco. Maya is currently operating mining and milling facilities at its Zgounder Mine, an 85%-15% joint venture between its subsidiary, ZMSM, and the ONHYM of the Kingdom of Morocco.
Its mining portfolio also includes the Boumadine polymetallic deposit located in the Anti-Atlas Mountains of Eastern Morocco. This property is also a joint venture with ONHYM wherein Maya retains a 85% ownership.
Additionally, the Corporation’s portfolio includes the Amizmiz and Azegour properties, both being 100% owned, with gold, tungsten, molybdenum and copper deposits covering over 100 square kilometres in a historical mining district of the Kingdom of Morocco.
This news release contains statements about future events or future performance and reflects management’s current expectations and assumptions. These are “forward-looking” because we have used what we know and expect today to make a statement about the future. Forward-looking statements usually include words such as may, intend, plan, expect, anticipate, and believe or other similar words. We believe the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable. However, actual events and results could be substantially different because of the risks and uncertainties associated with our business or events that happen after the date of this news release. You should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. As a general policy, we do not update forward-looking statements except as required by securities laws and regulations. All of the forward-looking statements made in this press release are qualified by these cautionary statements and by those made in the Corporation’s filings with SEDAR.
On behalf of the Board:
