Company seeking zoning by-law amendment to allow for more commercial space, but land will be zoned to allow a mix of commercial and residential uses
Greater Sudbury's busiest shopping corridor could be seeing expansion in the future, as the city's planning committee will deliberate on a zoning by-law amendment for the Silver Hills area on June 22. (Supplied)
Greater Sudbury's busiest shopping corridor could be seeing expansion in the future, as the city's planning committee will deliberate on a zoning by-law amendment for the Silver Hills area on June 22.
The proposed amendment would allow for a parcel of land south of Lowe's and Best Buy to be used to support a mix of commercial and residential developments.
The land owners — listed as Ontario numbered company 123225 —  are requesting the 58-acre property that is currently zoned R3-1.D59(24) (or “medium density residential special” in human speak), be changed to C2, or general commercial special. The rezoning request doesn’t state what the numbered company wants to do with the property.
Amending the zoning to C2 would open the property for commercial use, with some exceptions. The land can’t be used for an animal shelter, automotive leasing establishment, automotive lube shop, car wash, dry cleaning establishment, funeral home, long-term care facility, mobile home dealership, modular home dealership, service trade or taxi stand.
However, the amendment would allow for a retirement home containing a maximum of 160 guest rooms. Development standards for retirement homes under R3-1.D59(24) zoning (medium density residential special as stated above) will be incorporated as needed into the C2(S) zoning, should council ok the rezoning.
If approved, the residential land use permissions that would remain would allow for multiple dwellings with a maximum of 30 residential dwelling units per building, with a maximum residential density of 60 residential units per hectare, but could include both residential and non-residential uses as long as the lot is fully serviced.
If approved, the property could house lower density residential constructions containing not more than two residential units (ie. single-detached dwelling, semi-detached dwelling, duplex dwelling, as well as secondary dwelling units where certain parameters are satisfied). Shared housing would not be permitted in this location.
"Staff is also in support of the existing permission for a retirement home containing a maximum of 160 guest rooms remaining," said the report.
"Staff has reviewed the development proposal and is satisfied that it conforms with the Official Plan for the City of Greater Sudbury. The development proposal is also generally consistent with the land use planning policy directions identified in the PPS. Staff also notes that the application conforms to and does not conflict with the Growth Plan for Northern Ontario."
City staff is recommending that the planning committee approves the application to amend the zoning by-law.
