Total asset under management in both funds stands at Rs 31,962.67 crore.
In the last six months, the scheme has eroded 19.61 per cent of its value while five-year returns stand at a meagre 4 per cent.
Mutual fund rating agency Morningstar has downgraded two funds managed by star fund manager Prashant Jain from ‘gold’ to ‘silver’, saying that it sees an enhanced risks to the investment strategy employed by Jain. The agency said over the 5-year and 10-year time frames, the funds have been underperforming their respective benchmarks as well as category peers.
The two funds are HDFC Equity , a largecap fund, and HDFC Top 100, a multicap fund. Total asset under management in both funds stands at Rs 31,962.67 crore.
“Prashant Jain’s long-term investment approach, policy of staying fully invested and backing his convictions when the strategy is out of favour have often delivered pleasing results over the long term. But there have also been periods when his valuation-conscious approach is been out of favour,” said Himanshu Srivastava, research analyst at Morningstar.
As of May, HDFC Top 100 fund that tracks Nifty100 index had exposure to 50 stocks including RIL, ICICI Bank, ITC, Infosys NSE 3.37 % , HDFC Bank and Larsen & Toubro, which are top holdings.
In the last six months, the scheme has eroded 19.61 per cent of its value while five-year returns stand at a meagre 4 per cent.
Similarly, HDFC Equity that tracks the Nifty 500 index has exposure to 44 stocks. Top six holdings include ICICI Bank, Larsen & Toubro, State Bank of India, ITC, Infosys and RIL. Six-month return for the scheme stands at -21 per cent and 5-year return 3 per cent.
“The portfolios are poised to benefit from the turnaround in the economic environment, but will continue to witness challenges until the trend reverses. To add to it, his investments in public sector enterprises have not yielded desired results,” Srivastava said in his analysis.
However, he added that Jain’s decision to not bet on NBFC stocks has proven to be right, and the events that played out in the NBFC space as he had anticipated.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
