Seven people were treated at local hospitals following crashes at Silver Lake sand dunes on June 27-28, 2020. (Andraya Croft | MLive.com)
SILVER LAKE, MI – Seven people were sent to local hospitals as the result of all-terrain vehicle crashes on the Silver Lake sand dunes this past weekend.
The office of Oceana County Sheriff Craig Mast reported five single-vehicle crashes on Saturday, June 27, and Sunday, June 28.
The crashes occurred in the off-roading area at Silver Lake State Park off of Fox Road in Oceana County’s Golden Township.
The prior weekend, the sheriff’s department also reported five crashes in the Silver Lake ORV area.
Just before noon on Saturday, June 27, a 21-year-old man from Clarkston lost control of his 2019 Polaris RZR after riding over tire tracks from another vehicle, according to a crash report from the sheriff’s office.
The vehicle overturned and the driver suffered hand injuries. He and his passenger, a 15-year-old male from Belding, were taken to Mercy Health’s Lakeshore Campus in Shelby. It was unknown if they were wearing helmets, according to the report.
Around 3:20 p.m. Saturday, two Lansing area men were taken to MHP’s Lakeshore Campus for injuries they sustained after the 2013 Polaris RZR they were on crashed and rolled, according to the crash report. Neither man wore a helmet.
They became airborne after cresting a hill and landed on the ATV’s “nose” before rolling end over end about four times, according to the report. Both men, the 26-year-old driver from St. Johns and his 21-year-old passenger from Grand Ledge, suffered lacerations and back and neck pain, according to the report. The damaged ATV is owned by the driver.
At about 11 p.m. Saturday night, a 19-year-old Laingsburg man crashed his 2013 Polaris RZR after traveling too fast for conditions, according to a report of the crash. The ATV was traveling on the back side of Directional Hill when it struck a crevice created by wind erosion and came to an immediate stop. The force of the impact caused the front suspension of the ATV to be torn from the mounts and fold under the ATV.
The driver and his 18-year-old male passenger, also from Laingsburg, were taken to MHP’s Lakeshore Campus for treatment of minor injuries. Neither was wearing a helmet, according to the report.
At 8 p.m. Sunday, June 28, a 27-year-old Grand Rapids woman landed hard after going airborne on a hill and struck her jaw on the handlebars of the 2018 Yamaha Kodiak ATV she was riding.
She was transported to Mercy Health Partners Hackley Campus in Muskegon for treatment of a jaw injury, according to the crash report. The woman, who was wearing a helmet, is not the owner of the ATV, according to the report.
The sheriff’s office reported a fifth crash did not involve serious injuries. Just after 8 p.m. on Sunday, a 36-year-old Indiana man with a passenger on board crashed his 2017 Polaris RZR.
The ATV became airborne after going over a hill and landed on its front passenger tire before rolling multiple times. The passenger, a 33-year-old Indiana woman, suffered lacerations on her arm and leg and the driver suffered a knee injury, but neither was treated by EMS. Neither wore a helmet.
