Updated 1029 GMT (1829 HKT) July 1, 2020
Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.
As coronavirus cases in the US continue to rise , NBA commissioner Adam Silver is not ruling out putting the scheduled restart of the season on hold if there is an outbreak of cases amongst teams.
The 2019-20 season -- which was postponed in March -- is set to get back underway on July 31, with 22 of the 30 NBA teams congregating in Orlando, Florida, to finish the season at the Disney World complex.
But although Silver is certain that "it will be safer on this campus than off this campus," a "significant spread" of positive cases between players could result in the cancellation of the season.
"Certainly, if we have a lot of cases, we're going to stop," Silver told Time . "You cannot run from this virus. I am absolutely convinced that it will be safer on this campus than off this campus, because there aren't many other situations I'm aware of where there's mass testing of asymptomatic employees. So in some ways this is maybe a model for how other industries ultimately open.
Silver speaks during a press conference prior to the preseason game between Houston Rockets and Toronto Raptors in Saitama, Japan.
The NBA recently announced that after testing 302 of its players, 16 tested positive. One of those 16, DeAndre Jordan of the Brooklyn Nets, posted on Twitter that following his positive test, he won't be traveling to Florida.
The ratio of positive cases at the moment does not worry Silver though. "It's not alarming based on what we're seeing in the broader population," says Silver. "In many ways, it was somewhat predictable. Where I'm most relieved ... is that among those 16 positive tests, there are no severe cases."
A coalition of NBA players -- led by Brooklyn Nets point guard Kyrie Irving -- have voiced their opposition to the league's plan for restarting and have instead decided to sit out the remainder of the season to continue focusing on the Black Lives Matter movement and the global call for social change in the wake of George Floyd's killing at the hands of police in May.
