CIM Definition Standards (2014) were used for reporting the Mineral Resources.
The Qualified Person is Dinara Nussipakynova, P.Geo. of AMC Mining Consultants (Canada) Ltd.
Mineral Resources are constrained by an optimized pit shell at a metal price of US$18.70/oz Ag, recovery of 90% Ag and Cut-off grade of 45 g/t Ag.
Mineral Resources are reported inside the Claim boundary.
Pit optimization allows waste mining to extend outside the claim to the NE and SW.
Drilling results up to 31 December 2019.
The numbers may not compute exactly due to rounding.
Mineral Resources that are not Mineral Reserves do not have demonstrated economic viability.
Surrounding the conceptual constrained open pit is a zone of mineralized material of similar tenor and grade which has been drilled at variable distances ranging from 25m to plus 100m:  The first area immediately surrounds and encompasses the pit and has been drilled between 25m and 50m distances.  The Company considers this area to contain potential tonnage range of 7Mt to 15Mt and grades ranging from 85 g/t Ag to 150 g/t Ag.  This area requires additional engineering studies to be included in any future mine plans.  The second area occurs at the southern end of the Silver Sand deposit and has received less exploration to date.  The Company has defined an additional tonnages from 10Mt to 20Mt and grades ranging from 85 g/t Ag to 150 g/t Ag exploration target surrounding and below the current defined resource.  Initial drilling has intersected silver mineralization over similar widths and intervals as the main deposit, however, drill density insufficient to categorize the zone as Inferred at this time.  The potential quantity and grade from these two areas are conceptual in nature, there has been insufficient exploration to define a mineral resource, and it is uncertain if further exploration will result in the target being delineated as a mineral resource.
Silver Sand is one of the more significant new global primary silver discoveries in the last decade.
Mineralization remains open to the North and South and at depth. No feeder zones or source intrusions have been discovered to date.  The Company classifies the exploration potential as good to excellent
Detailed drilling indicates good mineral continuity to provide high confidence – lower technical risk. Measured & Indicated tonnes of 35.39 Mt @ 137 g/t Ag for 155.86 Moz or ~70% of the resource estimate.
Mineralization starts at or near-surface and is amenable to potential open-pit mining extraction:  Approximately 70% of the resources are within 200 m of the conceptual open pit surface.
Favourable initial metallurgical test work indicates laboratory-based recoveries of up to 97% for the various oxide – transition and sulphide mineral domains (see news release dated August 23, 2019 for details).
Resource estimate excludes the recently discovered Snake Hole zone where drilling intercepted 72.4 m grading 279 g/t Ag (see news release dated January 13, 2020 for details) and the final 37 infill drill holes released on February 19, 2020, which returned high-grade intervals from the core of the deposit.
Technical studies to facilitate the Preliminary Economic Assessment commenced in Q1-2020 and are ongoing using independent subject matter experts.
New Pacific remains well funded to advance the Silver Sand deposit with US$32 million in the treasury.
The resource estimate is based on a geological model that included assay results received by New Pacific for the Silver Sand deposit to December 31, 2019. The estimate does not include any drill results from the recently discovered Snake Hole prospect, located 600 m to the east of the Silver Sand resource. A mineralization wireframe was constructed by New Pacific with LeapFrog© software. The domain was reviewed by the independent Qualified Person (QP) and minor modifications made prior to estimation. One of the modifications was to separate the one domain into two separate domains based on the orientation of modelled zones of continuous mineralization.
AMC completed an ordinary kriging (OK) estimate on these domains. Prior to estimation, drillhole data were composited to 1.4 m and samples were capped for all variables within each domain where required. Silver values for both domains were capped at 1,500 g/t Ag.
In addition to the OK estimate completed inside the domains, a background OK estimate was also completed outside of mineralization wireframes.
The parent block size was 5 mE x 5 mN x 5 mRL with sub-blocking employed. Sub-blocking resulted in minimum cell dimensions of 1.25 mE x 1.25 mN x 0.5 mRL.
The background mineralization (outside the mineralization domains) was estimated with a parent block dimension of 10 mE x 10 mN x 10 mRL.
As mineralization is hosted in one rock type, the QP assigned density measurements to the block model based on the mean density. Density values of 2.54 tonnes/m3 and 2.50 tonnes/m3 were assigned to blocks inside and outside of the mineralized domains respectively.
Mineral Resource classification was completed using an assessment of geological and mineralization continuity, data quality and data density. Estimation passes were used as an initial guide for classification. Wireframes were then generated manually to build coherent volumes for the different classes.
Table 2 shows the search parameters and number of samples used for each pass. The highest confidence level is Pass 1. The lowest confidence level is Pass 3.
