Rule began his session by laying out three reasons he believes the precious metals macro, especially gold, is attractive right now.
“The first is quantitative easing, which I refer to as counterfeiting,” he told listeners. “That is to say that the policy response to the crisis we’re in is really a function of debasing the currency, printing new currency units with nothing behind them.”
Next on his list were debt and the deficit in the US. “In the US, between on-balance-sheet liabilities and off-balance-sheet liabilities, we’re at US$120 trillion and in fact gaining, while at the same time the deficit that is the budget that we would use to liquidate those debts is increasing too,” Rule explained.
Finally, he pointed to the current zero interest rate environment. In Rule’s opinion, society is effectively being decapitalized at the same time as compensation is being lowered for those who save in fiat currencies, particularly the US dollar.
He argued that while gold and silver have many price drivers, the most important is faith (or lack thereof) in the ongoing purchasing power of the US dollar and US dollar-denominated instruments.
“I would suggest that faith is under attack from quantitative easing, which is to say (from) the debasement of the dollar, (as well as) from the debt … and also from the interest rate that is paid to savers to subsidize themselves from the two prior risks,” he said.
Moving on, Rule touched on gold’s recent price activity, saying that the yellow metal has performed as he would expect during a crisis situation.
“Many people have written or called Sprott asking why in the immediate aftermath of the crisis gold didn’t move. That’s because in a liquidity crisis, all assets that have a bid sell off,” he said.
“Gold fulfilled its role in that it had a bid, and when people needed to raise liquidity, gold was there to sell and there were buyers for it.”
He continued, saying that historically it’s not crises that make the gold price go up, but rather the policy response to crises — “particularly the three things that we’ve talked about: quantitative easing, that is the debasement of the currency, deteriorating balance sheets and, of course, artificially low interest rates.”
What does it all mean for gold stocks?
With those elements in place, the gold price has started to move, and to wrap up his talk, Rule shed light on what the current circumstances mean for gold stocks.
