RIL announces India’s biggest rights issue, says more FB-like deals soon
NEW DELHI: Shares of Reliance Industries fell 3 per cent in Monday’s trade after the oil-to-telecom major reported a 39 per cent drop in March quarter earnings.
But thanks to the company’s deleveraging drive that now includes a $750 million investment from Silver Lake and India’s biggest rights issue ever and the company’s focus on telecom and retail, analysts are largely positive on the stock, with targets in Rs 1,500-1,700 level.
Morgan Stanley said a faster pace of balance sheet debt reduction is in works. It noted that January-March was the second straight quarter when the company reported positive free cash flow. RIL's refining business outperformed with full utilisation rates and higher margins, it said and maintaining its ‘overweight’ stance on the stock.
CLSA, which has a price target of Rs 1,770 on the stock, said while the January-March period was weak for the company, but the asset monetisation plan should help the stock. This brokerage said Q4 saw large inventory losses, and a miss in petchem, Jio and retail businesses.
Centrum Broking valued the stock at Rs 1,595, Motilal Oswal at Rs 1,618, Edelweiss at Rs 1,645, Emkay Global at Rs 1,630 and Axis Capital Rs 1,780.
Shares of RIL fell 3.22 per cent to hit a low of Rs 1,419 on BSE in Monday’s trade in a weak market.
On Monday, Reliance Industries said private equity giant Silver Lake Parters has bought a 1 per cent stake in Jio Platforms for $750 million in a deal that valued the unit at $65 billion.
“The contribution from the standalone business to RIL's consolidated Ebitda has declined to 60 per cent in FY20 from 85 per cent in FY15. Higher debt in the standalone business as well as better valuations for Tech/Consumer businesses (together account for 78 per cent of valuations) leads us to believe these two segments are the new core,” Motilal Oswal Securities said in a note.
This brokerage now values the firm's core business at just Rs 358 per share, Reliance Retail at Rs 500 a share and RJio at Rs 760.
Reliance Industries last week approved the biggest-ever rights issue of Rs 53,100 crore at Rs 1,257 per share.
This is the first such issue for RIL in 30 years and will provide additional liquidity and provide confidence to new investors (such as Facebook ) about promoter commitment to the business, said Centrum Broking.
"The other key message the rights issue sends out is that the promoters are solidly invested in the business irrespective of the moves to gradually unlock value in each business segment via strategic sales/investments.
With the Facebook deal already done, the imminent closure of the Tower/Fiber InVit and the ongoing negotiations with Aramco to sell 20 per cent in the Oil to Chemicals (OTC), the infusion of fresh equity by the promoter group would inspire confidence in the respective business by existing and prospective strategic investors," Centrum said.
Rajiv Sharma of SBICap Securities said it is another positive news for the stock.
Silver Lakes is a big tech investor, Sharma said, adding that it is all about sentiment currently because of the possible weakness in the core business.
Sameer Kalra of Target Investing said he is neutral on the Silver Lake deal. He feels that even if Reliance Industries achieve net debt free status, the cashflow burn of petrochemical and refinery businesses have increased due to low demand, which has already impacted short term debt levels and could further impact FY21 level.
Reliance Jio, Ajay Bodke, CEO for PMS services at Prabhudas Lilladher said, is well on it's way to emerge as a pure digital play with characteristics akin to a FAANG stock, with the imminent carving out of O2C business.
Jio platform would continue to be the first port of call for investors keen to bet on India's strong population that is rapidly embracing digital services including e-commerce, he said.
"We believe that the recent deals with Facebook and Silver lake along with the proposed rights issue is in line with the company's strategy of deleveraging the balance sheet. Large investments by global tech companies would not only help deleverage the balance sheet but also give confidence to the markets about the future prospects of the company," said Jyoti Roy, DVP Equity Strategist, Angel Broking.
The shares of the company closed 2.16 per cent lower at Rs 1435.40 on BSE.
