The move is expected to intensify RIL’s bid to become net zero debt company by March 2021.
RIL announces India’s biggest rights issue, says more FB-like deals soon
NEW DELHI: Reliance Industries NSE 1.31 % on Monday said its telecom business Jio Platforms will receive Rs 5,655.75 crore investment from Silver Lake at an equity value of Rs 4.90 lakh crore and an enterprise value of Rs 5.15 lakh crore. This, the company said, represents a 12.5 per cent premium to the equity valuation of the Facebook investment announced on April 22.
The move is expected to intensify Reliance Industries’ bid to become net zero debt company by March 2021.
Silver Lake is a technology investor with approximately $40 billion in combined assets under management. Some of its major investments include AirBNB, Alibaba, Ant Financial, Alphabet’s Verily and Waymo units, Dell Technologies and Twitter besides other global technology leaders.
“In the wake of severe economic disruptions caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, globally and especially within India, this partnership with one of the most renowned tech investors globally, Silver Lake, has special significance,” Reliance Industries said in a note.
Morgan Stanley acted as financial adviser to Reliance Industries. AZB & Partners and Davis Polk & Wardwell acted as legal counsels.
The news came days after Reliance Industries last week approved the biggest-ever rights issue of Rs 53,100 crore at Rs 1,257 per share.
“With the FB deal already done, the imminent closure of the Tower/Fiber InVit and the ongoing negotiations with Aramco to sell 20 per cent in the Oil to Chemicals (OTC), the infusion of fresh equity by the promoter group would inspire confidence in the respective business by existing and prospective strategic investors," Centrum Broking said in a note.
Reliance Industries (RIL) on Thursday reported a 38.73 per cent year-on-year (YoY) fall in consolidated net profit at Rs 6,348 crore for the quarter ended March 31. Profit took a hit due to an exceptional loss of Rs 4,267 crore during the quarter. But analysts largely stayed positive on the stock.
Morgan Stanley says a faster pace of balance sheet debt reduction is in works. It noted that March was the second straight quarter when the company reports positive free cash flow. RIL's refining business outperformed with full utilisation rates and higher margins, it said while maintaining its overweight stance on the stock.
CLSA, which has a price target of Rs 1,770 on the stock, said while March was a weak quarter, asset monetisation plan should help the stock.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
