RIL gets its seventh cheque for Jio Platforms, again from Silver Lake Partners
This brings aggregate investment by Silver Lake and its co-investors to Rs 10,202.55 crore.
Silver Lake’s investment values Jio Platforms at an equity value of Rs 4.91 lakh crore and an enterprise value of Rs 5.16 lakh crore.
Mumbai: Mukesh Ambani-led Reliance Industries said late on Friday it has received a seventh investment in its Jio Platforms in the last six weeks, this time again from US private equity firm Silver Lake Partners .
Silver lake and its co-investors will invest an additional Rs 4,546.80 crore in Jio Platforms, in addition to the Rs 5,655.75 crore of investment by Silver Lake announced on May 4. This brings the aggregate investment by Silver Lake and its co-investors to Rs 10,202.55 crore.
Silver Lake’s investment values Jio Platforms at an equity value of Rs 4.91 lakh crore and an enterprise value of Rs 5.16 lakh crore, and will translate into a 2.08 per cent equity stake in Jio Platforms on a fully-diluted basis.
With this investment, Jio Platforms has raised Rs 92,202.15 crore from leading technology investors in less than six weeks.
Earlier in the day, Abu Dhabi-based sovereign investor Mubadala Investment Company said it will invest Rs 9,093.60 crore for a 1.85 per cent equity stake in Jio Platforms.
Mukesh Ambani-led RIL NSE 1.31 % is India’s most-valued company, with a market capitalization of more than Rs 10 lakh crore.
For the year to date, the stock is up 4.4 per cent, outperforming benchmark Sensex which has dropped 17 per cent in the same period. The stock hit a record high of Rs 1,617.70 earlier on Friday.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
