3. It’s cheaper than gold — Between gold bullion and silver bullion, the white metal is not only less expensive and therefore more accessible to buy, but it’s also more versatile to spend. That means if you are looking to buy silver in the form of a coin to use as currency, it will be easier to break than a gold coin because it is lower in value. Just as a US$100 bill can be a challenge to break at the store, divvying up an ounce of gold bullion can be a challenge. As a result, silver bullion is more practical and versatile than physical gold, making this type of silver investment more appealing.
4. Silver offers higher returns than gold — Because the white metal is worth around 1/79th the price of gold, buying silver bullion is affordable and stands to see a much bigger percentage gain if the silver price goes up. In fact, in the past, silver has outperformed the gold price in bull markets, according to GoldSilver . GoldSilver claims that, from 2008 to 2011, silver gained 448 percent, while the gold price gained just 166 percent in that same period. It’s possible for an investor to hedge their bets with silver bullion in their investment portfolio.
5. History is on silver’s side — Silver and gold have been used as legal tender for hundreds and thousands of years, and that lineage lends the metal a sense of stability. Many find comfort in knowing that this precious metal has been recognized for its value throughout a great deal of mankind’s history , and so there’s an expectation that it will endure while a fiat currency may fall to the wayside. When individuals invest in physical silver, whether that be through buying a silver bar, pure silver, a coin or other means, there is a reassurance that its value has and will continue to persist.
6. Silver offers anonymity — Whether you value your privacy or not, silver has the same benefit as cash in that it gives users a degree of anonymity with regards to spending. Not everyone wants all of their transactions to be part of the public record, and privacy is a necessary component of democracy, as per Glenn Greenwald’s TED Talk . That is another benefit for investors who want to buy silver bullion.
