Silver price taking a beating, down nearly 4% on pandemic fears
Neils Christensen Tuesday February 25, 2020 15:30
( Kitco News )  - The silver market can ’t catch a break. Momentum appeared to be shifting last week as prices  outperformed gold; however that sentiment has evaporated as prices saw  significant selling pressure Tuesday.
According to some market analysts, the disappointment in silver  actually started Monday as the price significantly underperformed gold prices,  which rallied to a new seven-year high. Since then it has gone from bad to  worse. March silver futures last traded at $18.14 an ounce, down 3.90% on the  day.
Some analyst have said that silver is struggling to find momentum  as investors fear that the spreading coronavirus will eventually become a  pandemic, which will drag global growth down this year.
Ryan McKay, commodity strategist at TD Securities, said although  silver ’s  selloff is surprising in magnitude, it does make sense as the precious metal is  getting hit on two fronts.
“Silver will continue to underperform gold because gold  is the better beta to monetary policy and it is a better safe-have hedge,” he  said. “There is significant risk-off sentiment in the  marketplace including for industrial metals and that is also weighing down  silver.”
Although silver is seen as a monetary metal, half of its physical  demand comes from the industrial sector. One industry that investors and  analysts are watching closely is solar. Silver is a critical metal used in  photovoltaic.
Analysts at Heraeus, said that the coronavirus in China  significantly impacted solar panel production.
“China is the largest photovoltaic (PV) silver market in  the world, accounting for over a third of annual installations and the majority  of manufacturing globally,” the analysts said in a report Tuesday. “Many  solar module manufacturing facilities across China were closed for at least two  weeks as the authorities attempted to deal with the coronavirus outbreak. While  many factories have since reopened, the China Photovoltaic Industry Association  (CPIA) expects output to be curtailed until mid-year at the earliest, with  recovery from Q3.”
McKay said that just as markets were coming to grip with weak  demand in China, investors were hit with news that the virus is spreading  through South Korea, another important industrial hub for the silver market.
Looking ahead, Heraeus said that it expects silver will continue  to be trapped in gold ’s  shadow.
“It marginally outperformed gold last week, but unlike  gold, silver did not make a new price high for the year. The occasional surge  of outperformance does not change the expectation that, overall, silver will  lag gold this year,” the analysts said.
Traders are watching to see if silver can hold initial  support at $18.00. McKay said that if gold prices are unable to hold support at  $1,650 then silver prices will eventually fall to long-term support at $17.50  an ounce.
