For traders News and features Analysis Silver price news in spring 2020: will the metal finally shine in April?
Silver has not been immune to the volatility of most asset classes in recent weeks, rebounding by 20 per cent after plunging to an 11-year low in March during the broader market selloff. Even after the rise off the lows the silver price was down by 15 per cent at the end of last month, with investors exiting positions in precious metals as well as other commodities and equities.
The rebound has continued at the start of the new quarter, as the economic fallout of the Covid-19 pandemic continues to disrupt the global financial markets and drive interest in bargain hunting after the March decline.
With no sign of a let-up in the volatility in the markets in the weeks to come and the possibility that recent gains have been forming a dead-cat bounce, investors are looking for the silver price latest news and asking how best to position their silver trades amid the frequent price fluctuations.
This article recaps the recent performance of the commodity market and points to the latest news on silver price and silver price trends to monitor. In addition, you will find a video where our chief market strategist – David Jones – provides the latest technical analysis and offers some up-to-date trading tips.
Silver price news in spring 2020: what's happening to silver prices today?
The spot silver price started last month at around $16.50 per ounce and dropped to $11.70 per ounce in the selloff on March 16, reaching its lowest level since 2009. However, the recent bounce in the silver price last week took investors by surprise, with the commodity inching higher to end the month and the quarter at $13.50 per ounce.
The silver price moved up by another 4 per cent to $14.48 per ounce on April 2 in response to dismal economic news, breaking out of the previous week’s tight trading range after the US Department of Labour said that unemployment skyrocketed in the latest week. US jobless claims doubled to 6.6 million in the week ending March 28, from 3.3 million in the previous week, with businesses ordered to close across the country in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
But with so much macroeconomic uncertainty, why is silver price dropping from the $19.50 per ounce high reached in late 2019?
The silver market is stuck between the push and pull of its safe-haven investment status as a precious metal and its use as an industrial metal, at a time when risk aversion is heightened and industrial production is being heavily curtailed for an undetermined period of time. More than half of the annual demand for silver comes from its physical applications.
Aside from jewellery, silver is used in a range of industrial products, including electronic semiconductors, batteries, solar panels, water purification and LED lighting.
The rollout of 5G telecom networks, led by China, is expected to drive silver demand this year and into 2021, with the metal being used in semi-conductors for network equipment, consumer electronics and automotive electronics. And beyond just the hardware, 5G enables a new range of applications in which silver will play a role, notes the Silver Institute in its latest report Silver’s Role in a Future 5G Connected World.
But the overarching theme driving the market for now is that the spread of Covid-19 has massively increased the likelihood of a global recession in 2020. More countries are implementing restrictions on the movement of people and preventing businesses from operating in an attempt to halt the spread of the deadly virus. Monthly manufacturing purchasing managers’ index (PMI) reports, a key gauge of industrial activity, show disruptions to factory operations and supply chains worldwide.
The IHS Markit US manufacturing PMI for March showed the sharpest downturns in production and new orders since the financial crisis in 2009 because of weak demand from domestic and overseas customers. The index fell to 48.5 in March from 50.7 in February, with a number below 50 representing a contraction in activity.
The impact on manufacturing has prevented silver prices from rallying in the same way that the gold market has, as industrial demand for the white metal is expected to fall sharply.
According to the latest silver news, the metal has been a market in turmoil so far this year. The volume of silver ounces cleared through the London Bullion Market Association (LBMA) in February jumped by 52 per cent year on year to 300 million, according to monthly data. The gold/silver price ratio averaged 89.1 in February, the highest ratio since July 2019, the LBMA said. The ratio stood at 111.4 on April 2, after peaking at a record high of 126 on March 16. That’s well above the long-term resistance level of 100 that would typically see prices for the two metals move closer together.
There is potential upside for the silver price in the short term on the supply side, as Covid-19 lockdowns are set to result in the closure in April of silver mines in Mexico, which accounts for around a quarter of the world’s production of the metal. But because of the fall in industrial demand there is a question mark about the extent of the impact the closures could have on the supply/demand balance.
Silver price analysis in April 2020: the technical perspective
Do you want to learn what has been recently happening to silver from a technical point of view and find out how to profit off the increased volatility? Wonder where is the price of this precious metal heading next?
Watch David Jones, chief market strategist at Capital.com, explain how the supply and demand fundamentals play into the technical picture, and give you a suggested trade to capitalise on the current market volatility:
Always stay on top of the latest silver price analysis by subscribing to Capital.com’s YouTube channel.
Analyst outlook: what is the forecast for silver prices?
There is likely to be continued downward pressure on the silver market from crude oil prices , which hit an 18-year low on March 30. “Lower oil prices remain the Achilles heel for any sustainable rebound in industrial metals or break-up in precious/gold, with further demand losses in April expected,” said Nicky Shiels, metals commodity strategist at Scotiabank.
“The longer-term underappreciated risk is that bear market rallies (in oil and equities) tend to over-extend more than the market expects, especially given the massive stimulus efforts and Q2 data that is likely to be cartoonish (and potentially overlooked/written off?),” Shiels said.
Analysts see potential for the silver price to drop back down to the $12 per ounce support level and then bounce up towards $17 per ounce.
BMO Capital Markets expects the silver price to average $15.50 per ounce during the second quarter and then rise to $18.50 in the second half of the year, for an average price of $17.18 per ounce for 2020. “We see silver as not only hanging on gold’s coattails, but also potentially outperforming should governments move towards fiscal spending on 5G and solar technology,” BMO said.
Analysts at Refintiv also see potential upside for the market later in 2020. "We expect prices to recover from current lows, driven by bargain hunting, before moving higher later in the year once the market hysteria calms down and safe haven demand kicks in," said Cameron Alexander head of precious metals research at Refinitiv.
But if the silver price fails to find support at $12 per ounce, the next stop could be down at $10 per ounce.
A Scotiabank model mapping metals prices to their long-term relationship with oil backs up the possibility of a silver price at $10 per ounce, Shiels said, putting it sharply lower than the $14.48 level reached on April 2.
