In order to better understand where Neumeyer’s opinion comes from, it’s important to take a look at the factors that affect the metal’s movements, where prices have been in the past and where other industry insiders believe silver could be headed. First, let’s dive a little deeper into Neumeyer’s prediction that the white metal can break the seemingly distant US$130 level.
There’s a significant length for the silver price to go before it reaches the success Neumeyer has boldly predicted. In fact, in order for the precious metal to jump to US$130, its price would have to increase by close to eight times its current value.
Neumeyer sees US$130 silver in the cards in part because he believes the current market compares to the year 2000, when investors were sailing high on the dot-com bubble and the mining sector was down. The First Majestic Silver CEO thinks it’s only a matter of time before the market corrects, like it did in 2001 and 2002, and mining sees a big rebound in pricing. It was during this time that Neumeyer himself invested heavily in mining stocks and came out on top.
“I’ve been calling for triple digit silver for a few years now and I’m more enthused now,” said Neumeyer at an event in January of this year. “But I’m cautiously enthused because, you know, I thought it would have happened sooner than it currently is happening.”
The silver CEO’s enthusiasm is based on the fact that governments in the western world continue to print money and take on massive debt loads. “I think the central banks around the world have put themselves into a corner. I think interest rates are either going to stay stable or go lower, and the governments are just going to keep printing money and deficit spending.” This scenario is “very supportive for gold , and of course that will drag silver along,” he said.
Neumeyer emphasized that he trusts in silver’s supply and demand fundamentals to move the markets. “The headlines stuff that we read every day, whether it’s Trump or China … those will move markets for sure, but it doesn’t move supply and demand.” He pointed out that today’s booming solar panel and electric car markets are two huge drivers of silver consumption, “so the supply/demand fundamentals for the metal today are even more dramatic” than in years past.
More controversially, Neumeyer believes the white metal will become uncoupled from gold , and should be seen as a strategic metal due to its necessity in many everyday appliances, from computers to electronics to solar panels . He has also stated that silver production has gone down in recent years, meaning that contrary to popular belief, the metal is actually a rare commodity.
