Silver prices increase 23% this year, likely to cross Rs 50,000 in Q1 2020
Demand for silver has shown a positive trend in both domestic and overseas markets.
Rural India accounted for a chunk of the silver demand this festive season.
Kolkata: Silver price is likely to cross the Rs 50,000 per kg mark in the first quarter of 2020, after having increased 23 per cent since the beginning of this year to Rs 47,000 per kg, said analysts and traders .
Demand for silver has shown a positive trend in both domestic and overseas markets, unlike the flat or declining trend in the case of gold. Exports of silver jewellery shot up 76.12 per cent year-on-year to Rs 3,936.31 crore during April-September.
“We are very bullish on silver. It should touch $21 per troy ounce within six months to one year. From February-March next year silver will start moving further. Silver has underperformed and there is room for silver to move ahead,” said Chirag Sheth, senior research consultant at Metals Focus, a data provider to the World Gold Council.
“Gold is in a consolidation phase and it is likely to touch $1,650 per troy ounce. However, gold will not go up in a straight trajectory as it had in 2008. There will be ups and downs, giving a chance to buyers to participate,” he said.
Sheth said the expected price rise would not depend on demand. “When managed funds or professional investors enter the market, money will take a safe haven route,” he said.
Mukesh Kothari, director, RiddiSiddhi Bullion said that silver price will touch Rs 50,000-52,000 per kg by the first quarter of 2020, from around Rs 37,000 per kg at the beginning of 2019.
Silver witnessed good demand in the festive season this year. Saurabh Gadgil, managing director, PNG Jewellers said that silver sales were up 20 per cent year-on-year. “Silver articles, coins and jewellery have shown good growth. A lot of youngsters are now favouring silvery jewellery also,” he said.
Rural India accounted for a chunk of the silver demand this festive season. Nitin Khandelwal, a leading jeweller form Maharashtra’s Akola said that affordability of silver attracted rural people this festive season.
“High gold prices are keeping them away. Once harvesting is over, silver purchase will see a further upward trend among the agrarian community,” he said.
