Silver is on a tear.
Silver futures logged their largest weekly climb since 2013 Friday, hitting a nearly 22-month high as the U.S. dollar softened and investors continued to search for safety.
Precious metals have benefited from worries sparked by the U.K.’s decision to exit the European Union, dubbed Brexit. But precious metals have also seen somewhat of a pull back as appetite for risk lured buyers back into stocks over the past few sessions.
September silver US:SIU6 jumped 96.5 cents, or 5.2%, to settle at $19.588 an ounce. Prices haven’t settled at a level this high since mid-August 2014. Futures prices saw a 10.1% weekly gain—the largest since August 2013, according to FactSet.
Meanwhile, August gold US:GCQ6 gained $18.40, or 1.4%, to settle at $1,339 an ounce, with futures marking the highest close since July 10, 2014. Trading was choppy this week, but prices saw a 1.3% weekly gain, according to FactSet data, after posting a nearly 7% climb for the second quarter.
Precious metals gains have held up relatively well as concerns about anemic global growth persist.
“We have got the Brexit result, but that is a result without a resolution,” said George Milling-Stanley, head of gold investment strategy at State Street Global Advisors. Many uncertainties remain and “these will likely continue to roil financial markets, which should benefit gold.”
He expects to see a brief “pause for breath” in gold as the market digests the Brexit news, then a steady move higher in the second half of the year that may take gold to $1,350 and possibly higher. “It is not difficult to see $1,400 or even $1,450 by year-end,” said Milling-Stanley.
Fawad Razaqzada, market analyst at Forex.com and City Index, pointed out that silver has  significantly outperformed gold’s Brexit-related gains. Silver, unlike gold “has also many industrial uses and so when base metals like copper rally, silver benefits from this source, too,” he said.
That means silver is typically less sensitive to the “risk-on, risk-off” trade that can swing gold in two directions when demand for equities and other commodities ebb and flow.
Read: Commodities are crushing it in 2016: Here’s why
“Apart from a potential rally for the U.S. dollar, one other risk facing precious metals is profit-taking, Razaqzada said. Conversely, a weaker jobs report, due for release July 8, will “once and for all put to bed talks of a rate increase in 2016,” and that would be “good news for precious metals.”
Higher rates tend to make nonyielding precious metals less attractive to investors who will go for higher yields elsewhere in a rising-rate environment.
“ ‘The Fed wanted to raise the interest rate twice this year, but it surely is the time to say bye-bye to that concept.’ ”
Global central banks are “on the back foot with Brexit results and they have no other option but to ease the monetary policy,” said Naeem Aslam, chief market analyst at ThinkForex. “The Fed wanted to raise the interest rate twice this year, but it surely is the time to say bye-bye to that concept.”
Gold prices pared some of its earlier gains after data showed that U.S. manufacturers grew in June at the fastest pace in 15 months. Upbeat economic data can raise the likelihood of a rate increase.
