Written by Makayla Grijalva on June 2, 2020
Stephen Lindsey and Alexandra Tager of the Silver City Recycles group check out the newly arrived, town-purchased glass pulverizer in February of this year. Silver City Recycles is studying a partnership with a for-profit business to provide a new subscription-based curbside recycling program.
Silver City Recycles, a recently established nonprofit, released a survey last week to assess the willingness of town residents to sign up — and pay — for a possible return of curbside recycling service.
The survey is “just to judge the needs and desire in the community for a subscription-based pickup service,” said Chris Lemme, the board president of Silver City Recycles. “At this time, we are not doing anything more than just gathering information.”
According to the survey, possible subscription fees range from $10 to $50 monthly, with items being considered for the service to include recyclable glass, plastic, aluminum, paper, cardboard and compostables.
While Silver City Recycles officially issued the survey, the actual pickup services would be provided by a for-profit company owned by former Custom Steelworks proprietor Stuart Egnal. His new company, Trash for Treasure, would operate under the umbrella of Silver City Recycles.
“We don’t have the resources of a municipality to just spend thousands of dollars to buy trucks, and set up machinery to do stuff,” Egnal said, by way of explaining their decision to make the company for-profit. “Everything we do has to be paid for as we’re doing it.”
Egnal also feels that residents will take more care while recycling, and are less likely to recycle incorrect and contaminated items, under a subscription-based model.
“We felt like it was important that people will actually have buy-in,” Egnal said. “One of the classic problems with recycling, especially in this country, [is that] people just don’t take it very seriously. They just kind of view it as another trash can.”
Although the new company would be organized for-profit, Egnal and Lemme both foresee it not turning a profit until a market can be found for the recyclable materials it will collect.
“I’d be thrilled if we broke even,” Egnal said. “More likely than not, we’re going to lose money, but we are doing it because we feel it needs to be done — and hopefully it won’t lose that much money.”
Egnal added that the point of the company and the program is not to make money, but to give residents who want to recycle an easy avenue.
“It’s possible at some point in the future, if we can find a market for materials and we could start selling those materials, there might be some small margins to be made there,” Lemme said.
He added that many of the details for the potential new service had not yet been thoroughly discussed, and no official plans have been solidified.
In February, Silver City Recycles announced a partnership with the town of Silver City to introduce a glass recycling program, after Silver City’s solid waste collection terminated its curbside recycling program last July. According to Lemme, that program is in the “demonstration stage.”
He said the organization practices running glass through the pulverizing machine, but ran into the issue of actually being able to collect the glass from Silver City residents. To find a solution, Lemme said, they released the survey to assess the community’s recycling needs.
“One of the reasons we are not really moving forward with the collection yet is we don’t really have an outlet for the other materials. We don’t know what to do with them,” Lemme said, adding that a more solid plan will be determined once the volume of materials recycled and types of materials recycled can be roughly determined — questions about both of which are included in the survey.
Aluminum and steel cans can still be recycled through the town of Silver City — but only at the landfill — along with corrugated cardboard, which can be dropped off at designated in-town collection points. Lemme said that these two materials are the only recyclables with a commodities market currently. The Daily Press also offers newsprint recycling drop-off at its office.
Lemme said that Silver City Recycles is exploring options to process recyclables. One option mentioned would involve acting as a conduit to the Southwest Solid Waste Authority, utilizing its already established processes. However, potential agreements along those lines have not yet been discussed.
He said that if the community response to the survey is quick and positive, he projects a subscription-based curbside recycling service could be a reality in Silver City by the end of summer.
