Give me my free report!
“That may look pretty modest, but before that we were expecting quite an increase next year, and so the downturn is much greater than just a minus 3 percent compared to 2019.”
Mine production is expected to fall 5 percent this year to 797 million ounces, while overall global supply is expected to sink by 4 percent to 978 million ounces. That would be its lowest level since 2009.
Falls in output will be further compounded by significant growth in coin and bar demand, which is pegged to climb 16 percent this year. Net physical investment is also projected to see a third straight year of growth, rising 16 percent to 215 million ounces.
The white metal’s close ties to its sister metal’s safe haven nature will be beneficial in the long term, even as industrial demand weighs on gains; however, Newman also made a case for silver’s industrial growth.
“Maybe countries will be looking at how do they kickstart their economies, and maybe that’ll be growth in infrastructure spending,” said Newman. “I think that could benefit silver.”
In the long term, Metals Focus sees the silver price rising from its current US$15 per ounce level.
“We have the silver price hitting a high before the end of (the year) of US$19, but even at the same time, we still see the (gold/silver) ratio around the 90s at year end. But bear in mind of course, the market is very small, it doesn’t take much money coming in to have those more pronounced moves in silver.”
Don’t forget to follow us @INN_Resource for real-time updates!
Securities Disclosure: I, Georgia Williams, hold no direct investment interest in any company mentioned in this article.
Editorial Disclosure: The Investing News Network does not guarantee the accuracy or thoroughness of the information reported in the interviews it conducts. The opinions expressed in these interviews do not reflect the opinions of the Investing News Network and do not constitute investment advice. All readers are encouraged to perform their own due diligence.
