Silver Peak today announced support for network intelligence provider Kentik in a bid to address visibility challenges facing SD-WAN customers.
While SD-WAN can help enterprises meet network connectivity, performance, and security demands when connecting remote offices and workers, it doesn’t always adequately address network visibility, claims Kentik.
“As more enterprises adopt SD-WAN to support their global workforces, new network visibility gaps are emerging,” said Nick Stinemates, VP of business development at Kentik. “Our new integration offers advanced SD-WAN visibility and highlights another way that Kentik is helping organizations across the world to gain a comprehensive view of their infrastructure for greater network and business performance.”
Through the integration, Silver Peak customers can now enhance their network visibility using the service. These features can be used to address a number of challenges facing IT teams. This includes audits to application traffic policies and link utilization, capacity planning, policy compliance checks, and network cost optimization.
Kentik’s network intelligence platform works by gobbling up data streams from the internet, edge, cloud , data center, and hybrid infrastructures and spits out real-time data visualizations and insights gleaned from machine learning algorithms. These insights help users to detect anomalies faster, reduce the mean time to repair, and take steps to mitigate future disruptions.
Massachusetts-based workforce management company Kronos, which had already been using Silver Peak and Kentik independently, is among the first to take advantage of the integration.
“The power of combining the Silver Peak SD-WAN edge platform with complete network intelligence from Kentik closes the visibility gap between SD-WAN and the rest of our network infrastructure and will only strengthen our ability to identify potential issues, more quickly resolve incidents, and ultimately maintain the highest level of performance for our business’ needs,” said Doug Tamasanis, chief IT architect and senior director of networks and security at Kronos, in a statement.
The Kentik integration is a boost for Silver Peak, which according to the most recent Dell’Oro Group report sits in the No. 3 position among SD-WAN providers based on revenues, and comfortably behind market heavyweights Cisco and VMware.
