Here are 10 key things you need to know to understand how the white metal moves and what really determines its price behavior.
Historically, silver’s biggest rise (+15% in the 1970s) took place during the biggest bull market in history.
While metal silver is usually clubbed with other precious metals as it tends to maintain its worth better than conventional currencies, just like gold. Many investors hold silver, just like gold, to hedge against an economic crisis. But the white metal also has immense industrial use (about 56 per cent of total supply) and thus its price behaviour is often linked with the state of an economy. In fact, while other precious metals tend to do well during a stock market crash or economic uncertainty because of their safe haven quality, silver has often not fared so well during stock market crashes.
Historically, silver’s biggest rise (+15% in the 1970s) took place during the biggest bull market in history. The white metal ended flat by the end of the financial crisis in early 2009, which was its second-biggest bull market. Some analysts say silver tend to do well in a stock market crash if it is already in a bull market. Otherwise, it could struggle.
Silver rose 0.2 per cent to $14.29 per ounce. Silver futures were up 0.73 per cent or Rs 297 to Rs 40,821 per kg.
Silver works both ways: it acts as a base metal as well as a precious metal. In recent past, it has acted more like precious metal during the uncertainty related to the global trade war, Brexit and even the coronavirus outbreak. Of late, silver has been steadily moving higher in line with other base metals like copper, and traded in a broad range. Sudden panic in the market and a strong hit on businesses, especially in China, forced silver to act as a safe haven precious metal and follow gold’s trail.
What determines silver price in India?
Demand-supply situation plays a crucial role in determining the price of any commodity. Silver demand is underpinned by the demand from jewellery and silverware, industrial applications, and the overall industrial growth. Government’s trade policies that affect supply by regulating the material flow and geopolitical events and behaviour of the currency can also influence silver price in India.
How to invest in silver?
There are several ways to invest in silver. You can buy silver in the physical form such as silver coins, silver bars etc from banks and jewellers. One can also invest in silver futures or e-silver through commodity market or exchanges like MCX NSE 0.10 % , National Spot Exchange and NCDEX.
Silver prices have been relatively flat I last few years, as yellow metal gold has come to see more attention and demand in an uncertain environment. Yet, many experts say silver will soon outperform gold. Investors usually use the gold-to-silver ratio to assess if either of the precious metals is on the higher or lower side. The gold-to-silver ratio is the amount of silver it takes to purchase one ounce of gold. When this ratio is high, many investors interpret it to mean that silver is favored, because it shows relative to the ratio, silver is somewhat inexpensive. Conversely, a low ratio tends to favor gold and maybe a signal it’s a good time to buy the yellow metal. Many large-scale, experienced investors may trade their silver for gold as the ratio drops. It is considered the best 'buy' indicators for silver, whenever this ratio climbs above 80.
As the world is full of uncertainties, speculative positioning by hedge funds will have its own role to play for silver prices to move higher, according to market experts. Prathamesh Mallya, Chief Analyst Non-Agri Commodities and Currencies, Angel Broking said, “The best way to say this is, ‘If a winter is coming, silver prices will head north.’
Silver demand-supply scenario in India?
India is one of the world’s largest silver markets and is heavily dependent on imported metal to satisfy these requirements. Jewellery and silverware fabrication account for more than 50 per cent of total domestic silver demand. India consumed 160.6 million ounces (4,996 tonnes) in 2016, which accounted for a noteworthy 16 per cent of global silver demand. Silver imports reached nearly 225 million ounces in 2018, which was over 35 per cent higher compared to 2017.
Most of domestic silver is produced as a by-product of zinc mining from Hindustan Zinc’s operations in Rajasthan. The company has five operating mines: Rampura Agucha (the world’s largest zinc producer), Rajpura Dariba, Zawar, Kayad and Sindesar Kurd, which is the company’s most silver-rich (and lead-rich) mine and is responsible for the majority of Hindustan Zinc’s silver outturn.
Demand for the metal is based on factors including industrial, photography, jewellery and silverware. Together, these categories represent around 80 per cent of the annual silver consumption. Silver is used in electrical contacts, conductors, mirrors, as a catalyst in chemical reactions. It is also used to make dental alloys and coins. Its value as a precious metal is considered second only to gold. The yellow metal outpaced silver with a rally of 30 per cent since February 2019.
Silver is a grey-white metal which is soft and malleable. Its unique properties include its strength, malleability, ductility, electrical and thermal conductivity, sensitivity, high reflectance of light, and reactivity. The metal is also unique due to the fact that it can be classified as both a precious metal and an industrial metal.
Silver mining kicked off some 5,000 years ago, with the first mine being dug in Anatolia (modern-day Turkey). The principal sources of silver are the ores of silver, silver-nickel, lead, and lead-zinc obtained from Bolivia, Peru, China, Mexico, Australia, Chile, Serbia and Poland. Peru, Bolivia, and Mexico have been mining silver since 1546, and are still major world producers. Just over half of the mined silver comes from Mexico, Peru, China, and Australia. Primary mines produce about one-third of the world silver, while around two-thirds come as a by-product of gold, copper, lead, and zinc mining. India is the world’s 14th largest producer of silver.
The world’s top three silver-producing mines are Cannington (Australia), Fresnillo (Mexico), and San Cristobal (Bolivia). In Central Asia, Tajikistan is known to have some of the largest silver deposits in the world.
Silver bullion is usually traded in dollars and cents per ounce, with market activity taking place worldwide at all hours, resulting in a live silver price. Key commodities markets like New York, London and Hong Kong are just a few locations where investors trade the metal. London is the center of physical silver trade, while the COMEX division of the New York Mercantile Exchange, or NYMEX, is where most paper trading is done.
