According to Great Panther, mining and processing continue uninterrupted at its Tucano mine in Brazil.
Hecla Mining (NYSE: HL ) — Hecla Mining said on March 19 that it was taking a variety of actions in the wake of COVID-19, including putting health and safety procedures in place, restricting mine site access and stockpiling mining supplies. It also informed investors that it was securing contracts that guarantee a silver price of US$16 per ounce in Q2, and gold prices of US$1,450 per ounce and US$1,650 in the second and third quarters of this year, respectively.
Additionally, on March 24, the company suspended work at its Casa Berardi gold mine in order to comply with the Quebec government’s order for miners to reduce operations to a minimum. Originally set to remain offline until April 13, that date has since been extended until May 4.
In an April 7 announcement, Hecla said it was also winding down operations at its San Sebastian mine in Mexico; it will be staffed with a minimum number of workers until April 30, per government rules.
Despite the shutdowns at Casa Berardi and San Sebastian, the company’s three US mines remain operational as they have been deemed essential. Even so, Hecla has withdrawn its 2020 guidance in order to assess the impact of COVID-19.
Pan American Silver (TSX: PAAS ,NASDAQ:PAAS) — Activity at Pan American Silver’s four mines in Peru was suspended after the government declared a state of emergency on March 16. As mentioned, the state of emergency was originally set to last for 15 days, but has now been extended until April 12.
On March 23, Pan American also shut down its operations Argentina and Bolivia, where mandatory national quarantines have been enacted. The lockdowns were also scheduled to last until March 31, but have now been extended until April 13 in Argentina and April 15 in Bolivia.
In response to the Mexican government’s mandate, Pan American said on April 2 that it would bring its La Colorada and Dolores operations in the country into compliance . It said it is not yet able to determine what the impact on its 2002 guidance will be.
Companies are listed in alphabetical order.
Metalla Royalty & Streaming (TSXV: MTA ,NYSEAMERICAN:MTA) — The company has royalties on Pan American’s COSE and Joaquin mines in Argentina; as mentioned, the country is under a mandatory quarantine, and mining at those assets has been halted. Metalla Royalty & Streaming is not yet sure what the shutdowns will mean for its cash flow and dividend schedule, but is monitoring the situation.
Companies are listed in alphabetical order.
Discovery Metals (TSXV: DSV ,OTCQX:DSVMF) — Discovery Metals said on March 19 that it would decelerate exploration activity at its flagship Mexico-based Cordero project. On March 31, in response to the Mexican government’s orders, it suspended all exploration at its operations in the country.
