Phillip Streible Thursday June 25, 2020 09:57
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Over the past 20 years, I have worked with 100’s  of brokers, 1000’s of individuals clients, and seen every type of trader come  and go. The most successful traders have had an underlying thesis built behind  some market that if timed right has led to riches, however, the recurring theme  amongst those that failed had thought their opinions were bigger than the  market. Those that succeeded had the patience to slowly build their position  using technical analysis and when the market finally shared the same opinion as  theirs it was something magical.
My opinion on silver remains the same that once  global industrial production recovers from the lockdowns and the markets  realize the irreversible monetary damage the Fed has done by aggressively  devaluing the U.S. Dollar that will lead to a rush into gold which will  ultimately trigger a massive wave in silver. Remember that silver tends to  underperform gold when global industrial production is weak given silver demand  depends 80% on commercial users and only 20% investment demand, while the ratio  is inverse for gold with 20% commercial uses and 80% investment demand.
Before we break down the silver market, we have  created a free “Gold Trends Macro Book” which you should print out. This will  provide you with all the quantitative analysis on the gold market, therefore,  increasing your knowledge of key trends. You can request yours here: Free Gold Trends Macro Book
Remember most silver is produced as a byproduct  of copper, gold, lead, and zinc refining, while primary silver production in  2019 was 240.0 million oz and accounted for just 29% of global silver output.  The largest component of global physical silver demand was industrial  fabrication at 510.9 million oz (52%) of total physical demand in 2019. The  next largest component was jewelry at 201.3 million oz (20%), closely behind  was physical investment demand at 186.1 million oz (19%), then silverware at  59.8 million oz (6%) and photography at 33.7 million oz (3%).
Looking at the chart above there are two key  technical developments I am watching. The first is a potential “bearish” head  and shoulders pattern. Before you hear the word “bearish” and throw me under  the bus, this is merely a short term (7-14 days) “technical set up” to help us  identify what the next move might look like while the underlying “Golden Cross”  of the 50 DMA approaching the 200 DMA indicates that a longer-term (multiple  months/multiple-year) bull market may be developing.
We have been extensively covering the technical  backdrop  of the precious metals markets in the Blue Line Futures Morning  Express Research Reports so be sure to stay up to date on the developments by  registering for a Free two-week trial by clicking on the link here: The Blue Line Express Two-Week Free Trial Sign up
