Like with most investments, there are both pros and cons to silver investing. Below is a list of factors you may want to consider before adding the white metal to your portfolio.
Silver can offer protection — Investors often turn to precious metals during times of turmoil. When political and economic uncertainty are rife, legal tender generally takes a backseat to assets like gold and silver.
Silver bullion is tangible money — Silver bullion is a tangible asset that is finite. That means that, although it is vulnerable to market fluctuations like other commodities, physical silver isn’t likely to completely crash because of its inherent and real value.
It’s cheaper than gold — Between gold and silver, the white metal is not only the less expensive of the two products, and therefore more accessible to buy, but it’s also more versatile to spend. That means, if you are interested in buying silver coins to use as currency, they’re easier to break than gold because they are lower in value.
Silver offers higher returns than gold — Because silver bullion is worth around 1/79th the price of gold bullion, it is affordable and stands to see a much bigger percentage gain when silver prices go up.
History is on silver’s side — Silver and gold have been used as legal tender for hundreds and hundreds of years, and that lineage lends the metal a sense of stability. When individuals invest in physical silver, whether that be through silver bars, fine silver, coins or other means, there is a reassurance that its value has and will continue to persist.
Lack of liquidity — There is a chance that if you hold physical silver, it may not be immediately liquidatable . In order to make common purchases such as groceries, you are not able to use bars of silver, so you will need to convert that to currency first, and the ability to sell in a hurry can be an issue. Due to this factor, you may want to consider silver stocks.
Danger of theft — Unlike most other investments, such as stocks, holding silver bullion can leave investors vulnerable to theft. Securing your assets from looting with methods such as a safety deposit box in a bank or a safe box in your home can incur other costs.
Weak return on investment — Although silver may be a good safe haven asset, it may not perform as well as other investments — for example, real estate, or even other metals.
