The new Mercedes-AMG GLE 53 4MATIC Coupe, was officially unveiled by Jacqueline Stewart-Lechler, Director of Stewarts Automotive Group and Amanda Lechler, Mercedes Benz Brand Manager, during a digital launch at the Silver Star Motors Showroom recently.
Silver Stars Motors officially unveiled the brand-new Mercedes-AMG GLE 53 4MATIC Coupé during a full digital launch at its South Camp Road Showroom recently.
Fulfilling its mantra of delivering, ‘the best or nothing,’ the new Mercedes-AMG GLE 53 4MATIC Coupé is dubbed one of the most anticipated vehicles of the year to grace the Jamaican roads.
The Mercedes-AMG GLE 53 4MATIC Coupé uniquely combines sporty design with exhilarating performance and strong off-road capabilities. It’s impressive dynamics are enhanced by the 429 hp 3.0- litre six-cylinder in-line engine with 48-volt technology, fully variable AMG Performance 4MATIC+ all-wheel drive, AMG SPEEDSHIFT TCT 9-speed automatic transmission and a 2.4 in shorter wheelbase than its SUV sibling.
Driving dynamics are further enhanced by the AMG drive programs and the AMG ride control suspension based on AIRMATIC. The AMG-specific grille visually reinforces its membership in the AMG family. In addition, the new GLE 53 Coupé offers all the advantages of a Mercedes SUV: ample space for passengers and luggage, extensive safety features and superior traction on a variety of surfaces and road conditions.
The newly designed front-end boasts the AMG-specific radiator grille with vertical bars in high-gloss chrome and signature Mercedes-Benz star, which is testament to its outstanding sportiness - a theme which continues all the way to the rear of the vehicle.
Here, muscular shoulders and an expressive contour design for the front and taillights with optional MULTIBEAM LED headlamps which include 84 individually controllable high-performance LEDs, make everything appear even wider and more powerful.
Redesigned features include AMG rear apron with sporty diffuser and AMG exhaust system with two round high-gloss chrome-plated twin tailpipe trim elements.
New features that welcome you in the interior include the widescreen cockpit with two large displays as standard: an all-digital instrument display with four selectable display styles ("Modern Classic", "Sport", "Subtle" and AMG-specific "Supersport") and media display operated via touch control. The standard Mercedes-AMG GLE 53 Coupé interior is recognizable at first glance thanks to characteristic red colour highlights: red contrasting topstitching on the upholstery elements and red seat belts. A feel-good highlight is the generous rear compartment in which passengers now have even more space and can enjoy a high level of seating comfort.
"The new GLE Coupé adds even more style and elegance to the Mercedes SUV family, together with hallmark AMG features,” said Amanda Lechler, Brand manager for Mercedes-Benz Jamaica. “It guarantees a thrilling driving experience with sophisticated suspension technology and powerful, efficient six-cylinder in-line engine with 48-volt technology,” Lechler continued.
Get the latest local and international news straight to your mobile phone for free:
