Businesses that have benefited as Americans stockpiled food and cleaning supplies, like Campbell Soup and Clorox, were among a small number of decliners.
Oil prices also reflected optimism about the economy, with West Texas Intermediate , the U.S. benchmark, rising above $30 a barrel for the first time since March. Shares of energy companies like Chevron and Exxon were also sharply higher.
The central bank will use its “full range of tools,” the Federal Reserve chair will tell Congress.
Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, will tell members of Congress that the central bank stands ready to do what it can to help the American economy make it through the sharp downturn underway.
“The scope and speed of this downturn are without modern precedent and are significantly worse than any recession since World War II,” Mr. Powell said in prepared testimony that he is scheduled to deliver to the Senate Banking Committee on Tuesday.
Mr. Powell will testify alongside Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. The pair will explain to senators what they are doing with a $500 billion congressional appropriation in the CARES Act that was primarily meant to back up Fed emergency lending programs, which can keep credit flowing to businesses and local governments in times of crisis.
Mr. Powell noted that one program — the Main Street facility, which is intended to lend to midsize businesses and which has been a particular focus of lawmaker concern — has been revised to count in a broader set of counterparties and could be revised further.
The changes made already “should help the program meet the needs of a wider range of employers that may need bridge financing to support their operations and the economic recovery,” he said. “We will continue to adjust facilities as we learn more.”
WeWork wants a rent break. Its customers do, too.
Many professionals and businesses that use WeWork, including this Los Angeles location, have not been able to go to the office for weeks because of stay-at-home orders.Credit...Philip Cheung for The New York Times
WeWork, the office space giant that was struggling even before the coronavirus shut down much of the economy, is asking landlords for a break on its huge rent bill as it tries to survive the pandemic.
Some of the company’s small-business customers are also seeking relief on the rent they owe. But they say WeWork has been unwilling to cut them much slack as they grapple with plunging revenues and stay-at-home orders that prevent them from using the company’s sleek spaces.
Klint Briney, who runs a marketing company in Los Angeles, was disappointed that WeWork only offered to defer one month’s rent. Because much of his business comes from live events, his revenue is a fraction of what it was a year ago.
“Something that was a legitimate offer, I certainly would have entertained,” he said. “What they offered was a slap in the face.”
The tension between WeWork, its landlords and its customers highlights the problems gripping the market for office space, a huge part of the economies of big cities. In the coming months, many tenants will be unable or unwilling to pay their rent. And landlords will have to decide whether to grant them relief, wait for them to make good on their arrears or seek to evict them. Banks and investors who lent money to property owners will face similar choices.
J.C. Penney plans to close nearly one-third of its stores.
J.C. Penney, the 118-year-old retailer that filed for bankruptcy on Friday , said on Monday that it planned to close about 242 stores — 30 percent of its locations — as part of its restructuring plan. The move will leave J.C. Penney with 604 stores.
The retailer also aims to have its e-commerce business account for more than one-quarter of its revenue within the next few years, up from 14 percent last year, according to a filing that included a presentation outlining J.C. Penney’s business plan.
The company said in the filing that it would close 192 stores this year and close and sell 50 stores that it owns next year. The stores it plans to keep operating accounted for 82 percent of J.C. Penney’s most recent annual revenue and represent “the highest sales-generating, most profitable, and most productive stores in the network.”
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
J.C. Penney is planning to lose about half of its overall sales this year for annual revenue of about $5.1 billion. The retailer said it thinks it can expand its e-commerce sales to $2.3 billion in fiscal 2024, which would make up 26 percent of its business.
The retailer said it would reduce expenses by having fewer workers, lowering ad spending and cutting administrative costs, as well as cutting “bonus/equity and benefits.”
Minority business owners are still waiting for paycheck relief, a survey finds.
Black and Latino business owners are struggling to get government assistance under the Paycheck Protection Program, a new survey has found , and many say they are on the brink of closing permanently.
The survey, conducted by the Global Strategy Group for two equal-rights organizations, Color of Change and UnidosUS , included interviews with 500 business owners and 1,200 workers from April 30 to May 11. Just 12 percent of the owners who applied for government-backed loans in the $650 billion program reported receiving what they had asked for, and nearly half of all owners said they anticipated having to permanently close in the next six months.
By comparison, in a survey of small businesses by the Census Bureau from April 26 to May 2, three-quarters said they had asked for a loan and 38 percent of them said they had received one.
How the coronavirus changed the politics of budget deficits.
This month, the federal government said it would borrow a record-breaking $3 trillion from April to June to help businesses and workers get through the coronavirus-induced recession. In April alone, the United States recorded a larger budget deficit in a single month than it did for all of the 2017 fiscal year, a total of $738 billion.
Running such a large deficit would have been politically untenable just a year ago; since the end of World War II, economists have often warned that doing so would risk runaway inflation and possibly unsustainable tax hikes on future generations. But now, even some of the country’s most ardent deficit hawks have watched the debt pile up and said: More, please.
The coronavirus pandemic has brought a new sort of deficit scolding to Capitol Hill, with economists and lawmakers warning that the United States is not borrowing enough to carry the nation through a debilitating recession that could turn into a second Great Depression.
A legion of economists, Federal Reserve officials and even some of the most outspoken proponents of deficit reduction in recent years are now urging Congress and President Trump to continue spending trillions of dollars to prevent a long-term collapse in business activity and prolonged joblessness.
In financial trouble? Keep track everything companies tell you.
Every financial services company has a coronavirus relief page on its website right now, filled with reassuring language about the assistance on offer. Federal laws and regulations are supposed to make it easier to get help .
But if you’re wary of the corporations riding to your rescue — or even if you’re not — you need to protect yourself, writes Ron Lieber. Memorialize every single thing they tell or promise you.
One unfortunate lesson from recessions past is that companies and consumers often disagree about what help they settled on and under what terms. Absent written proof or recorded phone calls, struggling consumers are at a disadvantage years later when assistance turns out to be fleeting or illusory.
Many consumers are scared for their lives, not just their livelihoods. Billers, landlords and customer service reps are scattered to the winds, away from bosses and compliance officials, distracted by their own disrupted home lives. Mistakes will be made, in great volumes.
So, a taking of receipts is in order.
Catch up: Here’s what else is happening.
Uber said on Monday that it laid off 3,000 employees, closed 45 of its global offices and reorganized several of its secondary businesses as the coronavirus caused an 80 percent downturn in its ride-hailing business. Uber has also cut back its food delivery service, Uber Eats, in several countries where it was not successful and sold its bike and scooter arm, Jump. The company has laid off about 25 percent of its work force over the last month.
Target said on Monday that it would extend its temporary $2-per-hour pay increase for full- and part-time front line workers through July 4. The retailer announced the increase on March 20 and said at the time it would maintain the increase until “at least May 2.” Temporary wage increases during the pandemic, which some retailers have referred to as “hero” pay, have become a major point of contention in recent weeks .
Japan fell into a recession for the first time since 2015, as its already weakened economy was dragged down by the coronavirus’s impact on businesses at home and abroad. The world’s third-largest economy, after that of the United States and China, shrank by an annualized rate of 3.4 percent in the first three months of the year, the country’s government said on Monday.
The chief executive of Hertz, the century-old car rental company now at risk of bankruptcy, has resigned, the company said Monday. The company’s fate may be decided this week: It has until Friday to come up with a plan to pay back its lenders and continue to meet its ongoing financial obligations.
Reporting was contributed by Jeanna Smialek, Niraj Chokshi, Mike Isaac, Sheera Frenkel, Clifford Krauss, Cecilia Kang, Ben Dooley, Carlos Tejada, Neal E. Boudette, Ron Lieber, Kate Conger, Jack Nicas, Sapna Maheshwari, Jason Karaian, Michael Corkery, Matt Phillips, Emily Flitter, Mohammed Hadi, Katie Robertson and Gregory Schmidt.
