Tao Commodities has now completed soil sampling at the priority gold and silver targets with assays due in the coming weeks.
Tao Commodities (ASX: TAO) has uncovered up to 17.4 grams per tonne gold and 8,760g/t silver during a rock sampling program at its Milford project in the US.
Located in the US state of Utah, Tao has undertaken initial reconnaissance sampling across priority areas at the project including the Captain Jack West prospect where the peak silver and gold samples were taken.
Other mineralisation was also identified at Captain Jack West with a sample returning 1.71% copper with anomalous zinc and lead also present.
All up, 14 samples were collected from two main areas at Captain Jack and Captain Jack West prospects, with five revealing anomalous gold ranging from 0.99g/t to the peak 17.4g/t gold. Silver results ranged from 0.25g/t to 8,760g/t.
The Moccasin prospect also returned mineralisation with peak grades of 4.03g/t gold, 1.98% copper and 1,560g/t silver.
At Mocassin, 13 rock chips were recovered with four samples assaying above 1g/t gold and all ranging between 0.05g/t and 4.03g/t gold.
Silver mineralisation assayed from 0.27g/t to 1,560g/t with nine samples exceeding 100g/t.
Elevated base metals were also found in the Mocassin rock chips with peak results of 15.1% lead and 4.64% zinc, plus 1.21% copper.
To gain a better understanding of the mineralisation, Tao has completed geochemical soil sampling over the areas were the anomalous rock chips were collected.
Assays from these samples are expected in the coming weeks.
Tao noted it would plan the next stage of exploration once the soil samples have been received.
This stage will initially include detailed prospect scale mapping, further sampling and additional reconnaissance prospecting work.
Previous exploration at Milford had focused on base metal targets – zinc, lead and silver and as a result gold assaying was not completed.
However, a review of historical work pinpointed gold at Captain Jack and Moccasin which are the primary targets in upcoming exploration.
