Use Up/Down Arrow keys to increase or decrease volume.
The image of the wine bottle increases slightly at times, creating a subtle sense of motion that, Leggat says, invites the visitor to take the next action. That could be making a purchase, scheduling a visit or learning more about Silver Oak’s wines.
The product detail page for Silver Oak’s flagship cabernet sauvignon.
The product pages for Silver Oak’s Napa Valley and Alexander Valley cabernets include “subtle micro-interactions and animated transitions to lead users down the page as the full story behind the wine unfolds,” says Matt Faulk, CEO of the web design agency Basic that developed SilverOak.com. “An approach such as this brings a level of sophistication to the page that does the brand justice through elegant and unexpected subtleties that elevate product presentation and romance purchase intent.”
Basic also chose different typefaces to highlight the contrast between Silver Oak’s more traditional Napa winery and its more modern Alexander Valley facility in California’s Sonoma County, adjacent to Napa County. Headline text typically employs the GT Super type font that includes serifs, or decorative extensions to letters, a type of font often used by established firms and publications. Subheadings and body text is in the more contemporary sans-serif font Roboto.
“These design decisions were chosen to not only contribute to the feeling and legacy of the Silver Oak brand experience but to provide clarity and hierarchy for users as well through increased readability, visual rhythm and structure,” Faulk says.
Leggat gives Basic credit for capturing the essence of Silver Oak, which he describes as “casual yet elegant, aspirational yet exclusive.”
Beyond aesthetics, Silver Oak also wanted to incorporate features it saw on leading retail sites. One example is the ability for a consumer to move easily across the brand websites of a single retailer—such as the Gap, Banana Republic and Old Navy sites of Gap Inc.—and check out in a single shopping cart if they are logged in to their account.
The unified checkout is now available for two of Silver Oak’s wine sites, SilverOak.com and Twomey.com . When Silver Oak launches a new label called Timeless, a debut scheduled for September, that feature will be extended to Timeless.com .
Already, each of those three sites features tabs at the top of web pages that link to the other two brands’ sites.
Silver Oak also owns a fourth brand, Ovid , a super-premium label that has a waiting list for consumers who want to purchase the limited quantities produced. Because Ovid is available only to registered subscribers, it doesn’t have the standard shopping cart of an ecommerce site and is not part of the unified checkout service, nor is it linked to the other sites.
However, Silver Oak has begun email marketing that emphasizes the common values of the four brands, including sustainability and innovation. A recent email featuring the logos of the four brands led to 300 consumers signing up for Ovid’s waiting list, even though that was not a call to action featured on the email.
“They might be people that never saw we acquired Ovid 3 years ago,” Leggat says. “Being on the Silver Oak mailing list triggered the behavior where they want to get in line for the Ovid wines.”
While work on the SilverOak.com redesign has been going on for more than 2 years, the launch of the new website in May happened to coincide with the surge in online buying of wine and other products during the coronavirus outbreak. Leggat says Silver Oak’s online sales are up at least 300% over last year. “We feel we have a best-in-class website at just the right time,” he says.
But the impetus for the ecommerce investment stems from underlying trends driving the many family-run wineries like Silver Oak toward direct-to-consumer channels and now ecommerce.
The typical U.S. winery gets about 60% of its revenue from selling direct to wine drinkers via their tasting rooms, wine clubs and subscriptions, according to Rob McMillan, executive vice president and of the wine division at Silicon Valley Bank , a major lender to wineries. McMillan is also the author of the bank’s annual “State of the US Wine Industry” report.
However, he says the typical winery gets only 2% of its sales from its own website, although that shot up to around 10% when tasting rooms closed due to COVID-19. Digital will have to be a bigger part of wineries’ marketing strategy, he says.
“For the last several years I’ve pointed out how strange it is to expect customers in a digital world, and one that’s becoming increasingly digital, to come to the production facility to buy,” McMillan says. “In the same way we wouldn’t go to Detroit to buy a car, we go to our dealership.”
He says the coronavirus likely will accelerate wineries’ push into ecommerce. “Silver Oak is a little ahead of the crowd in adopting a sleek, current view on their web pages,” McMillan says of the winery’s new ecommerce site.
Leggat says Silver Oak has taken to heart McMillan’s advice to reach out to wine drinkers who can’t make it to its California wineries.
