Lobo Tiggre Wednesday June 17, 2020 12:21
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
I've alerted The Independent Speculator clients to two private-placement opportunities so far this month. It seems that  higher gold and silver prices are bringing more of the world's speculative cash  back to bear on junior explorers. This is creating opportunities, even for  investors who can't participate in the placements.
What is a private placement, and how do savvy speculators  make the most of them?
The key point I want to make sure everyone is aware of is  this: private-placement opportunities are surging—and will likely keep  surging even if gold and silver trade sideways for the rest of the year.
$1,700 is a great gold price. Lots of miners  and projects can make boatloads of money for shareholders at current levels.  The better ones can do it back down at $1,500, or even lower.
All mines are self-depleting assets. Whether  gold and silver rise or fall, producers need to replace the ounces they mine, either  by successful exploration or by acquisition of successful exploration companies.  It's that or they mine themselves out of business.
Producers have been exploring less. Since  the first budget item most producers cut when times are tough—as they have been  for years—is exploration, a  huge wave of takeovers is clearly on the horizon . Juniors that have large  discoveries with robust economics are prime takeover targets.
Juniors need cash to advance their projects  to attract takeover bids. Junior explorers always need money, since their  whole business revolves around pouring cash into holes in the ground, which  generates no revenue. But when markets are down, they too cut spending as much  as they can and wait for better times. Better times are here, and cash-starved  juniors are coming out of hibernation.
Juniors with no resource in hand know  that now is the time to give a new discovery their best shot.
Juniors with deposits in hand know that  now is the time to de-risk their projects and strut their stuff.
The uptick in junior financings this year shows  that, at long last, money is flowing back to the sector.
This is good news all of us, not just fat cat investors.
Because (as covered in my free  report on private placements ) share prices usually drop when a company  announces a private placement.
This happens because the placement is usually offered at a  discount to market, or with a juicy warrant, or both.
A warrant is like an option that gives participants the  right—but not the obligation—to buy shares in the future at a set price. That  means warrant-holders can exercise their warrants when they know they'll make  money, with essentially no risk.
This is why private placements are the #1 means by which  famous speculators like Doug Casey made their fortunes.
The result of this financial logic is that existing  shareholders will often sell the stock they have in order to buy in at the  lower price of the private placement—and get the free warrant to boot. Some  might do this even if the offering is not at a lower price, just to get the  warrant.
And that creates lower entry points for everyone else.
Also, while private placements are restricted to  SEC-accredited investors, if the warrants are transferrable, they're not so  restricted. When this happens for a large pool of warrants in a company with good  volume, the warrants will sometimes get their own listing and trade like  stocks.
For example, as I type, I can buy shares in Gran Colombia  Gold (GCM.TO) for C$6.71. Or I can buy Gran Colombia Gold warrants (GCM.WT.B)  for $4.58.
What a bargain, right? Well… maybe. For them to be worth the  effort, GCM shares have to rise to a level that justifies what I pay to buy the  warrant, plus the amount I have to pay to exercise the warrant (the strike  price)—C$2.21, in this case. Critically, I have to get this right before  the warrants expire in April of 2024.
The good news is that buying tradable warrants like this is  a way to gain options-like leverage without actually having to get an options  trading account.
The bad news is that it adds a time constraint to a  speculation. The cash I pay up front for the warrant can be totally wiped out  if the warrants expire out of the money. Still, for savvy investors willing to  take the risk, buying a tradable warrant instead of a stock can add leverage to  the upside.
All of the above is great news for speculators, but it  doesn't mean that all private placements are great opportunities.
If a company is forced to issue new shares for pennies—with  a long-lived, full warrant thrown in as well—it results in massive dilution for  existing shareholders. That's not necessarily bad if the company has good odds  of delivering more than enough value to offset the dilution. But such  financings are often done just to keep the lights on. That's absolutely not the  same as “delivering more than enough value to offset the dilution.”
Some might think that such a financing is just too bad for  existing shareholders, but great for those getting in on the new offering with  the juicy warrants. That's shortsighted. If the placement just keeps the lights  on—or if it pays for exploration that's no more likely to succeed than throwing  darts blindfolded—the new shareholders are no better off than previous ones  when that money runs out.
For more on how to evaluate opportunity versus dilution, please  see my “Dilution Dilemma” article .
Bottom line: I see a great deal of opportunity via  private placements in 2020 for savvy speculators.
I expect gold and silver to rise much further this year, but  the above remains true whether or not I'm right about that.
It's also true for ordinary investors, not just big  financiers on Wall Street, Bay Street, or Howe Street.
The caveat is that due diligence is still required. Not all  private placements will deliver big wins. But the ones that do offer us the  most leverage we can get in this space without going out on margin.
P.S. To be kept abreast of more  dangers, opportunities, and issues affecting investors, please sign up for our free,  no-spam, weekly Speculator's Digest .
