Newmont Mining looks like on a daily closing price basis:
Newmont Mining daily price chart, 4 10 20.
That is a 13+% upward one-day blast just in case you’re having trouble reading the chart. You can see how easily the earlier March high was taken out. This is the best move among the miners this week — I would guess this is partly because the NYSE-listed Newmont is the best known in the sector and the first go-to among large investors and big financial institutions.
Barrick Gold’s daily price chart looks like this:
Barrick Gold daily price chart, 4 10 20.
The stock took out the mid-February high just barely but that counts as a new high. As with Newmont, it’s clear how dramatic the earlier March sell-off looks — back when investors were just dumping all stocks no matter the sector. It looks like that emotional selling has given way to more thoughtful analysis, at least in the case of this NYSE-traded miner.
Nova Gold Resource’s daily price chart looks like this:
NovaGold Resources daily price chart, 4 10 20.
Investors decided that the new high of 9.99 was the best place for the stock to close out the week. You can make out how this takes it above the previous peak all the way back in mid-February. NovaGold Resources is based in Vancouver, British Columbia and trades on the NYSE American Exchange. Can you believe how the price has basically doubled from the panic selling of just 3 weeks ago?
Not every precious metals stock has moved to new highs. Many had a great week, but remain off of earlier peaks. The benchmark VanEyck Gold Miners ETF shows this:
VanEyck Vectors Gold Miner ETF, daily 4 10 20 price chart.
Taken together as a group, gold miners have yet to make it past the February high despite the performance of the 3 mentioned above.
I do not hold positions in these investments. No recommendations are made one way or the other.  If you're an investor, you'd want to look much deeper into each of these situations. You can lose money trading or investing in stocks and other instruments. Always do your own independent research, due diligence and seek professional advice from a licensed investment advisor.
