LONDON, April 23, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- While the pandemic tanks oil and gas, decimating demand, and even precious metals aren't feeling the safe-haven love they're used to, critical minerals have become the holy grail, and one, in particular, could become the post-pandemic tech gold. Mentioned in today's commentary includes: Teck Resources Limited (NYSE: TECK ), Turquoise Hill Resources Ltd. (NYSE: TRQ ), Pretium Resources Inc. (NYSE: PVG ), Magna International Inc. (NYSE: MGA ), Agnico Eagle Mines Limited (NYSE: AEM ).
Oil prices are still free-falling, even after an OPEC+ deal ended the oil price war. Gold prices are up 7% so far in April, but it's still nothing for the once-favored safe-haven asset, and UBS expects a reversal soon.
Critical metals, on the other hand, will inform world technological superiority, and when the dust settles on the coronavirus pandemic, the battle for world domination will continue with a fury like never before, spurred on by national security interests.
But one of these metals is so critical, and so rare, that it's very hard to put a price on it.  That metal is cesium, and it's essential to America's quest to win the 5G race--the No. 1 most important global competition so far this century.
That fact makes one particular junior miner--Power Metals ( PWM .V, PWRMF )--potentially one of the most critical companies in this space to emerge from the COVID-19 crash.  Why? Because it just started drilling in February for the only potential cesium mine that China doesn't already control.
In August 2018, while exploring for lithium, PowerMetals discovered pegmatites at West Joe Dyke and intersecting high-grade cesium mineralization in six drill holes.
Cesium is immune because its applications are critical to almost everything that comes next, including advances in healthcare, defense, and the 5G revolution.
For the healthcare industry, it's vital in strategic organic chemistry, including in x-ray radiation for cancer treatments.  For the oil and gas industry, it's vital for drilling fluids that prevent blow-outs in high-temperature, high-pressure wells.
For a huge lineup of commercial and industrial, cesium's applications are many and varied, from catalyst promoters, glass amplifiers, and photoelectric cell components, to crystals in scintillation counters, and getters in vacuum tubes.
But in terms of world dominance, it's all about time, and 5G. It's the "cesium standard" that allows us to measure time accurately. That means it's the key to mobile networks, the internet, and GPS.
This also means that without cesium, the global 5G war cannot be won.
For the most part, the average person only has a cursory understanding of what 5G means, and how it could transform the global balance of power. But 5G without cesium doesn't work. The new 5G cellular wireless tech will transfer data and the correct time faster than ever before--fast enough and accurately enough to transform industries.
In other words, 5G technology will rule the world because it can create a continuous, real-time connection for every single device that exists and every single device that will be made because of it.
Cesium is a critical element in all of this, and it could mean the difference between real-time responsiveness and 5G failure.  The battleground for 5G is also a battleground for cesium, and so far, China is winning by a landslide.
But while cesium is completely insulated from a global pandemic such as that taking down every other industry in the world, from a North American perspective, it matters little that it's insulated or not when China controls almost 100% of the world's supply.
When the dust settles on the coronavirus pandemic, the world isn't likely to be more unified or to view cooperation as the new way forward. Instead, China particularly is more likely to pursue policies that are more focused on national security than ever.
Washington's battle against China's 5G giant, Huawei, may have seemed petty to some, but this is the United States' way of playing catchup when it dropped the ball on critical metals like cesium. While the US refused to play along with China's Huawei-led plans for 5G domination,
the country's 5G networks, and Germany and France were on the cusp of similar deals.  COVID-19 has the potential to put the brakes on this Chinese progress in Europe, but North America still has a major cesium problem to deal with.
Beijing is well aware of the power it holds through its monopoly of critical metals.  Cesium was only added to the United States list of critical minerals in 2018 despite the fact that it will lead the 5G revolution, a revolution that will  generate trillions of dollars in new products along the way.
Despite the fact that it is so strategic, there are only three pegmatite mines in the world that can produce it: Tanco in Manitoba, Bitika in Zimbabwe, and Sinclair in Australia. Two of them, Tanco and Bitika, are no longer producing, and the stockpiles at Tanco and Sinclair are largely controlled by China.
Not only is there limited supply, but there are a very limited number of companies in the supply chain itself.
That positions Power Metals to potentially be a major North American supplier of cesium right at the crucial moment in the 5G revolution. Known for its major hard rock lithium deposit in Canada, Power Metals hopes to very soon be known as the company that broke China's monopoly on the critical metal.
Power Metals is sitting on what could become only the fourth deposit of its kind in the world, with 100% ownership in the Case Lake property in Northeastern Ontario, where it has made a discovery of high-grade cesium mineralization.
The company discovered the pegmatites at West Joe Dyke in August 2018 , intersecting high-grade cesium mineralization in six drill holes when it was targeting lithium instead.
In February , right before the COVID-19 outbreak turned into a pandemic, Power Metals started drilling, and it's world-class geologist, Dr. Julie Selway , says the three properties the company is drilling are hoped to have similar finds to the strategically important Sinclair mine in Australia.
"They are shipping their resource, which they say is higher than 10% cesium-oxide, and ours have some that are between 12% and 14% of cesium-oxide," Selway, a key geologist for the Ontario Geological Survey during the tantalum boom of the early 2000s, and now VP of exploration for Power Metals, told Oilprice.com.
Power Metals has intersected cesium (Cs) mineralization in 6 drill holes on West Joe Dyke, with "exceptionally high-grade" Li and Ta intervals. They also found Cs mineralization in drill core samples in the first new dyke below Main Dyke, as well as in the drill core in Northeast Dyke.
Now, they're working to expose, sample and assay that cesium mineralization on the surface outcrops to find more cesium-bearing pegmatite dykes nearby. When and if they do, it stands a good chance of disrupting the Chinese control of cesium to give North America a leg up in the 5G war, and beyond.   While cesium may just be the most critical of critical metals, it's worth taking note of some of the others fueling the next generation of technology, as well.
Germanium and indium are two metals that fly under the radar of most. They aren't as exciting as gold or silver, or as rare as cesium, but they are arguably as important. And one well known miner can take credit for a lot of their production.
Teck Resources (TECK) is Canada's largest diversified mining company. It has operations across North and South America. It will play a key role in the emerging battery metal revolution, as a key supplier of both copper and zinc. But one of Teck's lesser known strengths lays in its production of germanium and indium, which are essential in semiconductors and transistors. Teck is one of the world's largest producers of the lesser-known but incredibly important metals, germanium and indium. Without these, the technological revolution would be at a stand-still.
While most people know that uranium is absolutely essential in today's nuclear power generation, they may not know much about rhenium and molybdenum. These two elements also play a critical role in our development of cleaner energy, and will likely grow in demand over time.
Turquoise Hill Resources (TRQ) is Canadian miner with an international reach. It primarily produces gold and copper, two essentially resources in the tech boom, but what most people don't know is that it also producers uranium, rhenium, and molybdenum which are often overlooked in today's major metals markets.
While  gold and silver did not make the critical metals list, there is a huge push for it to be included. Why? Because the iconic yellow metal is not only used in numerous electronics, but it also carries tremendous geopolitical weight. Just last year, a number of countries, including China and Russia, stockpiled gold in record amounts.
Agnico Eagle Mines Ltd (NYSE: AEM , TSX:AEM)is one of Canada's top gold producers. Though gold is a flashy metal often associated with wealth, it is also one of the world's most widely beloved safe haven assets. To put it simply, gold fares well in times of crisis. And it always has. That's what makes Agnico so appealing
Like Agnico, Pretium Resources (PVG) is another one of Canada's premier gold miners. Pretium has an impressive portfolio and if you can catch the stock while the price is right, there could be huge opportunity for upside. Additionally, construction and engineering activities at its top location continue to advance, and commercial production is targeted for this year.
With things seemingly taking a turn for the worst on a global level, Pretium's forwarding thinking approach leaves it in a prime position to weather the storm and emerge even stronger than ever before.
While producers of the world's most important metals get most of the fame and glory, it's the buyers that really make the world go around. Without demand, producers would have nowhere to go. And Magna International (MGA) may just be one of the important connections in the business.
While it doesn't produce metals itself, it is a leading supplier of mobility technology for automakers. That means it uses a lot of these metals, and its secure supply chain and partnerships in the space are incredibly important.
With operations in over 27 countries, Magna has the potential to supply every automaker in the world, and they're well on their way in doing so.
**IMPORTANT! BY READING OUR CONTENT YOU EXPLICITLY AGREE TO THE FOLLOWING. PLEASE READ CAREFULLY**
This news release contains forward-looking information which is subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual events or results to differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements.  Forward looking statements in this release include that prices for cesium will retain value in future as currently expected; that PWM can fulfill all its obligations to maintain its properties; that PWM's property can successfully mine commercial quantities of cesium; that the three properties the company is drilling are hoped to have similar finds as the strategically important Sinclair mine in Australia; that occurrences and indications of a commercially sized deposit become reality; that high grades found in samples are indicative of a high grade deposit; and that PWM will be able to carry out its business plans. These forward-looking statements are subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual events or results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking information.  Risks that could change or prevent these statements from coming to fruition include that aspects or all of the properties' development may not be successful, mining of the cesium may not be cost effective, the price of cesium may not stay high and it may never be profitable to mine cesium; PWM may not raise sufficient funds to carry out its plans, changing costs for mining and processing; increased capital costs; the timing and content of upcoming work programs; geological interpretations and technological results based on current data that may change with more detailed information or testing; potential process methods and mineral recoveries assumptions based on limited test work with further test work may not be viable; competitors may offer cheaper cesium; more production of Cesium could reduce its price; alternatives could be found for cesium; the availability of  labour, equipment and markets for the products produced; and despite the current expected viability of its projects, that the minerals cannot be economically mined on its properties, or that the required permits to build and operate the envisaged mines cannot be obtained. The forward-looking information contained herein is given as of the date hereof and the Company assumes no responsibility to update or revise such information to reflect new events or circumstances, except as required by law.
ADVERTISEMENT. This communication  is not a recommendation to buy or sell securities. Oilprice.com, Advanced Media Solutions Ltd, and their owners, managers, employees, and assigns (collectively "the Company") may in the future be paid by PWM to disseminate future communications if this communication proves effective. In this case the Company has not been paid for this article. But the potential for future compensation is a major conflict with our ability to be unbiased, more specifically:
This communication is for entertainment purposes only. Never invest purely based on our communication. We have not been compensated by PWM but may in the future be compensated to conduct investor awareness advertising and marketing for PWM.V;PWRMF. Therefore, this communication should be viewed as a commercial advertisement only. We have not investigated the background of the company. Frequently companies profiled in our alerts experience a large increase in volume and share price during the course of investor awareness marketing, which often end as soon as the investor awareness marketing ceases. The information in our communications and on our website has not been independently verified and is not guaranteed to be correct.
SHARE OWNERSHIP. The owner of Oilprice.com owns shares of this featured company and therefore has an additional incentive to see the featured company's stock perform well. The owner of Oilprice.com will not notify the market when it decides to buy more or sell shares of this issuer in the market. The owner of Oilprice.com will be buying and selling shares of this issuer for its own profit. This is why we stress that you conduct extensive due diligence as well as seek the advice of your financial advisor or a registered broker-dealer before investing in any securities.
NOT AN INVESTMENT ADVISOR. The Company is not registered or licensed by any governing body in any jurisdiction to give investing advice or provide investment recommendation. ALWAYS DO YOUR OWN RESEARCH and consult with a licensed investment professional before making an investment. This communication should not be used as a basis for making any investment.
RISK OF INVESTING. Investing is inherently risky. Don't trade with money you can't afford to lose. This is neither a solicitation nor an offer to Buy/Sell securities. No representation is being made that any account will or is likely to achieve profits similar to those discussed.
DISCLAIMER: OilPrice.com is Source of all content listed above. FN Media Group, LLC (FNM), is a third party publisher and news dissemination service provider, which disseminates electronic information through multiple online media channels. FNM is NOT affiliated in any manner with OilPrice.com or any company mentioned herein. The commentary, views and opinions expressed in this release by OilPrice.com are solely those of OilPrice.com and are not shared by and do not reflect in any manner the views or opinions of FNM. FNM is not liable for any investment decisions by its readers or subscribers. FNM and its affiliated companies are a news dissemination and financial marketing solutions provider and are NOT a registered broker/dealer/analyst/adviser, holds no investment licenses and may NOT sell, offer to sell or offer to buy any security. FNM was not compensated by any public company mentioned herein to disseminate this press release.
FNM HOLDS NO SHARES OF ANY COMPANY NAMED IN THIS RELEASE.
This release contains "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended and such forward-looking statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. "Forward-looking statements" describe future expectations, plans, results, or strategies and are generally preceded by words such as "may", "future", "plan" or "planned", "will" or "should", "expected," "anticipates", "draft", "eventually" or "projected". You are cautioned that such statements are subject to a multitude of risks and uncertainties that could cause future circumstances, events, or results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements, including the risks that actual results may differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, and other risks identified in a company's annual report on Form 10-K or 10-KSB and other filings made by such company with the Securities and Exchange Commission. You should consider these factors in evaluating the forward-looking statements included herein, and not place undue reliance on such statements. The forward-looking statements in this release are made as of the date hereof and FNM undertakes no obligation to update such statements.
