“This was an extraordinary week and is capitulating into panic selling into many markets including precious metals,” Peter Spina, president and chief executive officer at GoldSeek.com, told MarketWatch. “The gold market has had heavy fund holdings grow heavily over the last several months’ run-up in gold that now, with the general markets selling off, some of that excessive positioning is being shaken out.”
Likely adding to pressure on gold prices: “Physical transaction in China and India are typically conducted face to face, and we anticipate that these transactions are going to plummet as the coronavirus crisis plays out,” said Peter Grant, vice president of precious metals at Zaner Metals, adding that these two countries account for about 1,000 metric tons of demand annually.
Meanwhile, silver prices have taken a hit along with gold, with prices for the May contract US:SIK20 down $1.278, or 7.2%, at $16.457 an ounce on Friday, for a weekly loss of nearly 12%. That was the largest weekly percentage decline for a most-active contract since April 2013, according to FactSet data.
“Silver is in even worse shape due to its industrial attribution and slack in industrial demand and fears of greater demand loss as the virus fears hit commodity and energy markets,” said Spina. The gold-to-silver ratio is “slightly exceeding last year’s highs above 95,” he said, highlighting the extreme moves for both metals. On Friday, about 95 ounces of silver would buy one ounce of gold.
Taking a look at the bigger picture surrounding gold’s volatile moves, Lundin said “Gold’s being buffeted by waves of selling, likely from equity traders getting market calls and needing to raise cash, followed by waves of buying from investors who see a flood of central bank stimulus on the way.”
Read: The Fed can’t stop coronavirus from slamming the economy, but it could ease the pain
Lundin expects to see “much higher” gold prices in the weeks and month ahead. “The stimulus programs coming up will have to include not only rate cuts, but more [quantitative easing] than the last go around, plus fiscal measures like massive government spending programs,” he said. Precious metals like gold tend to attract buyers in a low interest-rate climate.
“For now, though, everyone’s running for cover,” said Lundin.
He’s 34 years old and owns $550 million worth of Apple — so why is he hoping the stock gets hammered, again?
“I learned from dad when I was 13. He showed me a chart comparing real estate to stock market returns, and it was really easy decision. I’ve been doing it ever since,” he said. “But it’s hard for me to find things I like and find attractive.”
