Franco’s business model gives it upside exposure but downside protection in the notoriously challenging and volatile mining industry. It acquires royalties (and their cousin, the “stream”) from mining companies. The mining company might need development capital, or it could want to repair its balance sheet.
In short, Franco makes an upfront payment and in return receives a percentage of the production that comes form the mine. It has been a very successful business, with another record of GEOs (“gold equivalent ounces”) received.
Get access to MoneyShow's 100+ page Top Picks Report featuring the nation’s most respected and well-known newsletter advisors favorite investment ideas for 2020.
Although primarily holding gold assets, Franco also generates revenue from other resources, including silver and even oil. Significantly, Franco’s newest and largest stream investment, Cobre Panama, a copper mine from which Franco receives the gold by-product, made first deliveries after announcing commercial production September 1st, ahead of guidance. This removes lingering caution on the $1 billion plus recent investment.
Franco has the best management in the mining business. There is currently a changing of the guard at the top, with CEO David Harquail becoming chairman of the board in May, while founder Pierre Lassonde becomes chairman emeritus. Paul Brink, president and chief operating officer, will become CEO.
Both Lassonde and Harquail have outstanding reputations in the gold industry, and will still be heavily involved with the company, while Mr. Brink has certainly proven himself over the years with the very strong transactions he has supervised. Any conservative investor wanting exposure to the gold sector should look no further than Franco-Nevada.
One of the most relevant macro-economic events during 2019 was gold’s breakout rise from a key multi-year resistance at $1,365. This move confirmed a secular bull market rise that began in December 2015. The breakout rise we are experiencing has been strong and broad — and is based as gold shares, silver and other precious metals pick up the pace.
Interestingly, silver had been a sleeper until the second half of 2019 when it started to show breakout strength. And together with a bullish outlook for resources in 2020, silver is positioned to outperform precious and resources metals.
Also consider the silver to gold ratio remains near an extreme favoring gold suggesting the ratio could start moving in favor of silver in the year ahead.
And while silver itself would be a good trade, consider buying silver shares to take full advantage of silver’s upswing. One of my favorite silver miners is Silvercorp Metals (SVM). It’s a low-cost silver producer with main operations in China.
Employees and guests of Silvercorp Metals attend the opening bell at the New York Stock Exchange, ... [+] Monday, March 8, 2010. Silvercorp Metals Inc. is a Canadian-based primary silver producer with mining operations and development projects located in China and Canada. Started in 2004, the company today is China’s largest primary silver producer. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan)
Not only is Silvercorp Metals positioned to benefit from the renewed secular bull market in precious metals and silver, but it could benefit from easing trade tensions between China and the U.S. I consider the stock a top pick for aggressive investors; I’ll be looking to buy Silvercorp on dips below $5.50.
Integra Resources (Vancouver: ITR) (OTC: IRRZF) is developing the large-scale DeLamar gold-silver project in southwest Idaho. When I say large-scale, I mean it: The company recently released an updated resource estimate showing 3.9 million ounces in gold-equivalent, measured and indicated resource (2.4 million ounces of gold and 116.5 million ounces of silver).
Another 500,000 ounces of gold-equivalent lies in inferred resources. And that’s so far. The company continues to aggressively drill the project, with outstanding results.
At its War Eagle Mountain target, Integra recently reported drill results that were highlighted by 10.9 g/t gold and 115.3 g/t silver over 34.1 meters. At its Florida Mountain target, the drill cut 1.7 g/t gold and 26.5 g/t silver over 45.8 meters, including 19.6 g/t gold and 68.2 g/t silver over 2.1 meters.
These results from War Eagle and Florida Mountain highlight the potential for high-grade ore at DeLamar to punch up the economics of the low-grade mill feed currently envisioned for the project.
And more results will be coming in 2020, as the drilling success has attracted smart, deep-pocketed investors. Integra recently closed a $31.9 million financing that will keep the drills turning while also funding a pre-feasibility study.
Integra’s share price has been largely range-bound in recent weeks. With more drilling and assays to come from DeLamar, I think the company makes for an excellent buy at current trading levels.
We are beginning to see more money come into the gold mining space. Senior gold producers have been the primary beneficiary so far, as investors have begun to rotate money to these names.
The senior gold miners have also delivered a disciplined year of consolidation. Now, if they are going to try to grow their reserves and resources and not go buy an exploration mining company with a property of merit, they are going to drill.
And that is where Major Drilling Group International (Toronto: MDI; OTC: MJDLF) is going to benefit from the exploration cycle first.
As gold peaked in the earlier part of this past decade, Major Drilling’s returns on invested capital breached 20 percent but began to fall with gold prices and reduced drilling demand.
Demand is now on the rise as Major Drilling’s cash from operations nearly double over the past quarter, delivering a windfall of free cash flow for the quarter.
The gold related markets were outstanding in 2019. Gold shares were especially strong, leading the way for the entire sector. The XAU gold share index, for example, surged nearly 50%. It more than doubled the gains in gold and the Dow Jones Industrials. It also outperformed Nasdaq and, overall, it was the top performer.
There’s no question that gold and gold shares are in major bull markets. The same is true of silver. Most interesting, these major bull markets are still in their early stages.
That is, they have a lot further to go on the upside. They’ll likely outperform stocks and bonds and they’re set to be top performers as 2020 unfolds.
The gold related markets have many factors in their favor, like low or zero interest rates and a U.S. dollar that’s beginning to weaken. Global uncertainty, central bank buying and a mature stock market are also very positive. Plus, investor sentiment is now shifting toward gold.
As these markets head higher, gold shares will probably continue to outperform gold, which is usually the case during bull markets, but we recommend buying both.
An easy way to invest in these markets is by buying the SPDR Gold Trust (GLD). For gold shares we like the VanEck Vectors Gold Miners ETF (GDX). And for silver, which is also poised to outperform, we like the iShares Silver Trust (SLV).
Since 2008, when it first went public, Franco-Nevada (FNV) has outperformed gold bullion and gold equities, in both bull markets and bear markets. I’m a huge fan of royalty and streaming companies. Investors who like gold as an asset do so because they understand that the yellow metal can limit losses in their equity position and reduce volatility during downturns.
Adding a royalty company such as Franco-Nevada to the mix can be like injecting nitro into your souped-up sports car. This is because while Franco-Nevada, the world’s largest streamer with a market cap of $25 billion, enjoys a lot of the upside potential when gold prices are rising, it shares very little of the downside potential with producers and explorers when the metal is in decline.
Franco is better insulated from bear markets because it has a diversity of high-quality active mines in its portfolio, including those in the oilfield. What’s more, Franco isn’t the company spending money to develop a project.
It simply puts up the capital, and in exchange it receives either a royalty on whatever the miner produces or rights to a stream of metal or oil supply at a fixed, lower-than-average cost. It’s a win-win for Franco and the miner, a win-win-win if you also include the investor.
To give you an idea of just how profitable Franco-Nevada is, when you compare its net income per employee to those of blue chip stocks, there’s really no contest.
Some of the world’s most recognizable names — including Apple (AAPL), Facebook (FB) and Goldman Sachs (GS) — are highly profitable, generating around half a million dollars or more per employee after expenses. And then there’s Franco-Nevada, which makes approximately $3.5 million per employee, or seven times Facebook’s net income. It’s simply in a league of its own.
Get access to MoneyShow's 100+ page Top Picks Report featuring the nation’s most respected and well-known newsletter advisors favorite investment ideas for 2020.
MoneyShow — an industry pioneer in investor education since 1981 — is a global, financial media company, operating the world's leading investment and trading conferences.
MoneyShow — an industry pioneer in investor education since 1981 — is a global, financial media company, operating the world's leading investment and trading conferences. Each show brings together thousands of investors to attend workshops, presentations and seminars given by the nation's top financial experts. The company also offers exclusive seminars-at-sea, with the investment industry's leading partners, such as Forbes. In addition, MoneyShow operates the award-winning, multimedia online community, Moneyshow.com and publishes free Investing and Trading newsletters, which provide individual investors with exclusive ongoing access to the latest investment and trading ideas from the nation's most respected and trusted financial newsletter advisors.
