Written by Geoffrey Plant on June 24, 2020
Members of the Silver City Town Council and officials met virtually Tuesday evening via the GoToMeeting app.
It appears the town of Silver City’s budget woes in the face of the COVID-19 economic crisis aren’t as dire as they first appeared, Town Manager Alex Brown told the Town Council on Tuesday evening. Brown’s report, as well as that of the town’s marketing company, Sunny 505, took up a large portion of the regular meeting of the Town Council, held virtually via GoToMeeting.
“We’re still not at a point where we can make a final decision, and honestly, I don’t think we’re going to get to a concrete decision,” Brown cautioned. “It’s going to be changing throughout the fiscal year, as we get information about what is happening in the economy and such.”
That said, Brown reported several bright spots in what he had predicted in March would be up to a 25 percent loss in revenue, due to the state-mandated shutdown and ensuing economic crisis.
“I think we might not be in very bad shape,” he said this week.
Brown revised his earliest projection of a 25 percent budget cut to what appears more likely to be a 15 percent cut — about $1 million — something Brown said could be accommodated through an already-in-place hiring freeze, canceled raises and a plan to eliminate a single pay period across the board for all town employees next fiscal year.
That pay cut actually eliminates a 27th pay period for all employees that would result as a quirk of next year’s calendar. Most years, there are 26 pay periods for town staffers.
The town relies on gross receipts tax collections for a large portion of its revenue, and Brown said he was pleased to see that, while the payment from Santa Fe for March was down by 7.65 percent, April’s payment was actually up by 8.65 percent.
“That matches what I thought might happen,” Brown said, adding that federal stimulus and increased unemployment benefit opportunities probably offset job losses to help keep people spending money in Silver City, a “shopping hub” for the surrounding area. “A lot of people laid off from the mines and other jobs are likely spending a larger majority of their income in town.
“Our retail was about the same as the previous year, but a big part of the increase came from food sales,” Brown continued.
He said that in April, Silver City businesses saw about $5.8 million in food sales, compared to $3.5 million the previous year.
“I don’t see we are going to have such a drastic decrease in revenue as anticipated — in the range of 14 to 15 percent decrease,” he said.
That’s good news for library and museum employees, and others on the town payroll, some of whom were looking at extended furloughs and even layoffs, if worse came to worst.
“We were supposed to start decreasing the hours at the museum and the library at the beginning of this month,” Brown said, adding that his calculations started to change after the town received the latest gross receipts tax payment from the state. “We had let [employees] know we were going to extend furloughs, and with this news, we may be able to cancel those furloughs.”
“We may be looking at canceling all scheduled furloughs,” Brown confirmed with the Daily Press on Tuesday night.
Brown had more good news for councilors.
“The state did allocate some funds for municipalities” during the Legislature’s five-day special session, Brown said.
The allocations, which would be disbursed next year, could range from $750,000 to $1.5 million, and will depend on population size.
“I think, based on our current revenues, we’re going to be OK,” Brown said, adding that if the state monies come through, the town should think about filling vacant positions in the short-staffed parks and streets departments.
Brown wasn’t finished finding silver linings in the new pandemic economy, either.
“We’ve had quite a few new water accounts opened in the last two months,” he said.
The town manager’s report came on the heels of an update from the town’s marketing firm, Sunny 505. The firm’s president, Joanie Griffin, predicted that Silver City could become a premier driving destination for non-flying tourists, and even a new home for telecommuters and retirees, all seeking escape from urban reality during and after the pandemic.
“There’s a lot of people moving from out of state. I think the last time I looked it was 167 new accounts,” Brown said. “We’ve got a total of 6,700 water accounts right now. [The addition of] 167 is a dramatic increase for this community.
“Total revenue for the water-sewer budget to date has surpassed our projections for this last fiscal year of $6.3 million,” Brown said. “We have brought in about $6.5 million so far. A lot of that has to do with people being at home, growing gardens and such. I think we’ll be pretty stable, as far as the water-sewer fund.”
The town’s lodgers tax fund, on the other hand, is “pretty ugly,” Brown said. “Last year in May we brought in $36,000; this year, we brought in $8,000.”
The town’s gas tax and street maintenance fund is “doing pretty well,” he said. The municipality garners 2 cents per gallon from each fuel sale in Silver City.
“I think with the cost of gas and people wanting to get out — that’s probably going to help us out,” Brown said.
