Traders mint from bullion swings abroad; buy gold, silver futures in Comex
Unique modus operandi: Selling silver futures in India & buying on Comex. Brokers cashed in on the price difference between the Indian & offshore mkts.
MUMBAI: Irregular trades running into thousands of crores are believed to have been cut on overseas commodity exchanges by local brokerages under the guise of offering business process outsourcing (BPO) services to foreign investors.
Amid a surge in the prices of silver and gold , brokers have used their proprietary books to cash in on the price difference between the Indian and offshore futures markets through quick, continuous trades, better known as arbitrage transactions in the Street.
According to Indian laws, commodity brokers are barred from trading in international exchanges. They are neither allowed to trade on terminals sold by foreign bourses nor use Internet accounts to take positions there.
“But the way the bullion prices moved, it was an opportunity they did not want to miss. At least 10 to 15 brokers have done such trades where you may sell silver futures in India and buy abroad to catch the spread,” said a source familiar with the activities.
The commodity market regulator Forward Markets Commission (FMC) has recently clamped down on the practice by denying a few large intermediaries, tempted by the opportunities, permission to carry out such trades. In a communique dated March 28, the FMC told local exchanges to ensure that none of their member brokers offer BPO or knowledge process outsourcing services (KPO) to foreign investors trading on overseas bourses.
“This has been done to protect market integrity,” said BC Khatua, chairman, FMC. “There should be no link between any entity providing such KPO/BPO services (to foreign investors trading on overseas exchanges) and the Indian commodity exchanges.”
Speaking to ET, Mr Khatua also indicated that the regulator may carry out surprise visits to find out whether some of the market intermediaries were indulging in such trades.
While Mr Khatua said that he was not aware “offhand” of such practices, market sources said that it was unusual for the regulator to issue the March circular without a trace of suspicion. Indian brokers, known for their native ingenuity, followed a unique modus operandi in running arbitrage deals, selling silver futures in India and buying in Comex , a division of the New York Mercantile Exchange .
The orders that arbitrage traders sitting in Mumbai punch are shown as execution of trades on behalf of an overseas (BPO) client, say in Dubai. Under the arrangement, the entity in Dubai is run by an associate or a relative or can be a subsidiary of the promoters of the brokerage; the Dubai arm puts up the margin for the overseas trades.
According to a chartered account who is aware how such deals are structured, the accounts between the overseas entity and the Indian brokerage are settled periodically and payments for the last leg of the transaction, especially, in cases where a trade has backfired and the mark-to-market losses have to be settled with the overseas exchange, is completed through the hawala channel.
Brokers say some incidence of such services have come down following the circular but it may just be a matter of time before those indulging in “such activities” would find a way to work around the regulation. One of them said that such trading can be shifted to remote locations where the possibility of audits being conducted by FMC are near negligible.
Traders say that such deals were rampant during the initial days of commodity futures trading when many wealthy retail investors took positions in overseas exchanges. Brokers offered the service freely and some of them having an international presence seemlessly routed the transactions through their overseas offices enjoying credit lines from leading banks which even handled the fund transfers.
But such trade volumes declined following certain restrictions imposed by the FMC followed by a Reserve Bank of India directive that derivatives, which allow investors to take position by paying a slice of the money, cannot be undertaken without an underlier. Investor interest also suffered following losses booked as commodity prices and currencies turned volatile. But such trades resurfaced in the past six months with the excitement in bullion counters.
Interestingly, these are deals that punters and traders in India have carried out for generations. At the turn of the last century, traders in Bombay and Calcutta used to bet on cotton futures with exchanges in Alexandria and Chicago.
In the roller-coaster world of futures, fortunes were made and lost depending on the movement of prices between foreign bourses and local markets. Such trades died down after the Second World War when new regulatory walls curbed the free flow of currency. Today, in a world of web trade, quick transmission of information, instant execution of orders and smart financing options, regulators have a tougher job.
