Governments around the world will continue to print money and keep interest rates either unchanged or lower, which would be bullish for the precious metals, including silver, this according to Keith Neumeyer, CEO of First Majestic Silver.
“I’ve been calling for triple-digit silver for a few years now, and I’m more enthused now but I’m cautiously enthused. I thought it would have happened sooner than it currently is happening,” Neumeyer told Kitco News on the sidelines of the Vancouver Resource Investment Conference. (show less)
Governments around the world will continue to print money and keep interest rates either unchanged or lower, which would be bullish for the precious metals, including silver, this according to Keith Neumeyer, CEO of First Majestic Silver.
“I’ve been calling for triple-digit silver for a few years now, and I’m more enthused now but I’m cautiously enthused. I thought it would have happened sooner than it currently is happening,” Neumeyer told Kitco News on the ... (read more)
Your browser does not support inline frames or is currently configured not to display inline frames. Content can be viewed at actual source page: /news/video/latest?show=VRIC-2020.
The Vancouver Resource Investment Conference has been the bellwether of the junior mining market for the last twenty-five years. It is the number one source of information for investment trends and ideas, covering all aspects of the natural resource industry.
Disclaimer: The content on this website, including, without limitation, news, videos, interviews and commentaries, is provided by Kitco Metals Inc. ("Kitco") for informational purposes only and is not intended as any form of advice, whether legal, accounting, investment, financial or tax advice. Therefore, it cannot be relied upon as such. Should you require such advice, contact a licensed professional. The content provided herein is provided on an "as is" basis without any warranty of any kind, whether express or implied and your use of the information provided in said content is entirely at your own risk. In no event will Kitco be held liable for any indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages arising out of the use of the content on this website.
