Written by Silver City Daily Press on June 6, 2020
The Gila National Forest announced Sunday that the Tadpole Fire north of Silver City had grown to 450 acres, and that two other fires were burning in the Wilderness Ranger District in Catron County.
The Tadpole fire, caused by lightning, started early Saturday south of Tadpole Ridge in the Silver City Ranger District. It is burning in piñon, juniper and ponderosa pine.
According to a release from the GNF, resources assigned to the fire include one FS engine and four hand crews, including two Hot Shot crews. Gila/Las Cruces Type 3 incident management team took over the incident, with Leo Trujillo being the incident commander.
The strategy for this fire is full suppression, using a confine and contain strategy, according to the release. There is a high potential for spread. Objectives include protecting and minimizing the impact of fire on high values at risk which includes; wildland firefighter and public safety, and infrastructure associated with private land. This fire is in rugged and remote terrain.
The Silver City Ranger District has placed road closure signs on Bear Creek Road, down towards Ben Lilly Pond, and off New Mexico 15 at Forest Road 382/Sheep Corral Road. Two trailheads are in the vicinity, and should be avoided. They are TH 232/Tadpole Ridge and TH 234 Sycamore.
N.M. State Patrol will be manning road closures on N.M. 15 from the Ben Lilly Memorial to the junction of N.M. 35/N.M. 15, the release stated. The alternate route to the Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument is via N.M. 35 through the Mimbres Valley.
As for the other two fires on the Gila, the Turkey Fire, at 27 acres, is burning northeast of Brushy Mountain, while the Good Fire, at 35 acres, is burning in Blood Good Canyon. Both were lightning caused.
Resources assigned to the Turkey fire are eight smokejumpers and two helitack crews.
“The Good Fire is in steep, rugged and rocky terrain in the canyon and currently cannot be staffed due to safety concerns for the wildland firefighters,” a spokeswoman said. “Objectives for both fires are to protect public and wildland firefighter safety. The strategy is full suppression, with confine and containment.”
Smoke from fire rises up and away during the daytime, but in the evenings, smoke can pool back down in canyons, drainages, and basins, the release stated. Overnight smoke will settle in the Mimbres Valley.
For information on air quality and protecting health, and to find guidance on distances and visibility, visit https://nmtracking.org/fire. Fire information can be found at nmfireinfo.com.
EDITOR’S NOTE: This is a breaking story, and will be updated as further information becomes available. The new version of this story above was posted at 11:15 a.m. Sunday, June 7, including the updated fire size and reports of two additional fires on the Gila. The original story appears below, posted June 6 at 7:18 p.m. and updated June 6 at 7:33 to reflect the increase in fire size from 30 to 50 acres.
The Tadpole Fire is burning on National Forest system lands north of Pinos Altos on the Silver City Ranger District of the Gila National Forest.
The fire, caused by lightning, started early Saturday, and was up to 50 acres by 7 p.m. Saturday. It is burning in piñon, juniper and ponderosa pine.
The strategy for this fire is full suppression, according to a release from the GNF, which said the blaze has a high potential for spread. Objectives include protecting and minimizing the impact of fire on high values at risk, which include wildland firefighter and public safety, and infrastructure associated with private land.
The fire is in rugged and remote terrain, according to the release. The Silver City Ranger District has placed road closure signs on Bear Creek Road, down towards Ben Lilly Pond, and off New Mexico 15 at Forest Road 382/Sheep Corral Road. Two trailheads are in the vicinity, and should be avoided. They are TH 232/Tadpole Ridge and TH 234 Sycamore.
Smoke from fire rises up and away during the daytime, but in the evenings, smoke can pool back down in canyons, drainages and basins, according to the release. For information on air quality and protecting your health, and to find guidance on distances and visibility, visit nmtracking.org/fire. Fire information can be found at nmfireinfo.com.
