It’s worth noting that supply chain disruptions caused by the coronavirus have recently made it very difficult to buy physical silver — travel restrictions and other factors have left dealers with limited product to sell, and have pushed up premiums on physical silver. That means even those who can find silver bullion for sale will see much higher markups than usual.
As a final point, market participants should be aware that they can also invest in silver through an exchange-traded fund (ETF). Investing in a silver ETF is similar to trading a stock on an exchange, and there are several silver ETF options to choose from. For instance, some ETFs focus solely on physical silver bullion, while others focus on silver futures contracts.
Still others focus on the silver mining market itself or follow live silver prices. It is important to keep in mind that you will not own any physical silver when investing in any ETF platforms — even a silver ETF that tracks physical silver cannot be redeemed for tangible white metal.
Silver hit US$48.70 per ounce, the highest silver price to date, towards the end of the 1970s.
However, the purchase price didn’t exactly reach that level by honest means. As Investopedia explains , the metal’s bid price was driven by the Hunt brothers, two wealthy traders who attempted to corner the market by buying not only physical silver, but also silver futures. They then took delivery of that silver instead of taking legal tender in the form cash settlements. Their exploits ultimately ended in disaster: On March 27, 1980, they missed a margin call and the silver market price plunged to US$11.
Despite that price action, silver’s highest average annual price didn’t come until 2011, when it hit US$35.12 on the stock market. The commodity price uptick came on the back of very strong silver investment demand, and was more than double the 2009 average silver price of US$14.67. 2011 was also the year that silver hit its highest price in recent years.
The below chart from Kitco spans from the start of January 2011 to mid-April 2020. It shows that the silver price reached US$47.94 in April 2011 before plummeting in the years that followed.
Like other metals, the silver spot price is most heavily influenced by supply and demand dynamics. However, as the stats above illustrate, the silver price can be very volatile. That is partially due to the fact that the metal is subject to both investment and industrial demand within the global markets.
In other words, it’s bought by investors interested in using it as a store of wealth as well as by manufacturers looking to use it for different applications. Those applications are incredibly varied — silver has diverse technological applications and is used in devices like batteries and catalysts, but it’s also used in medicine and in the automotive industry.
In terms of supply, in 2019, the world’s three top producers of the metal were Mexico, Peru and China. Interestingly, even in those countries the white metal is usually produced as a by-product — for instance, a mine producing primarily gold might also have silver output.
