While the gold price consolidates, silver begins to awaken
David Erfle Friday May 15, 2020 14:17
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
When I  stumbled upon the precious metals sector in 2003, silver was stuck in a trading  range below $5.00 per ounce, while the gold space was zooming higher. The  incredible gains in gold stocks, which began just after the turn of the  century, had caught my eye and I became fascinated with the mining sector.
Although  both gold and its miners had already begun to out-perform the stock market in  parabolic fashion just before the crisis event of 9/11, silver did not start to  participate until the $5.00 ceiling was finally broken in late 2004. In fact, I  am still holding large bags of “junk” physical silver purchased in late 2004,  as I was convinced the forgotten precious metal was just beginning an historic  bull market.
Fast  forwarding to the present finds gold’s little sister more of an industrial  metal and back to being forgotten again, as recent deflationary events have  created a contrarian’s dream of an entry point for long-term speculators. These  strong deflationary forces, created by government decisions to shut down most  of the global economy due to the Covid-19 pandemic, has driven most speculators  to finally give up in frustration on this tiny sector.
Once the  2016 low at $13.62 in the silver price was breached during peak market panic in mid-March, the stop-run selloff  that followed created a spike 10.9 year low at $11.64 and also took most of the  weak handed speculators out of the market along the way.
The best  time to speculate in the silver space is when it is abnormally-inexpensive  compared to gold, which can be measured by the gold/silver ratio. This  barometer, closely watched by precious metals speculators, reached an all-time spike high of over 120-1 on March 18th.
This means  it took 120 ounces of silver to purchase just one ounce of gold on that day.  And after being pummeled to record-low levels relative to gold, silver  speculators have plenty of room to get back in before an epic silver mean  reversion higher gets started.
The  gold/silver ratio has consistently fluctuated between 70 and 90 over recent  years and even those levels were high relative to the historical average of  roughly 40-1. The extreme high in this ratio implies the metal has been used  more for industrial purposes, as safe-haven investors have been favoring gold  since the lows in late 2015.
Moreover,  since most silver is produced as a byproduct of copper and gold mines, this has  resulted in 2020 being the 8th year of oversupply for the metal due in part to  the deflationary environment. Although silver stock-piles have grown beyond its  demand, the metal is still being dug up even while demand falls as  it is a byproduct.
However,  investment demand for physical silver has never been higher. This is true both  in the retail bullion markets, and in the futures markets where there has been  a huge spike in the number of contract holders standing for delivery recently.  Although there is plenty of demand for silver as a safe-haven, this has yet to  show up in the paper price.
Consider  that while the ratio of the futures price of gold to silver is currently at  110-1, this ratio is far lower when it comes to actual coins being offered for  sale such as the American Eagle. The price of one gold American  Eagle is equivalent to that of only 77 silver American Eagles. This  physical discrepancy suggests the risk of numerous demands for physical  delivery in a market where the physical premiums widen relative to the paper  price due to the increasing unavailability of the physical metals.
Despite the  poor showing of silver in the paper markets, silver’s fundamentals have been  improving recently as the economy has gradually reopened and global central  banks have begun to inject massive amounts of stimulus into their shut-down economies.
The one  factor that seems to correlate to the gold/silver ratio better than most  is inflation expectations. And by inflation, I am referring to both  monetary inflation and its impact on the general price level.
The two  largest modern-day silver bull markets have occurred during inflationary  environments. The stagflationary recession of the 1970’s, and when investors expected inflation  after the Great Recession of 2008. It has been my contention since March of last year that the rising gold price was  beginning to predict coming stagflation into the economy, brought on by poorly  constructed economic policies.
Meanwhile,  silver equities began to sniff out this coming mean reversion long before the  metal could close back above its 50-day moving average yesterday. Since the  deflationary panic to cash ended in mid-March , the Global Silver Miners ETF (SIL)  has been rapidly closing in on its highest level in three years. Both SIL  and the junior silver stock ETF (SILJ) have participated in the sector strength  while both have also outperformed silver, and SIL has dramatically outperformed the metal.
In previous  precious metals bull markets throughout modern history, silver typically lags  gold, then catches up and eventually passes it. While the GDX has already broken out of a  7-year base last  month and most quality gold juniors have now caught  them , the best value  at present for long-term speculators resides in a carefully chosen basket of silver  related juniors.
If you  require assistance is choosing the best silver stocks to accumulate for the  long-term, stop by my website at www.juniorminerjunky.com and sign up for my free email list. You will  receive this column in your inbox each week, along with current interviews.  Although the 250-membership cap has been reached in the JMJ subscription  service, place your name and email address on the waiting list if you are  interested in becoming a member and you will be contacted once spaces open up.
