Who Has Been Buying Silver Spruce Resources Inc. (CVE:SSE) Shares?
Simply Wall St December 4, 2019
We often see insiders buying up shares in companies that perform well over the long term. The flip side of that is that there are more than a few examples of insiders dumping stock prior to a period of weak performance. So before you buy or sell Silver Spruce Resources Inc. ( CVE:SSE ), you may well want to know whether insiders have been buying or selling.
Most investors know that it is quite permissible for company leaders, such as directors of the board, to buy and sell stock in the company. However, most countries require that the company discloses such transactions to the market.
We would never suggest that investors should base their decisions solely on what the directors of a company have been doing. But logic dictates you should pay some attention to whether insiders are buying or selling shares. As Peter Lynch said, ‘insiders might sell their shares for any number of reasons, but they buy them for only one: they think the price will rise.
In fact, the recent purchase by Chairman of the Board & Interim CFO Brian Penney was not their only acquisition of Silver Spruce Resources shares this year. Earlier in the year, they paid CA$0.025 per share in a CA$131k purchase. We do like to see buying, but this purchase was made at well below the current price of CA$0.045. Because the shares were purchased at a lower price, this particular buy doesn’t tell us much about how insiders feel about the current share price.
Happily, we note that in the last year insiders paid CA$221k for 8139000 shares. On the other hand they divested 4857633 shares, for CA$157k. Overall, Silver Spruce Resources insiders were net buyers last year. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
Silver Spruce Resources is not the only stock that insiders are buying. For those who like to find winning investments this free list of growing companies with recent insider purchasing, could be just the ticket.
The last three months saw some Silver Spruce Resources insider selling. Chairman of the Board & Interim CFO Brian Penney sold CA$41k worth of shares in that time. But the good news is that there was purchasing too , worth CA$13k. While it’s not great to see insider selling, the net amount sold isn’t enough for us to want to read anything into it.
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. Usually, the higher the insider ownership, the more likely it is that insiders will be incentivised to build the company for the long term. Insiders own 8.8% of Silver Spruce Resources shares, worth about CA$369k, according to our data. But they may have an indirect interest through a corporate structure that we haven’t picked up on. We do generally prefer see higher levels of insider ownership.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Silver Spruce Resources Insiders?
Insider selling has just outweighed insider buying in the last three months. But the difference isn’t enough to have us worried. But insiders have shown more of an appetite for the stock, over the last year. The transactions are fine but it’d be more encouraging if Silver Spruce Resources insiders bought more shares in the company. Along with insider transactions, I recommend checking if Silver Spruce Resources is growing revenue. This free chart of historic revenue and earnings should make that easy .
Of course Silver Spruce Resources may not be the best stock to buy. So you may wish to see this free collection of high quality companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
