Tune in now for Markets news, views & cues
Why did Nifty give up the gains on Tuesday?
05:35 Min | June 30, 2020, 5:34 PM IST
Tune in! Let's talk about what happened in the market today.
Welcome to ETMarkets Watch, the show about stocks, market trends and money-making ideas. I am Amritesh Malhan and here are the top headlines at this hour.
·      Covid-19 may set back banks’ recovery by years, says S&P
Domestic equity benchmarks surrendered their initial gains to end in the red on Tuesday, as investors turned cautious ahead of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s address to the nation later in the day. RIL, HDFC Bank, ITC and TCS led the fall, while some buying in ICICI Bank, Maruti Suzuki and HDFC capped the downside.
Overall, Sensex closed nearly 46 points down at 34,916, while Nifty settled 10 points lower at 10,302.
Smallcaps underperformed their midcap and largecap peers. Sectorally, BSE Oil & Gas, Telecom and Healthcare indices declined over 1 per cent each, while Auto and Consumer Discretionary indices and Bankex ended in the green.
In the broader market, Bharat Dynamics, Emami and Jindal Steel and Power advanced over 5 per cent, while Trent, Indian Overseas Bank and Engineers India shed over 5 per cent each.
Many Indian cities have extended lockdowns in the face of unabated growth in virus infections, which added to the uncertainty surrounding economic recovery. But is it just that, or is it systemic weakness seeping in?
We caught up with Ajit Mishra of Religare Broking to try and understand the market undercurrent.
Why did the market give up gains in today’s trade?
Do you think liquidity push will again drive the market going forward or is there likely to be some alignment with reality?
What are your projections for June auto sales numbers? Do you expect any demand improvement?
On the technical charts, Nifty formed a small bearish candle on the daily chart after forming indecisive Doji candles for two consecutive sessions. Some analysts believe the index was losing strength and the bias has turned negative. We have with us Rohit Singre of LKP Securities to do the chart reading.
What are the technical charts telling us?
What is your reading from the F&O open interest data?
Globally, most other Asian markets ended in the green, while European equity indices traded lower in early deals. US equity futures retreated amid concerns that new virus infections will slow the pace of re-opening of businesses.
That’s all for now. Do check out ETMarkets.com for all the news, market analysis, investment strategies and dozens of stock recommendations. Enjoy your evening. Good bye!
