Donald Trump has been very beneficial for Wall Street, which is why so much hangs on him winning a second term
Peter Cooper says Donald Trump will win his impeachment trial but the election in November is far from a done deal. AP
Gold price forecasts for 2020 were typically around the $1,600 an ounce mark. It was therefore pretty remarkable to be above $1,600 in the first week of the year.
But this did follow two black swan events: the US killing of Iran's top military commander Qassem Suleimani in Baghdad followed by an attack on US bases in Iraq. After such a hiatus a retreat back from overextended gold prices was only to be expected, absent further revenge attacks.
Few investors need to be reminded just how good Mr Trump has been for Wall Street.
However, few commodity analysts think that was it for gold in 2020. It was perhaps a dress rehearsal for a later spectacular performance. Super-high US share prices still look priced for a correction if profits disappoint, and yields are so low that treasury bonds are also expensive.
If history is any guide, precious metals and the commodities complex deliver the best performance in such circumstances. Goldman Sachs tips gold as the best hedge, not oil.
The more difficult thing is to map exactly how this could play out in 2020. In my view geopolitics is not actually the main worry for investors. The biggest political event of the year is the US presidential election on November 3.
At the moment, incumbent Donald Trump is facing impeachment. This he will win. But the election in November is far from a done deal, with polls showing him lagging behind the leading Democratic contender, Joe Biden.
Few investors need to be reminded just how good Mr Trump has been for Wall Street. Thus the moment of maximum uncertainty for US stocks should be November 3 — when he could really be unseated — and that could also be the high point for gold prices this year.
If Mr Trump survives, then US stocks will rally from whatever sell-off they have endured before then, and gold prices plunge. If a far more left-wing president is elected then investors will assume the worst: stocks will dive and presumably gold will head higher.
