Why So Down on Silver?
Price crash dents small specs' bullishness...
WE RECENTLY looked at a chart of gold with its associated Commitment of Traders data, writes Gary Tanashian of subscription service Notes from the Rabbit Hole .
The chart has a clear upside target and the unspectacular CoT [ie, the net positioning of speculative traders] is not standing in the way of that. Gold sports a CoT structure that you'd expect to be more contrarian bearish, given the current gold price.
We also looked at the chart of silver, which more and more people are becoming bearish of, and we noted the really muted little guy (blue line shows 'non-reportables', ie private individuals rather than professionals) in the CoT data.
Altogether this gives us an unpleasant looking chart of the silver price, and an okay large Specs/Commercials CoT alignment (but nowhere near as good as it was last spring; note the pinched Specs and Commercials at left). Ah but...the little guy. Look how he hates himself some silver.
That is not at all negative because the little guy will be briskly bullish at the next major top in silver, whenever that comes.
What's more, the Sprott Silver Trust's premium has been cut to .66%, in essence even, after a big drop and spike in sympathy with silver's price drop (which may have been the final flush) and recovery. The difference between the pump of the last few weeks and the pump you can see here in early 2016 is that this spike came after a flush. In the way markets sometimes work and precious metals often work, that might mean something. We'll just have to see.
I understand the supply/demand overhang issues that silver is dragging around (very well presented in Mark Turner's IKN Weekly last weekend) but there are sentiment-based forces in play that could support the silver price going forward. And if the balls out inflation being promoted in the US by fiscal and monetary authorities and around the world over finally takes hold as expected, silver is going to be a big play again.
Short-term? Long-term? It's all up in the air. But I am keeping its relationship to gold well on radar as an ignition switch.
Thus far the Silver/Gold ratio is not doing anything. A little bear flag forming after a bear flag breakdown is not gonna get 'er done.
Gary Tanashian successfully owned and operated a progressive medical component manufacturing company for 21 years, through various economic cycles. This experience gave Gary an understanding of and appreciation for global macroeconomics as it relates to individual markets and sectors. Along the way, Gary developed an almost geek-like interest in technical analysis (TA), to add to a long-time interest in human psychology. Various unique macro market ratio indicators were also added to the mix, with the result being a financial market newsletter, Notes From the Rabbit Hole (NFTRH) that combines these attributes.
Please Note: All articles published here are to inform your thinking, not lead it. Only you can decide the best place for your money, and any decision you make will put your money at risk. Information or data included here may have already been overtaken by events – and must be verified elsewhere – should you choose to act on it. Please review our Terms & Conditions for accessing Gold News .
