Segment revenues have seen a continuous decline due to lower production and fall in global silver prices.
The trend is likely to continue in the near term with WPM expected to lose about $52 million of its silver revenue in 2019, led by volume decline and a drop in global price levels.
Silver volume sales are likely to go down from 22 million ounces in 2018 to 18 million ounces in 2019, following the New San Dimas agreement under which silver production that was attributable to the company under the old agreement would now be converted to the equivalent gold volume.
Silver price realization is expected to gradually increase from $15.81/ounce in 2018 to $16.20/ounce in 2019, due to an increase in prices of precious metals with an expected global economic slowdown.
With volume expected to remain stable and prices being on an upswing, silver revenues are set to increase to $302 million in 2020.
To understand 10-year silver price performance and production-demand-GDP analysis , view our dashboard analysis.
Gold and Palladium are the two fast-growing segments of the company which drive most of the company’s value. To understand how gold and palladium divisions have performed and what is the outlook , view our interactive dashboard analysis.
What’s behind Trefis? See How It’s Powering New Collaboration and What-Ifs For CFOs and Finance Teams | Product, R&D, and Marketing Teams More Trefis Data Like our charts? Explore example interactive dashboards and create your own
Led by MIT engineers and Wall Street analysts, Trefis (through its dashboards platform dashboards.trefis.com) helps you understand how a company's products, that you
Led by MIT engineers and Wall Street analysts, Trefis (through its dashboards platform dashboards.trefis.com) helps you understand how a company's products, that you touch, read, or hear about everyday, impact its stock price. Surprisingly, the founders of Trefis discovered that along with most other people they just did not understand even the seemingly familiar companies around them: Apple, Google, Coca Cola, Walmart, GE, Ford, Gap, and others. This might include you though you may have invested money in these companies, or may have been working with one of them for years as an employee, or have consulted with them as an expert for a long time. You can play with assumptions, or try scenarios, as-well-as ask questions to other users and experts. The platform uses extensive data to show in a single snapshot what drives the value of a company's business. Trefis is currently used by hundreds of thousands of investors, company employees, and business professionals.
