YES Bank gets EoIs from JC Flowers, Silver Point; delays Q3 results to March 14
YES Bank is in discussions with these investors on the commercial terms, including pricing.
Private lender YES Bank NSE -2.42 % , which is engaged in fundraising exercise, on Wednesday said it has received non-binding expressions of interest from investors including JC Flowers, Tilden Park Capital , OHA UK and Silver Point Capital .
YES Bank is currently in discussions with these investors on the commercial terms, including pricing, of their investments.
In a regulatory filing, the lender also said that it decided to delay its December quarter earnings to on or before March 14, 2020.
“Given that the current capital raising process has the bank' s fullest attention, it would like to inform the exchanges that it will publish its unaudited financial results for the quarter and nine month period ending December 31, 2019 on or before March 14, 2020,” YES Bank said.
Meanwhile, India Ratings has downgraded YES Bank’s long-term issuer rating to ‘A-’ from ‘A’, while maintaining it on rating watch negative, reflecting the continued delay and inconclusive quantum of the anticipated equity infusion.
This is the third downgrade of the lender by the ratings agency in the last one year.
“The downgrade reflects the continued delay and inconclusive quantum of the anticipated equity infusion in Yes Bank,” India Ratings said.
On Friday, shareholders of YES Bank had approved raising the private-sector lender’s authorised capital to Rs 1,100 crore at an extraordinary general meeting held in Mumbai. A special resolution to allow capital raising through issuance of equity shares or other convertible securities of Rs 10,000 crore was also passed.
Earlier last week, ET had reported that the lender had picked Cantor Fitzgerald, led by former Deutsche Bank global co-CEO Anshu Jain, and local investment banks IDFC Securities and Ambit Capital to raise funds that would help the lender expand its loan book. Yes Bank plans to raise up to $2 billion to shore up its capital base.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
