The herald of the Silver Age of Comics, the Flash has been revamped and rebooted numerous times since his first appearance.
There is a perception that popular superheroes exist in a certain kind of stasis, remaining unchanged over the years in order to not upset the status quo of their respective universes. To an extent, this is true. While some basic elements may remain the same however, the years have allowed creators to enrich and expand on different aspects of these characters, finding nuance in what may seem at first to be static figures.
The Flash is a perfect example of this. The herald of the Silver Age of Comics , the Flash has been revamped and rebooted numerous times since his first appearance, with great writers and artists putting new spins on the character's history and deepening his existing mythology. Here are just ten of the ways the Flash has changed since he was introduced in 1956.
Flash Fact: One of the most major changes to the Flash mythos since the Silver Age has been the revelation of the Speed Force. Introduced by Mark Waid in The Flash #95, it is one of the Seven Forces of the Universe, and responsible for the powers of the Flash and other speedsters.
Before this, Flash's powers were just explained as the byproduct of his being doused with mysterious chemicals following a lightning bolt striking his lab. While this was a satisfying enough explanation for 1956, Waid's reveal that the chemicals helped Allen tap into the Speed Force opened up a wealth of new aspects of the character and his corner of the DC Universe .
Barry Allen's sacrifice in Crisis on Infinite Earths may be one of his most iconic moments and has colored the way he has been portrayed and his role in DC's stories going forward.
While his first appearance in Showcase #4 effectively started the Silver Age of Comics, his death three decades later made it clear that he was one of the most important characters in the DC Universe , on par with the Trinity.
Following his death in Crisis, a posthumous Flash story in Secret Origins #2 added a bizarre wrinkle to the character's origin story. The story begins immediately after Barry Allen sacrifices himself, and sees the hero transform into a bolt of lightning.
In his lightning form, Allen travels back through time to moment he was transformed into the Flash. He bursts into his old lab, acting as the catalyst for the explosion that gave his past self super speed. This time-loop twist on his origin has seldom been referenced again, so it's possible that it might just be considered an "Imaginary Story" (Aren't they all?)
2009's Flash: Rebirth revealed a surprising twist to the Flash's origin: when he was a child, his mother was murdered by a time-traveling Professor Zoom and his father was framed for the crime. This retelling was surprising, considering it is especially dark for a more upbeat character like the Flash.
This revamped origin story helped set the stage for the character's actions in Flashpoint and the ensuing New 52 , and judging by its inclusion as part of the Arrowverse and DCEU versions of the character, it seems that it will be sticking around for the foreseeable future.
Barry Allen was originally a pleasantly square character, similar to many other Silver Age DC heroes, and his personality was mostly defined by his total inability to show up on time to any of his obligations or plans. This remained the case up until he sacrificed himself to save the multiverse in Crisis on Infinite Earths, and the younger and more irreverent Wally West took up his mantle.
As the Wally West version of the Flash was the one featured on Cartoon Network's popular Justice League , this portrayal of the character was solidified in the minds of many young viewers. When Barry Allen returned as the Flash several years later, writers split the difference between the two characters and made Allen into a more wisecracking hero in contrast to his more serious teammates.
The Flash's ability to travel between the different Earths was established fairly early into his Silver Age series, with the landmark "Flash of Two Worlds" centering around his adventure on Earth-2 with Jay Garrick , the Golden Age Flash.
Over the decades, this ability has been expanded upon and the Flash's adventures across the Multiverse are one of the most crucial elements of the character. What started as a fun issue where Barry Allen gets to meet his childhood hero has spiraled into a thriving multiverse (and Dark multiverse ,) that has been destroyed and rebuilt numerous times.
Today it is a simple fact that the Flash is the fastest hero in the DC Universe. This wasn't always the case, and for many years one of the more popular fan debates went something like this: Who would win in a race, Superman or the Flash?
This debate was only fueled by the looser continuity of DC's Silver Age output, where Superman's super-speed would seem to vary from month to month. The 1960s saw the two heroes race twice, both times resulting in a tie. With the introduction of the Speed Force in the 1990s, the Flash has since been acknowledged as faster than the Man of Steel .
The relationship between Barry Allen and Iris West was originally very typical for DC Silver Age comics. Iris was completely in the dark about Barry's alter ego and was constantly frustrated by all his mysterious absences and late arrivals stemming from his role as the Flash. This changes when the two are married, and she discovers his secret after hearing him mutter it in his sleep.
The most recent incarnations of the two characters have had a much more complicated relationship. Iris discovers Barry is the Flash by having the Pre-Flashpoint reality revealed to her by Reverse-Flash , along with the fact that the two had been married with children in the previous reality. The weight of these revelations leads to serious trust issues that the two overcome, leading to Iris becoming an invaluable confidant and member of Team Flash.
The Flash's notorious enemies The Rogues were introduced as run-of-the-(cosmic tread)mill supervillains in the character's early years. Despite their wide array of powers and gadgets, there wasn't much to differentiate them from many of DC's other costumed crooks personality-wise.
Luckily, the group has evolved into a raucous bunch of villains that have become fan favorites. With an "honor among thieves" code of ethics and a grudging respect for the Fastest Man Alive, the Rogues are firmly established as one of the more colorful and compelling threats in the DC Universe.
Wally West's introduction as Kid Flash , the Flash's sidekick, happened during the same period that other new partners were being introduced to aid DC's heroes, including Aqualad and Wonder Girl . Since his first appearance, Wally's place in the DC Universe has only gotten more complicated (Not Wonder Girl complicated, but still.)
When the DC Universe was rebooted following Crisis on Infinite Earths, Wally became the new Flash and carried the mantle for more than two decades until the miniseries Flash: Rebirth in 2009. In the New 52 continuity, two different Wally Wests are active, the Post-Crisis version (who spent several years zapped out of reality by Doctor Manhattan ) and a younger one who is revealed to be the son of the Reverse-Flash.
