100,000 Responses Show People are Not Just Facing Aging, They Are Embracing It
NEW YORK--( BUSINESS WIRE )--A recent poll conducted by Silver Disobedience Inc. recorded over 100,000 responses from people about age, attitudes and lifestyles in 2020.
Over a four-day period via Instagram stories, these respondents – 91 percent of whom were over age 35 and 69 percent were between ages 45 and 64 – revealed fascinating insights into how this significant segment of society views themselves, their futures and their portrayals in the media including:
Sixty-nine percent (69%) have a “pro-aging” attitude whereas only 31 percent identify with “anti-aging” messages.
This Might Be the Best Age Yet, As Older Adults Are Wiser and More Confident
Eighty-five percent (85%) of the participants do not define themselves by age, with over 90 percent believing their attitudes are younger than those of past generations, confirming that age is most reflected as an attitude towards living, not a number reached.
Approximately 80 percent describe themselves as active, are optimistic about their futures, and say they are more confident than 10 years ago – and a majority (59 percent) feel like they are in their prime.
While 87 percent of the respondents are open to sharing their age, 77 percent believe this is to their detriment. Eighty-four percent (84%) believe ageism does exist today with 78 percent of older women being negatively stereotyped and 31 percent of men getting the same adverse treatment.
The majority of respondents (63 percent) feel ignored by various print media, yet 87 percent of respondents prefer print news sources, with 66 percent still reading print magazines. Only approximately 15 percent of the respondents believe that people age 50 plus are accurately reflected in advertisements, films and TV – and 93 percent believe these mediums do not portray men and women equally, as it relates to aging.
“There is a daily battle with societal perspectives on what aging really means to those who feel more confident and more relevant than ever before. With 95 percent of the respondents firmly voicing that they would place greater value on the brands that understand them, the smartest brands know that the message must change and assumptions about the older demographic should be thrown out the window,” says Dian Griesel, Founder of Silver Disobedience Inc., a media company that publishes daily, inspirational content on living and loving agelessly and partners with brands that share this philosophy.
Respondents, well over half still working (63 percent), feel financially secure, with 70 percent more focused on staying healthy than worrying about finances. Seventy-two percent (72%) believe that it is never too late to start a new career.
When it comes to spending, 64 percent strongly prefer the brick and mortar stores, although 52 percent would buy products that they see mentioned favorably on Instagram or Facebook. In addition to shopping, travel and entertainment is common with this group as 81 percent were planning to vacation this year and 59 percent attended a concert in the past 12 months. Some adults might put some budget towards discovering new hobbies, with 92 percent believing they can start a new hobby at any age.
“Overall, these poll results confirm that the 'older' demographic is not viewing age as something negative – yet the stereotypes and assumptions about this audience and their fears about aging still exist in almost every medium. This likely helps explain why Silver Disobedience which is pro living to the fullest at every age, continues to engage more people daily,” Griesel observed. “As people continue to crave positive content that they can relate to, they are turning to outlets like Silver Disobedience daily, with nearly 75 percent of these respondents confirming that they read the blog at least five days a week via the website or social media. This movement continues to grow and it is time for brands to recognize that people are relevant, active, vocal and connected at any age.”
Silver Disobedience® is an active community founded on the principle of living agelessly. It has grown into a personal-growth movement that rejects the notion that aging means becoming obsolete. Well over 2 million people per month – in what may be the largest, real-time focus group of those 48+ – participate by engaging with positive news and first-person essay content on SilverDisobedience.Rocks and social media channels, with each and every post being free of political divisiveness. Daily, an average of more than 3000+ responses and more than 600 comments by Silver Disobedients™ are smashing stereotypes and proving that their individual voices want to be heard as they are “Changing the Face of Aging™”.
Founded by Dian Griesel, a corporate strategist and national Wilhelmina Icon model, Silver Disobedience® works with select brands and partners who understand the value that the “longevity economy” provides to society, recognizing that not everyone over the age of 50 is a grandparent about to retire on a fixed income. This historically unique demographic comprising all lifestyles is focused on self-improvement, finding greater meaning, and living life to its fullest – with the purchasing power to do so. In addition to daily content opportunities, thousands of Silver Disobedients™ have subscribed to “opt in white lists” for targeted offers and coupons. Silver Disobedience is proud to be a woman-owned small business (WOSB).
For more information about Silver Disobedience and its related content creation and distribution capabilities, please contact:
