SmallCapPower | May 1, 2020: The gold price is poised to have a strong year in 2020 given the record amount of monetary stimulus related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Bigger gold miners will need new sources of gold production as current supplies dwindle and, thus, will be best served buying an existing resource rather than trying to find more gold on their own. Today we have identified three junior gold stocks that have become appealing acquisition candidates.
*Returns are based on closing stock prices as of April 30, 2020
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Wesdome Gold Mines explores for, extracts, processes, reclaims, and sells gold in Canada. It produces principally gold in the form of doré bars, and silver as a by-product. WDO boasts over 30 years of continuous gold production and the Company’s principal assets include the Eagle River Mine, which consists of three contiguous mining leases and 442 contiguous active mining claims covering an area of 7,958 hectares; the Mishi Mine that consists of 19 patented mining claims, five mining leases, and five staked claims covering an area of 3,055 hectares; and the Eagle River Mill located near Wawa. During 2019, Wesdome Gold Mines saw a 28% increase in production along with a 9% decrease in cash costs over 2018. With most of its mining infrastructure already built, Wesdome can easily triple production without incurring significant additional capex costs, making the Company an attractive takeover target for a large-cap miner.
K92 Mining is focused on exploration and development of mineral deposits located in Papua New Guinea. The Company’s main asset is the Kainantu Gold Project, consisting of two gold deposits. The Kainantu property covers a total area of approximately 410 square kilometers and is located in the Eastern Highlands Province of Papua New Guinea. On March 27, 2020, KNT reported record 2019 revenue of US$101.7 million and a yearly profit of US$32.5 million, in addition to all in sustaining costs (AISC) of US$680 per gold ounce. Production for 2020 is expected to be in the range of 115,000 to 125,000 gold equivalent ounces at all in sustaining costs of less than US$700 per ounce. Given its high-grade gold results thus far, K92 Mining could end up being acquired by a large-cap producer (the property used to be owned by Barrick).
Probe Metals is a gold junior engaged in the acquisition, exploration, and development of gold properties in Canada. The Company’s flagship asset is the Val-d’Or East gold project, comprising approximately 820 claims covering an area of 33,429 hectares located in the city of Val-d’Or, Quebec. Probe Metals management has experience selling their assets to large-cap miners. Having sold the Borden Lake project to Goldcorp in 2015 for $526M, the likely exit strategy for this Company is a sale. On April 28, 2020, Probe Metals intersected 5.2 g/t gold over 14.0 metres at its Val-d’Or East Monique property.
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
