SmallCapPower | July 23, 2019: Gold and silver prices have a high correlation, with silver prices generally moving an amplified amount relative to gold prices. During the past three months, gold is up 12% while silver is up 11%. While a lot of attention has been directed towards gold as it hit US$1,446/oz on July 18, its highest point in more than five years, the silver price has also been on the rise of late, hitting $16.39 per ounce on July 22, its highest point in about a year. Today we have discovered four junior silver stocks with sharply rising share prices on the basis of both year to date and 90-day returns.
*Share prices as at close Friday, July 19, 2019, data obtained from S&P Capital IQ
Levon Resources is focused on silver assets in Mexico. The Company’s main project is its Cordero property, located in the State of Chihuahua in North Central Mexico approximately 180 kilometers south of the city of Chihuahua. The Cordero Project consists of approximately 37,000 hectares of mining claims covering the Cordero district.
90 Day Average Trading Volume: 142,000
Silver One is a silver-focused exploration and development company. The Company has acquired a 100% interest in three assets from First Mining Finance. Through this transaction, First Mining owns 7.2% of the issued and outstanding shares of Silver One. Silver One has also acquired a 100% interest in the Candelaria Mine project through an option agreement with Silver Standard Resources Inc. This project lies within the Candelaria Mining District, which is historically the richest silver mining district in Nevada. On July 3, Silver One announced a private placement for $2.5M at $0.125 per unit. And, on July 8, SVE announced that it has increased the private placement from $2.5M to $5M.
90 Day Average Trading Volume: 155,000
Defiance Silver Corporation is a silver explorer and developer of the San Acacio Deposit, located in the historic Zacatecas Silver District of central Mexico that has produced over 700M ounces of silver. On June 25, Defiance announced that it has appointed Mr. Chris Wright to fill the role of CEO on an interim basis while it conducts a search for a permanent candidate.
90 Day Average Trading Volume: 147,000
Avino Silver & Gold Mines Ltd. ( TSX:ASM ) – $0.91
Avino Silver & Gold Mines operates two silver mines in Mexico and has a gold project currently under development in British Columbia, Canada. It extracts resources and processes a bulk concentrate at the San Gonzalo Mine and a copper concentrate from the Avino Mine, both of which are located on the Avino property in Durango, Mexico. The Avino property consists of approximately 20 mineral concessions, totaling over 1,000 hectares.
90 Day Average Trading Volume: 33,000
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
