SmallCapPower | January 29, 2020: Insiders are defined as any person with access to key company information before it is released to the public, or someone who owns more than 10% of a company’s shares. Insiders include individuals such as management, officers, and directors. Government bodies require companies to report this information, in a timely manner, giving investors a sense of insider activity within a company. One of the wealthiest investors in the mining sector is Eric Sprott, the billionaire founder of Sprott Inc. The junior resource stocks we have discovered today have received a significant insider investment from Eric Sprott during the past three months.
*Share price data as at January 27, 2020, data obtained from S&P Capital IQ
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Amex Exploration is a Canada-based mining exploration company focused on exploration activities conducted in Canada and Mexico. Its properties include the Perron Property, Normetal Property, Cameron Property, Lac Indicateur property, Eastmain Centre property, Eastmain North Property, Natora Property and Nueva Escondida property. The Company’s flagship asset, the Perron Property, consists of approximately 120 mining claims covering an area of over 4,510 hectares in northern Quebec. Amex’s summer drilling program found high-grade gold intersected on the Gratien gold zone at Perron, with results up to 16.48 g/t Au over 14.6 m, including 315.4 g/t Au over 0.5 m and 102.96 g/t Au over 0.7 m. Eric Sprott added 2M shares at $1.00/share last November, bring his total ownership up to 6.7M shares.
Benchmark Metals is a mining company focused on exploring and developing its Lawyers Gold and Silver project  located in the prolific Golden Triangle of northern British Columbia. The Lawyers Property and formerly producing Cheni Gold and Silver Mine is located 45 km northwest of the Kemess Gold and Copper Mine. The Property contains an existing Mineral Resource and hosts at least 16 gold and silver occurrences that were never fully mined, developed or explored. Eric Sprott added 2.3M shares at $0.30/share last December, following 13.3M shares added at $0.30/share in September, bringing his total ownership to 15.6M shares.
Discovery Metals focuses on discovering and advancing high-grade polymetallic deposits in a land package of about 150,000 hectares in the historic mining district in Coahuila State, Mexico. The Company’s portfolio consists of three large-scale, drill-ready projects and several earlier-stage prospects. Currently, the land holdings contain numerous historical direct-ship ore workings with several kilometers of underground development, however no modern exploration or drill testing on the properties has occurred before the work of Discovery Metals. As well, Discovery is currently exploring one the world’s largest silver resources at its 100% owned 37,000-hectare Cordero Project in Chihuahua State, Mexico. Eric Sprott added 3.3M shares at $0.45/share in December, following 7.8M shares added at $0.45/share in November, bringing his total ownership to 41.3M shares.
Dolly Varden Silver engages in the acquisition, development, exploration, and evaluation of mineral properties in Canada. The Company explores for gold, silver, and copper deposits. It holds 100% interests in the Dolly Varden project, covering an area of 8,800 hectares, as well as the Musketeer property located in northwestern British Columbia; and the Big Bulk porphyry copper-gold project located in Canada. Eric Sprott added 5.7M shares at $0.235/share in September, bringing his total ownership to 10.7M shares.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
