One of the main platinum uses is in the construction of autocatalysts. An autocatalyst is a “ cylinder of circular or elliptical cross section made from ceramic or metal formed into a fine honeycomb and coated with a solution of chemicals and platinum group metals.” An autocatalyst mounted inside a stainless steel canister is known as a catalytic converter.
A catalytic converter is installed in a vehicle’s exhaust lines, between the engine and muffler, where it moderates the dangerous qualities of exhaust. Specifically, the autocatalysts that vehicles contain convert over 90 percent of hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide, nitrogen and water vapor. They can also convert pollutants from diesel exhaust into carbon dioxide and water vapor, which is immensely helpful in reducing pollution.
Autocatalysts have been used in the US and Japan since 1974, and are now so common that more than 95 percent of new vehicles sold each year have one. As a result, they are a significant source of platinum demand that is not likely to disappear in the future. Indeed, as pollution rules become more stringent, car companies are looking into the possibility of creating even more efficient autocatalysts.
Platinum has many qualities that make it ideal for use in jewelry , and that is second largest source of platinum demand. The metal is strong, resists tarnish and can repeatedly be heated and cooled without hardening or oxidizing. When used to make jewelry, platinum is commonly alloyed with other platinum-group metals such as palladium , as well as copper and cobalt , so that it is easier to work with.
The history of platinum jewelry is long. More than 2,000 years ago, indigenous people in South America made rings and ornaments out of platinum metal. Egyptians used platinum for decoration as early as the 7th century BC . Meanwhile, Europeans began to use the metal in jewelry in the 18th century and continue to do so to this day. Currently, China is the largest market for platinum jewelry.
