SmallCapPower | February 28, 2020: The 2020 Prospectors & Developers Association of Canada (PDAC) convention is set to begin in Toronto, Canada, March 1st to 4th at the Metro Toronto Convention Centre. There is expected to be over 1,000 exhibitors, 3,500 investors, and 26,500 attendees from 135 countries. The five junior resource stocks we have identified today have seen promising exploration results recently, making some potential acquisition candidates. This could spur some positive investor sentiment over the next week at the PDAC 2020 conference.
*Share prices as at February 26, 2020, data obtained from S&P Capital IQ
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Amex Exploration is a Canada-based exploration company focused on exploration activities conducted in Canada and Mexico. Its properties include the Perron Property, Normetal Property, Cameron Property, Lac Indicateur property, Eastmain Centre property, Eastmain North Property, Natora Property and Nueva Escondida property. The Company’s flagship asset, the Perron Property, consists of approximately 120 mining claims covering an area of over 4,510 hectares in northern Quebec. On February 13, 2020, AMX announced Fall drill results from the Eastern Gold Zone at the Perron property, which included 29.44 grams per tonne (g/t) gold over 8.50 meters. High-grade gold mineralization encountered at multiple targets with grades in excess of 10g/t Au have sparked investor interest in the stock. Amex has $14M in funding for its 2020 drilling program, which will help prepare the geologic model for a resource estimate.
Azimut Exploration engages in the acquisition, exploration, and evaluation of mineral properties in Canada. It explores for copper, gold, zinc, silver, cobalt, tungsten, rare earth elements, uranium, chromium, nickel, and platinum group elements, as well as base metals in the Nunavik, Ungava Bay, and the James Bay region, Canada. The Company’s flagship project is the Kaanaayaa Property, which comprises 390 claims covering 200.5 square kilometers located in the James Bay region of Quebec. Investors should pay attention to this stock as Azimut has been using predictive modeling and  artificial intelligence on over 50 parameters and 17 years of data to identify optimal drill targets. The Company plans to announce drill results from James Bay targets in March.
K92 Mining is focused on exploration and development of mineral deposits located in Papua New Guinea. The Company’s main asset is the Kainantu Gold Project, consisting of two gold deposits. The Kainantu property covers a total area of approximately 410 square kilometers and is located in the Eastern Highlands Province of Papua New Guinea ~180 km west-northwest of Lae. On February 20, 2020, K92 announced drill results, which showed an average grade of 6.4 g/t Au + 15.9 g/t Ag + 0.9% Cu (8 g/t Au eq) at 2.4m. The Company is expected to release a new PEA, which could indicate a possible resource expansion to ~5.0M-8.0M oz/Au, suggesting a ~ 300K oz/Au per year mine. Given its great gold grades thus far, KNT could end up being acquired by a large-cap producer (the property used to be owned by Barrick).
Great Bear Resources is a Canadian gold junior exploring in the Red Lake Region of northwestern Ontario. Its flagship property, Dixie, is located just south of the former Newmont Goldcorp operations, covering an area of 9,140 hectares. In May 2019, GBR reported 16.3m grading 26.9 g/t Au and 7m grading 44.5 g/t Au at the “Hinge Zone” at the Dixie project. Great Bear Resources’ early success prompted famed mining investor Rob McEwen, founder and former Chairman and CEO of Goldcorp, to take an 8% stake in the Company. GBR continues to benefit from a tight capital structure – just about 46 million shares outstanding and the Company asserts that it is fully funded for drilling for the remainder of 2020 with plans for up to 300 holes. Additionally, with its proximity to Newmont’s operations, Great Bear could be seen a takeover target.
Viva Gold engages in the acquisition, exploration, and development of precious metals properties in Nevada. The Company’s flagship asset is the Tonopah gold project, an exploration/evaluation project with 444 unpatented mineral claims covering an area of 8,762 acres located in Ralston Valley, Nevada. In a recent interview with SmallCapPower, CEO James Hesketh said the Company is aiming to release an update PEA for the Tonopah Gold project soon.
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
