Favorite risk/reward gold mining stocks for 2020.
Low valuations versus their upside potential.
Quality properties with long-life mines.
Exceptional leverage to higher gold prices.
In January/February I made posts on SA that included my favorite gold and silver mining stocks for 2020. I decided to follow up on that with five more that should have made the lists. The stocks on those lists are still valid, although Cardinal Resources is potentially being acquired by a Nordgold (a private Russian company), and Alio Gold is being acquired by Argonaut Gold. Also, the risk level for TMAC Resources has increased substantially as investors have abandoned it.
Last week gold closed above $1700 for the first time since 2011. Technically, once we got above $1650, the gold chart looks very strong. There is not a lot of technical resistance between $1650 and $1935. The odds are increasing daily that we will now trend to a new high above $1935.
The silver price is still low and under $16. This adds risk to the silver miners. This new list does not include any pure silver miners. All of these five stocks are mostly gold miners, with some (SSR Mining, Great Panther, McEwen Mining, and Coeur Mining) mining a significant amount of silver. Below I will mention how much gold/silver they mine when I discuss each company.
If gold does trend to a new high, then this is a good opportunity to hold gold miners. And the best ones to hold are quality mid-tier producers with good upside potential. All of the stocks on this list should outperform the HUI (large-cap gold miner index) and GDXJ (large-cap and mid-tier gold miner ETF).
The last time gold made a new high in 2011 at $1935, the HUI was at 635. Today, the HUI is at 230. That means if gold trends to a new high, the quality producers should really fly. For every $100 move up in the gold price above $1700, the share price should rise 50% or more in some of the quality producers. Said another way, there is huge leverage measured historically at these levels.
While we probably won't see 635 in the HUI when gold reaches a new high, I think it is safe to say, it will be over 500. So, that is more than a 100% return for many quality producers if we reach a new high in gold. I think all five stocks on this list meet that criteria.
There is a good chance that the stock market could sell-off. It is currently valued at near historic levels measured against expected earnings. If the stock market sells off, then so could gold and the mining stocks. So, even though the gold chart looks great, and the reasons to like gold are abundant, there is never a sure thing.
Gold is currently benefitting from the following: 1) Huge money printing which could cause inflation, 2) Low-interest rates and negative real-rates, 3) Historical levels of uncertainty, 4) High physical demand, 5) Upward trending prices.
