Guest(s): Florian Grummes Managing Director, Midas Touch Consulting
Long-term, investors can expect gold prices to climb multiple times its current value, and silver prices to rally into the triple digits, but they should not count on the precious metals to break out in the short-term.
In fact, a correction is due and investors should take this as a buying opportunity, said Florian Grummes, managing director of Midas Touch Consulting.
“It looks like [gold will get] a consolidation on the higher levels, with one nasty, little pullback where all the weak hands are shaken off and then the next wave up towards $1,800 and then the all-time highs of $1,920,” Grummes told Kitco News. “Once gold sustainability takes out the all-time high of $1,920, it can run easily a few hundred dollars further.” (show less)
Long-term, investors can expect gold prices to climb multiple times its current value, and silver prices to rally into the triple digits, but they should not count on the precious metals to break out in the short-term.
In fact, a correction is due and investors should take this as a buying opportunity, said Florian Grummes, managing director of Midas Touch Consulting.
“It looks like [gold will get] a consolidation on the higher levels, with one nasty, ... (read more)
Your browser does not support inline frames or is currently configured not to display inline frames. Content can be viewed at actual source page: /news/video/latest?show=Kitco-NEWS.
The Kitco News team speaks to analysts and experts on the frontlines of the market to get the most up-to-date news on the economy. The show offers a well-rounded, timely view on big market moves and any major headlines that may affect financial assets. Coined – no pun intended – as the number one source of precious metals news, Kitco News is the leading provider of up-to-date price action in the precious metals space.
Disclaimer: The content on this website, including, without limitation, news, videos, interviews and commentaries, is provided by Kitco Metals Inc. ("Kitco") for informational purposes only and is not intended as any form of advice, whether legal, accounting, investment, financial or tax advice. Therefore, it cannot be relied upon as such. Should you require such advice, contact a licensed professional. The content provided herein is provided on an "as is" basis without any warranty of any kind, whether express or implied and your use of the information provided in said content is entirely at your own risk. In no event will Kitco be held liable for any indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages arising out of the use of the content on this website.
