Silver said returning to play this season at one or two potential sites -- including Orlando and Las Vegas -- made the most sense.
"There's no point in adding risk for flying all of you city to city if there's not going to be fans," Silver said. "We think it would be safer to be in a single location, or two locations, to start."
Silver allowed that there would need to be some restrictions in place at a single or two-site scenario, but he told players: "The goal isn't to have you go to a market for two months to sit in hotel room."
The commissioner expressed a desire that the NBA complete its season with a traditional playoff structure that includes seven-game series in each round, but he left open the possibility of play-in tournaments to accommodate more teams in resumption of a shortened season. Silver also told players that the start of next season could be pushed until December, regardless of whether this season was completed.
Through it all, Silver reminded players that these were issues that needed to be collectively bargained with the NBPA. Among those issues, he said, included how future basketball-related income and salary caps would be affected by massive decreases in revenue.
He flatly told players about the current collective bargaining agreement: "The CBA was not built for extended pandemics."
As for a return to play this season, Silver indicated discussions around training camp length in the resumption of the season centered on a minimum of three weeks. Silver said the NBA's hope would be that players who test positive for COVID-19 won't require shutting down a team or season, but only the removal of a player amid persistent testing of those who had come into contact with him.
Silver expressed confidence there would be enough mass testing available in the United States for the league to feel confident about using such a large number of tests. Once the NBA is ready to play in the next couple of months, Silver said, "We won't be taking tests from needy people."
Sources have told ESPN that the league estimates it would need in the neighborhood of 15,000 tests to resume and complete its season.
Roberts and Paul asked Silver to remind teams they were not allowed to pressure players to show up at voluntary workouts at team facilities. Silver said, if that was happening, it was "disheartening," and he assured them the organizations would be reminded.
"Until there's a vaccine, or some cocktail preventing people from dying from the virus, we are going to be dealing with this collectively," Silver told the players. "The ultimate issue is how much risk we're all comfortable taking."
