Click here to read the full article.
Fans of the beloved Air Jordan 1 High sneaker may have a new style to look forward to next year.
According to the sneaker leak account @zSneakerheadz on Instagram, the “Silver Toe” Air Jordan 1 Retro High OG is expected to launch in early 2021 and will only be available in women’s sizing. According to the account, the shoe is expected to wear a “Black/Metallic Silver-White-Black” color scheme featuring a white leather side panel that’s combined with black leather overlays and Swoosh branding on the sides. The shoe’s standout feature is the shiny metallic silver look that dresses the toe box, heel counter and collar.
Jordan Brand has yet to confirm information regarding the release surrounding the “Silver Toe” Air Jordan 1 Retro High OG Women’s but it reportedly will be available on the SNKRS app and at select Jordan Brand retailers starting early 2021 for $170.
Air Jordan Retro 1 High OG #SilverToe Black/Metallic Silver-White-Black CD0461-001 Early 2021 || $170 Women’s exclusives. *Pictured is a photoshop representation of the given colorway.*
A post shared by zSneakerHeadz (@zsneakerheadz) on Jun 28, 2020 at 8:00am PDT
The Air Jordan 1 was created by former Nike designer Peter Moore and was NBA icon Michael Jordan ’s first signature basketball sneaker in 1985. The shoe was controversial when it debuted as the NBA banned the baller from wearing it on the court because the original black and red colorway violated the league’s uniform policy, which forced the league to issue a $5,000 fine each time the legend wore it on the court.
In related Jordan Brand news, the Air Jordan 1 High OG “Smoke Grey” is launching via SNKRS on July 11 for $170.
Sign up for FN's Newsletter . For the latest news, follow us on Facebook , Twitter , and Instagram .
Grab the pair now on StockX and GOAT.
A new take on a classic style.
New colorway is arriving in July.
It was the first photo he has shared of himself since November 2019.
The rare sneaker drops on July 4 in Toyko.
The two-year-old already pulls off bold styles.
Before the Dior Jordan, there was the Nike Air Max 360 x Kim Jones.
She explored the desert on a road trip with husband Justin Bieber.
Nurses, fitness gurus and even nuclear power plant workers all love this affordable sneaker.
Score up to 40 percent off sneakers, wedges, flats, and more.
It's weirdly versatile and celeb-approved.
The star shared a series of images from her workout, taken by daughter Honor.
The 32-year-old performer sported an all-red outfit for her latest workout.
ICYMI, Kate Middleton's favorite, go-to sneaker is a sleek, unassuming, all-white sneaker called Superga. And since they were spotted last fall, Middleton worshipers were quick to track down the kicks on Amazon because, let's face it, they're not that affordable, typically retailing for $65 a pair. But now, thanks to Amazon's Summer Sale, you can […]
Culpo took her gym dressing to the next level.
Plus, the retailer is dropping a surprise location-exclusive sneaker collab.
In addition to their clothing choices, the men also share a status as billionaires.
Limited to 100 numbered editions, the Dior surfboard features Stussy's reinterpretation of the house's logo in gray and ice blue.
"Heartbeats 4 sneakers" launches July 2, hosted by Klarna and Highsnobiety.
The whole family got in on the action.
Drake's Crosby silhouette will go with almost everything in your closet.
Other celebs to take on the trend include Katie Holmes and Gabrielle Union.
Celebrities can't get enough of Hoka One One sneakers.
Rare sale—score major discounts on Coach's bestselling purses and wallets.
Nicholas Knightly has been Vuitton's creative director of leather goods since 2004.
The "Clueless" actress looked workout ready.
Truth be told, there's no such thing as a universal nude.
Here’s the thing: At the PureWow office, a lot of us are kind of sneakerheads. We love sporting kicks almost as much as we love the allure of a four-figure waitlist. Remember...
The fashion house is exploring a new avenue to reach younger consumers.
Here, Black female professionals, including a winemaker, sous chef, and an OB/GYN, share their personal career success stories.
Espadrilles and sandals for women, oxfords and boat shoes for men—all massively reduced at Cole Haan.
Alba danced alongside daughter Honor.
For $35, these socks make staying at home since March even more bearable thanks to its comfort, literally and figuratively. Plus, it's for a good cause.
Employees can access all earned pay as needed, eliminating the need for predatory lending.
More than 48 million U.S. workers applied for unemployment aid since the coronavirus pandemic took hold.
