After gold , silver is the most invested precious metal commodity. For centuries, silver has been used as currency, for jewelry, and as a long term investment option. Various silver-based instruments are available today for trading and investment. These include silver futures, silver options, silver ETFs , or OTC products like mutual funds based on silver. This article discusses silver futures trading—how it works, how it is typically used by investors, and what you need to know before trading.
To understand the basics of silver futures trading, let’s begin with an example of a manufacturer of silver medals who has won the contract to provide silver medals for an upcoming sports event. The manufacturer will need 1,000 ounces of silver in six months to manufacture the required medals in time. He checks silver prices and sees that silver is trading today at $10 per ounce. The manufacturer may not be able to purchase the silver today because he doesn’t have the money, he has problems with secure storage or other reasons. Naturally, he is worried about the possible rise in silver prices in the next six months. He wants to protect against any future price rise and wants to lock the purchase price to around $10. The manufacturer can enter into a silver futures contract to solve some of his problems. The contract could be set to expire in six months and at that time guarantee the manufacturer the right to buy silver at $10.1 per ounce. Buying (taking the long position on) a futures contract allows him to lock-in the future price.
On the other hand, an owner of a silver mine expects 1,000 ounces of silver to be produced from her mine in six months. She is worried about the price of silver declining (to below $10 an ounce). The silver mine owner can benefit by selling (taking a short position on) the above-mentioned silver futures contract available today at $10.1. It guarantees that she will have the ability to sell her silver at the set price.
Assume that both these participants enter into a silver futures contract with each other at a fixed price of $10.1 per ounce. At the time of expiry of the contract six months later, the following can occur depending upon the spot price (current market price or CMP) of silver. We will walk through several possible scenarios.
In all the above cases, both the buyer/seller achieves buying/selling silver at their desired price levels.
This is a typical example of hedging —achieving price protection and hence managing the risk using silver futures contracts. Most futures trading is intended for hedging purposes. Additionally, speculation and arbitrage are the other two trading activities which keep the silver futures trading liquid. Speculators take time-bound long/short positions in silver futures to benefit from expected price movements, while arbitrageurs attempt to capitalize on small price differentials that exist in the markets for the short term.
Although the above example provides a good demo to silver futures trading and hedging usage, in the real world, trading works a bit differently. Silver futures contracts are available for trading on multiple exchanges across the globe with standard specifications. Let’s see how silver trading works on the Comex Exchange (part of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange ( CME ) group).
A price quote of $15.7 for a full silver contract (worth 5,000 troy ounces) will be of total contract value of $15.7 x 5,000 = $78,500.
Futures trading is available on leverage (i.e., it allows a trader to take a position which is multiple times the amount of the available capital). A full silver futures contract requires a fixed price margin amount of $12,375. It means that one needs to maintain a margin of only $12,375 (instead of the actual cost of $78,500 in the above example) to take one position in a full silver futures contract.
Since the full futures contract margin amount of $12,375 may still be higher than some traders are comfortable with, the miNY contracts and micro contracts are available at lower margins in equivalent proportions. The miNY contract (half the size of the full contract) requires a margin of $6,187.50 and the micro contract (one-fifth the size of a full contract) requires a margin of $2,475.
Each contract is backed by physical refined silver (bars) which is assayed for 0.9999 fineness and stamped and serialized by an exchange-listed and approved refiner.
Most traders (especially short term traders) usually aren’t concerned about delivery mechanisms. They square off their long/short positions in silver futures in time prior to expiry and benefit by cash settlement .
The ones who hold their positions to expiry will either receive or deliver (based on if they are the buyer or seller) a 5,000-oz. COMEX silver warrant for a full-size silver future based on their long or short futures positions, respectively. One warrant entitles the holder the ownership of equivalent bars of silver in the designated depositories.
In the case of miNY (2,500-ounce) and micro (1,000-ounce) contracts, the trader either receives or deposits Accumulated Certificate of Exchange (ACE), which represents 50 percent and 20 percent ownership respectively, of a standard full-size silver warrant. The holder may accumulate ACE’s (two for miNY or five for micro) to get a 5,000-ounce COMEX silver warrant.
Forward trading in silver has been in existence for centuries. In its simplest form, it is just two individuals agreeing on a future price of silver and promising to settle the trade on a set expiry date . However, forward trading is not standard. It is therefore full of counterparty default risk. (Related: What Is the Difference Between Forward and Futures Contracts? )
Dealing in silver futures through an exchange provides the following:
Standardization for trading products (like the size designations of full, miNY or micro silver contracts)
Future date listing for 60 months forward dates, which enables the establishment of a forward price curve and hence efficient price discovery
Speculation and arbitrage opportunities that require no mandatory holding of physical silver by the trader, yet offer the opportunity to benefit from price differentials
Silver has been an established precious metal in dual streams:
This makes silver a commodity of high interest for a variety of market participants who actively trade silver futures for hedging or price protection. The major players in the silver futures market include:
