EDITOR: Matthew Bohlsen | June 29th, 2020 | 1 Comment
Angkor Resources’ Winning Formula: Strong Management, Great Assets and Excellent Exploration Upside in Cambodia.
Management is of key importance for all junior miners. Combine this with good assets and exploration potential and you have a winning formula. Angkor Resources Corp. (TSXV: ANK) has all three – Strong management, great assets, and excellent exploration upside.
CEO Stephen Burega has spent the past 10 years intimately involved in the launch and management of a number of natural resource companies. He brings experience spanning both national and international projects, private and public sectors. Mr. Burega has also held senior management roles for a variety of both publicly traded and private natural resource companies. CEO Burega, according to the InvestorIntel Publisher has also spoken in front of the United Nations about their model of reinvesting in the community .
VP Exploration Dennis Ouellette, B.Sc., P.Geo. has recently worked as a consulting geologist designing and managing exploration programs in Alberta, Yukon and British Columbia and assisting in the execution of exploration programs in the USA and Guatemala. During his career Dennis worked in a variety of roles, including VP for Northern Tiger which merged with Golden Predator which is now exploring the 3 Aces project in the Yukon, and senior Exploration Geologist, Project Geologist and Field Assistant for companies such as United Keno Hill Mines (Yukon), Falconbridge (Newfoundland) and Goldquest Exploration (Goldcorp – Red Lake, Ontario).
Executive Chairman Mike Weeks is a founder of Angkor Resources Corp. and previously served as its president and CEO. Mr. Weeks has 25 years experience in project management of power generation and petroleum-related industries. He has spent over 14 years negotiating with foreign governments in developing and implementing natural resource concessions. Mike has managed large projects in Canada, Africa and Europe, constructing and managing several large production facilities in North Africa.
Angkor’s business strategy focuses on project generation and selecting strong partners to advance each of their multiple prospects towards a sustainable recurring revenue stream. The Company has raised over USD $23 million to date from partners and capital raises to help fund its exploration activities.
Thank you for joining InvestorIntel daily email updates!
Angkor has a very large land package entailing 983 km² in Cambodia with multiple prospects focused on gold, silver and base metals. Added to this is their oil and gas exploration license known as Block VIII ( 7,300 km² concession) also in Cambodia.
In their latest news Angkor Resources reported on their recently completed mapping and sampling program on their 100% owned Andong Meas property. This included multiple grab samples with gold from 3.08 to 55.4 g/t.
Angkor’s exploration potential is massive and covers base metals, precious metals, and oil and gas, all in Cambodia.  Six key exploration licences include:
Andong Meas (187 km²) – Under-explored with potential for developing porphyry style mineralization and epithermal vein systems related to precious metal deposition. Past gold sampling has found samples of 20.9g/t and 19.7g/t.
Banlung (150 km²) – Hommy 5 Resources Inc. has an earn in agreement (up to 70%) with Angkor retaining a 30% interest. Past exploration has found a “bonanza zone” which included an intercept of high grade gold at Okalla East of 86.0 g/t Au over 1m, at 101m to 102m.
Koan Nheak (189 km²) Emerald Resources NL (ASX: EMR) has an earn in agreement with Angkor retaining a 20% interest. Prospective for gold and copper.
Oyadao (222 km²) – Early stage exploration opportunities.
Oyadao South Halo (235 km²) – Includes a copper-molybdenum-gold porphyry system with disseminated sulphides.
Oil and gas license – Block VIII – Bought only in 2019 Angkor Resources has already discovered promising multiple oil seeps within their Block VIII license.
Note that 2 of the 5 licenses currently have exploration funding agreements in place with JV partners.
Angkor Resources has to date been a prolific and successful project generator in Cambodia. Not only does this look set to continue in the areas of precious and base metals, oil and gas; but recent very promising gold sampling of up to 55g/t Au on their 100% owned Andong Meas property means Angkor may one day have their own Cambodian gold resource/mine. Of course it is early days but the recent news is very encouraging.
Angkor Resources trades on a market cap of only C$8 million. They control almost 1,000 km² on land and another massive 7,300 km² of oil & gas licenses all in the under-explored country of Cambodia. Combine their strong management, great assets, and excellent exploration potential and you have potential for a very successful future.
