Are Silver Lake Resources’s (ASX:SLR) Statutory Earnings A Good Guide To Its Underlying Profitability?
Simply Wall St June 29, 2020
It might be old fashioned, but we really like to invest in companies that make a profit, each and every year. That said, the current statutory profit is not always a good guide to a company’s underlying profitability. Today we’ll focus on whether this year’s statutory profits are a good guide to understanding Silver Lake Resources (ASX:SLR).
We like the fact that Silver Lake Resources made a profit of AU$47.1m on its revenue of AU$440.5m, in the last year. At the risk of seeming quaint, we do like to at least examine profit, even when a stock is improving revenue and considered a ‘growth stock’.
Not all profits are equal, and we can learn more about the nature of a company’s past profitability by diving deeper into the financial statements. So today we’ll look at what Silver Lake Resources’s cashflow and unusual items tell us about the quality of its earnings, as well as touching on how its recent share issues are impacting shareholders. That might leave you wondering what analysts are forecasting in terms of future profitability. Luckily, you can click here to see an interactive graph depicting future profitability, based on their estimates.
One key financial ratio used to measure how well a company converts its profit to free cash flow (FCF) is the accrual ratio. In plain english, this ratio subtracts FCF from net profit, and divides that number by the company’s average operating assets over that period. This ratio tells us how much of a company’s profit is not backed by free cashflow.
That means a negative accrual ratio is a good thing, because it shows that the company is bringing in more free cash flow than its profit would suggest. That is not intended to imply we should worry about a positive accrual ratio, but it’s worth noting where the accrual ratio is rather high. Notably, there is some academic evidence that suggests that a high accrual ratio is a bad sign for near-term profits, generally speaking.
Silver Lake Resources has an accrual ratio of -0.11 for the year to December 2019. That indicates that its free cash flow was a fair bit more than its statutory profit. Indeed, in the last twelve months it reported free cash flow of AU$75m, well over the AU$47.1m it reported in profit. Silver Lake Resources’s free cash flow improved over the last year, which is generally good to see. Having said that, there is more to consider. We must also consider the impact of unusual items on statutory profit (and thus the accrual ratio), as well as note the ramifications of the company issuing new shares.
In order to understand the potential for per share returns, it is essential to consider how much a company is diluting shareholders. In fact, Silver Lake Resources increased the number of shares on issue by 7.5% over the last twelve months by issuing new shares. As a result, its net income is now split between a greater number of shares. To celebrate net income while ignoring dilution is like rejoicing because you have a single slice of a larger pizza, but ignoring the fact that the pizza is now cut into many more slices. You can see a chart of Silver Lake Resources’s EPS by clicking here .
How Is Dilution Impacting Silver Lake Resources’s Earnings Per Share? (EPS)
We don’t have any data on the company’s profits from three years ago. On the bright side, in the last twelve months it grew profit by 161%. On the other hand, earnings per share are only up 77% over the same period. So you can see that the dilution has had a bit of an impact on shareholders. Therefore, the dilution is having a noteworthy influence on shareholder returns. And so, you can see quite clearly that dilution is influencing shareholder earnings.
Changes in the share price do tend to reflect changes in earnings per share, in the long run. So it will certainly be a positive for shareholders if Silver Lake Resources can grow EPS persistently. However, if its profit increases while its earnings per share stay flat (or even fall) then shareholders might not see much benefit. For that reason, you could say that EPS is more important that net income in the long run, assuming the goal is to assess whether a company’s share price might grow.
How Do Unusual Items Influence Profit?
Silver Lake Resources’s profit was reduced by unusual items worth AU$15m in the last twelve months, and this helped it produce high cash conversion, as reflected by its unusual items. This is what you’d expect to see where a company has a non-cash charge reducing paper profits. While deductions due to unusual items are disappointing in the first instance, there is a silver lining. We looked at thousands of listed companies and found that unusual items are very often one-off in nature. And, after all, that’s exactly what the accounting terminology implies. Assuming those unusual expenses don’t come up again, we’d therefore expect Silver Lake Resources to produce a higher profit next year, all else being equal.
In conclusion, both Silver Lake Resources’s accrual ratio and its unusual items suggest that its statutory earnings are probably reasonably conservative, but the dilution means that per-share performance is weaker than the statutory profit numbers imply. Based on these factors, we think Silver Lake Resources’s earnings potential is at least as good as it seems, and maybe even better! In light of this, if you’d like to do more analysis on the company, it’s vital to be informed of the risks involved. Case in point: We’ve spotted 3 warning signs for Silver Lake Resources you should be aware of.
Our examination of Silver Lake Resources has focussed on certain factors that can make its earnings look better than they are. And it has passed with flying colours. But there are plenty of other ways to inform your opinion of a company. Some people consider a high return on equity to be a good sign of a quality business. So you may wish to see this free collection of companies boasting high return on equity , or this list of stocks that insiders are buying .
If you decide to trade Silver Lake Resources, use the lowest-cost* platform that is rated #1 Overall by Barron’s, Interactive Brokers . Trade stocks, options, futures, forex, bonds and funds on 135 markets, all from a single integrated account.
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned.
Have feedback on this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
