With surging interest lifting prices, it’s time to take your pick of the best crypto to ride the second wave
By Josh Enomoto , InvestorPlace Contributor Jul 17, 2019, 11:43 am EDT
After spending most of 2018 and much of this year in the doldrums, bitcoin and the virtual currency complex are making a big comeback. Sure, the upside has been anything but consistent. Merely a few weeks ago, bitcoin was challenging the $14,000 level before falling back below $10,000. Yet I believe the best cryptocurrencies are just getting started.
Before I dive into my main arguments, I want to clarify one point: bitcoin and other so-called best cryptocurrencies don’t have any intrinsic value. Instead, the premise of any digital token is not only the potential that it finds mainstream acceptance but that the underlying blockchain technology does as well. As such, even the best crypto is subject to narrative-driven mania rather than steady movements through sound fundamentals.
This also brings up the point that before you buy any of the best cryptocurrencies, you should always check their associated newsfeeds: it’s not unusual for digital tokens to spike (or collapse) on something as flimsy as unsubstantiated rumors.
Despite the risks, investors should still consider taking a measured shot at the best cryptocurrencies. Because for one thing, nothing else gives you this rip-roaring potential. Over the next decade, I believe the best crypto will give you far greater returns than the best penny stock.
Secondly, the general public has just experienced one complete crypto cycle: the insane highs, and the devastating lows. Yet contrary to bearish criticisms, bitcoin is still very much alive and kicking.
For this slideshow of the best cryptocurrencies, I’m going to focus on technical factors. Further, all charts utilize base-10 logarithmic scales (including market-value volume levels) to account for the extreme historical price swings.
With that, here are my picks for the 10 best cryptocurrencies:
