Cryptocurrencies to Buy for 2020: Ripple (XRP)
A leading altcoin positioned for potentially big gains in 2020 is Ripple.
Ripple is a company which leverages blockchain technology to enable banks, payment providers, digital asset exchanges and corporations to send money globally, usually using the company’s cryptocurrency, XRP.
In many ways, then, Ripple is the infrastructure behind cross-border cryptocurrency payments.
As cryptos gain more mainstream traction, Ripple is adding more and more banks and various other customers to its network. Most recently, the National Bank of Egypt just partnered with Ripple.
More and more banks will partner with Ripple in 2020 as cryptocurrency awareness and demand rises. As it does, the price of XRP will rise, too.
One of the more interesting cryptocurrencies to watch in 2020 — and which could explode higher — is Basic Attention Token.
The core idea behind BAT is pretty simple. The digital advertising model is broken, in that user and advertiser incentives are not aligned. Instead, they run opposite one another. That is, advertisers want users to watch their ads, while consumers want to skip the ads.
The idea of BAT is to realign the incentive structure in the digital ad network so that user and advertiser incentives match one another.
To do this, users get paid Basic Attention Tokens to watch ads in the Brave browser, so that they are now financially incentivized to watch the ad. The end goal, of course, is that more consumers watch ads, and advertisers sell more product/generate more brand awareness.
It’s a pretty smart business model.
And, as cryptocurrencies gain more mainstream consumer traction in 2020, this smart model for compensating users to watch ads should similarly gain traction. As it does, the price of BAT should rise.
Cryptocurrencies to Buy for 2020: Chainlink (LINK)
One of the hottest cryptocurrencies, and one which Matt McCall thinks will remain red hot for the foreseeable future, is Chainlink.
In his Ultimate Crypto portfolio , Matt first recommended Chainlink in early January at a price of $2.09. Today, Chainlink trades hands at $3.87, up a whopping 85% in just five months. What’s more, that 85% return over the past five months, follows a 450% return in 2019.
In other words, Chainlink has been scorching hot. Strengthening fundamentals imply that it will remain hot for the foreseeable future.
Specifically, Chainlink leverages blockchain technology to create smart contracts, which are essentially self-executing contracts that can be executed without central oversight.
But businesses have been slow to adopt smart contracts because data is integral to executing these smart contracts, and there hasn’t yet been a reliable way to connect external data with the smart contract.
That’s exactly what Chainlink does. So, they provide a very necessary gateway to usher in broader adoption of smart contracts. This adoption uptake in 2020 will provide a natural tailwind for LINK, and the coin’s red-hot rally will likely persist.
The Synthetix Network Token is a cool platform in the ethereum ecosystem which leverages blockchain technology to help bridge the gap between the often very obscure cryptocurrency world, and the far more tangible traditional asset world.
That is, in the Synthetix Network, there are Synths, which are synthetic assets that provide exposure to assets such as gold, bitcoin, U.S. Dollars and various equities like Tesla (NASDAQ: TSLA ) and Apple (NASDAQ: AAPL ). The whole idea of these synthetic assets is to create shared assets wherein users benefit from asset exposure, without actually owning the asset.
It’s a very unique idea, and a promising project in the ethereum landscape. Because it helps bridge the gap between cryptocurrencies and traditional assets, it creates a level of familiarity and value that are often missing in other cryptocurrency assets. This familiarity and value ultimately position SNX price to rise in 2020.
Cryptocurrencies to Buy for 2020: DxChain Token (DX)
On the smaller side, a cryptocurrency which look like an interesting speculative buy in 2020 is DxChain Token.
DxChain is a very ambitious project which aims to use blockchain technology to solve the world’s data computation, storage and privacy issues. It’s a tall order. But, if it works, it could yield huge results in terms of DXC usage and value growth.
In 2020, data privacy concerns are front and center. As such, privacy-focused coins should rise. DXC is one of the more interesting privacy-focused coins with potentially huge long term upside.
While it’s still all very speculative, those attributes may make this altcoin worth the risk over the next few quarters.
New technologies are often undergirded by periods of rapid, exponential growth … before either dying out in supernova fashion or normalizing to meet realistic expectations. So when cryptos had their first “once-in-a-lifetime” event in 2013 — which turned every $1,000 into $93,000 — the spectating world thought they had missed out.
Then came the next life-changing event in 2017, turning every $5,000 into $123,000 … that was assuredly the big boom that you either rode to 25x gains or, well, you didn’t, right? Wrong.
Cryptocurrencies are unlike any trend we’ve ever seen before, and there will be another opportunity for investors to turn a fistful of dollars into millions of dollars.
The key to this explosion is the Halvening. Don’t miss out this time!
Luke Lango is a Markets Analyst for InvestorPlace. He has been professionally analyzing stocks for several years, previously working at various hedge funds and currently running his own investment fund in San Diego. A Caltech graduate, Luke has consistently been recognized as one of the world’s top stock pickers by various other analysts and platforms, and has developed a reputation for leveraging his technology background to identify growth stocks that deliver outstanding returns. Luke is also the founder of Fantastic, a social discovery company backed by an LA-based internet venture firm. As of this writing, he did not hold a position in any of the aforementioned securities.
If you missed out on investing in the first wave of smartphones, don’t worry…. a new device is just being released that could be even bigger.
Legendary investor Matt McCall has all the details on the little-known company behind it.
Article printed from InvestorPlace Media, https://investorplace.com/2020/06/explosive-cryptocurrencies-to-buy-2020/.
