Crypto exchange Binance denied stealing $1 million from one of its users.
The exchange took the funds by order of the South Korean police.
Crypto exchange Binance has presented new evidence about a user account that was blocked by a police investigation. The exchange seeks to clarify the facts after being accused of stealing $1 million from a user whose initials are “B.K.” According to an alleged investigation by the South Korean police, B.K. is part of a scam that allowed him to seize part of the stolen funds.
According to Binance’s publication, the events began in early November 2018. A crypto project was the victim of a scam that caused losses of 3,995 ETH. The victims of the scam reported to South Korean authorities, according to Binance. After the investigations, authorities determined that the perpetrator (allegedly, B.K.) gained unauthorized access to the victim’s mail. B.K. allegedly posed as a representative of Binance. Binance further says:
As a security deposit from the victim, the suspect received a remittance in cryptocurrency (ETH) worth approximately 10 billion KRW. According to the conducted investigation, a user on Binance was then identified as receiving a majority of the stolen funds — this user’s initials are B.K.
Binance was contacted in early 2019. The South Korean security agency requested that the exchange transfer B.K.’s funds back to his alleged victims. The exchange complied with the request, after “having taken the necessary steps”. The owner of the funds, B.K., was notified of the action and given the contact details of the South Korean agency so that he could contact them and possibly recover his funds.
The exchange was then contacted by a Ukrainian security agency. The agency was acting on behalf of the user and, according to Binance, they were informed of the case. The Ukrainian security agency had no further demands and “thanked the exchange for its cooperation”.
In the image below is the image provided by Binance as evidence. It is a screenshot of the request from the South Korean authorities.
The crypto exchange claimed to be working with security agencies around the world to prevent any crime related to its operations. In addition, Binance said it would be willing to provide more information to authorities if requested. The exchange claims:
Binance will not hesitate to take legal action against anyone who deliberately tarnishes its reputation through misrepresentation or misinformation.
The user, B.K., gave his version of the facts on the website forklog and revealed the exact amount the exchange would have taken. The total sum is $858,999 which comes down to 4.56 BTC , 1600,215 ETH , 4290 LTC , among other cryptocurrencies. In addition, the user allegedly tried to contact the South Korean police who, according to B.K., denied their involvement. The user claims that Binance “appropriated the funds” for its benefit. However, the user’s version could not be verified, and he did not present hard evidence to defend himself.
It remains to be seen what steps the user will take. Binance is one of the companies accused of violating the US securities law. In addition, it is claimed that the company has concealed the obligation to register as promoters of cryptocurrencies used as utility tokens. According to the lawsuit, the companies compare these assets to Bitcoin and Ethereum, which are not considered securities by U.S. authorities.
#Binance remains committed to combating fraud without compromising the truth. https://t.co/SjrxNf8xzq
Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and don’t miss any hot news anymore! Do you like our price indices ?
