Bitcoin (BTC), Ethereum (ETH), Litecoin (LTC) Price Forecast, Analysis and Chart:
Bitcoin battles with $9,000 level.
Cryptocurrencies rally across the board.
If you are interested in trading the cryptocurrency market, we have produced a Day Trading Guide to Bitcoin and Other Cryptocurrencies to help you better understand this highly volatile asset class.
The two-month cryptocurrency rally continues Friday with all major coins/tokens in positive territory. Market leader Bitcoin has just touched the $9,000 level and made its highest level since November 11, while Ethereum is back at levels last seen two months ago.
We have produced a series of cryptocurrency reports recently, highlighting notable technical set-ups and important price points.
Bitcoin’s latest run, while fueling bullish sentiment, needs to break a couple of important technical levels to turn the chart further positive. A break of the 200-day moving average, currently around $9,100, would confirm short-, medium- and long-term positive sentiment, while a close above $9,930 would break a series of lower highs and add further bullish sentiment. Initial support either side of $8,500.
As always with this sector, sharp moves either way can occur in a short timeframe, and with the market trading 24/7, care should be taken over the weekend.
Bitcoin (BTC) Daily Price Chart (May 2019 - January 17, 2020)
What is your view on the latest cryptocurrency rally? You can let us know via the form at the end of this piece or you can contact the author at nicholas.cawley@ig.com or via Twitter @nickcawley1 .
DailyFX provides forex news and technical analysis on the trends that influence the global currency markets.
Leveraged trading in foreign currency or off-exchange products on margin carries significant risk and may not be suitable for all investors. We advise you to carefully consider whether trading is appropriate for you based on your personal circumstances. Forex trading involves risk. Losses can exceed deposits. We recommend that you seek independent advice and ensure you fully understand the risks involved before trading.
FX Publications Inc (dba DailyFX) is registered with the Commodities Futures Trading Commission as a Guaranteed Introducing Broker and is a member of the National Futures Association (ID# 0517400). Registered Address: 32 Old Slip, Suite 803; New York, NY 10005. FX Publications Inc is a subsidiary of IG US Holdings, Inc (a company registered in Delaware under number 4456365)
News & Analysis at your fingertips.
