I’ve written about Bitcoin, Ethereum, and VeChain on this site in recent weeks.
You should also know that I own all three.
Per a recent post , I think the entire cryptocurrency market is on the verge of another two-year bull run.
But instead of talking about each crypto individually, I wanted to take a few minutes to write about which one I think will dominate the others.
To do that, we’re going to look at some charts to get a sense of relative strength and weakness.
That’s probably a given since I have a stake in each one.
That said, each will perform differently in the current cycle.
This is a chart I’ve posted on Twitter several times.
Get Instant Access to the Same "New York Close" Forex Charts Used by Justin Bennett!
You don’t have to be a TA guru to see that Ethereum is coiling for a move higher against Bitcoin.
The higher lows since late 2015 suggest as much.
If Ethereum does break higher against Bitcoin over the coming weeks, it will solidify the first multi-year higher low for the pair.
That would be a significant development, in my opinion.
It would also help confirm the notion that Ethereum will outperform Bitcoin over the next two years.
I’m not saying that will happen, but I do think it’s likely.
I explain a second reason why BTC may lag others this time around below.
Now that we know the technicals favor ETH over BTC, let’s see how VeChain stacks up to Ethereum.
For that, we turn to the VETETH chart.
As you can see, VeChain is breaking out against Ethereum this week.
If the current weekly candle closes at or near its current levels, we’ll have a confirmed breakout.
And keep in mind that these charts show at least a year’s worth of price action, so breakouts aren’t likely to fizzle anytime soon.
But as I stated above, there are no guarantees.
This type of analysis only shows what might occur over the next two years.
These charts are also open to interpretation and could change over time, in which case I’d have to reevaluate.
However, as of this writing, I can say with a certain degree of confidence that the next two years will look like this in terms of performance:
