Total trading of Bakkt's hyped "physical" bitcoin futures, meaning traders and investors are not able to sell more bitcoin than they actually have, came to just 72 bitcoin by the end of its first day, compared to over 5,000 bitcoin traded on the first day of CME's cash-settled futures, launched at the peak of bitcoin-mania in December 2017 .
"The disappointing Bakkt opening signals to the crypto community that institutions are less ready to invest in bitcoin at scale than was supposed, which means the price was probably too high and due for a correction," said Alex Mashinsky, chief executive at crypto lending company Celsius Network.
"What we've just seen is short sellers and momentum traders piling on to make things worse, and now here we are back at support," Mashinsky added.
The bitcoin price suddenly moved sharply lower today, knocking the wider cryptocurrency market, ... [+] including ethereum, litecoin, bitcoin cash, and Ripple's XRP.
Some other bitcoin and crypto market watchers were more upbeat, pointing to Bakkt's widely telegraphed launch as reason for bitcoin's poor performance.
"It should be noted that the launch of these futures was one of the main narratives that spurred on the massive bull run at the start of the year, so what we've got here is a classic case of buying the rumor and selling the news," eToro's senior market analyst Mati Greenspan wrote in a note to clients.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
