By Maheen Hernandez June 30, 2020 Off
Common sense according to a Litecoin enthusiast should dictate why Bitcoin is the King and on how Litecoin complements the BTC without competing with it. Sometimes it is good to learn the fundamentals and ignore the Fear, Uncertainty, and Doubt.
The idea of Litecoin making it to 55 million wallet addresses can be exciting if it would in some way learn to an increase in the price of the tokens.  Whether the wallet address is at profit or loss can be determined by considering the price at which the tokens were acquired and on how it is possible ensure a positive balance.
Some people opine that Lightning Network is dead.  This can be a hasty decision.  While traders are only concerned about the price going up and coming down, there are lot of tasks to be done to ensure that the price happens.  Price does not happen simply. It is true that LTC can be used for payments just like BTC and that it is cheaper and faster.
The good thing about Litecoin is that the richest wallet has so far had only 2.5 percent of the supply. There are lot of opinions than facts.  Facts are facts, but opinion is something that can be spelled by anyone based on their individual perception of statistics and facts revolving around them.
A little while ago the Litecoin Foundation tweeted:  “There have been 307,603 new non-zero #Litecoin wallet addresses created in the past 7 days. That is an average of 43,943 new addresses per day.”
This just means that Litecoin community are progressing in steps towards whatever they are progressing towards.
Sydney Ifergan, the crypto expert tweeted:  “Litecoin Development gets support from different donations in the community contributing to its overall growth.  Good for LTC.”
Investors are interested in making their money talk for themselves.  Of note about 99% of the LTC historical outputs have been monetary.  Accountability goes like Litecoin’s blockchain has had 146,796,072 Outputs over 9 yrs.
The Litecoin Community have been actively involved in the process of creating awareness, adoption, and adoption of the LTC by virtue of their strong and vibrant community.
And, now we have Charlie Lee expressing himself openly about one stuff or the other, which in turn is good for the community.  As despite all the ideas of human behavior, familiarity breeds passion.  People understand facts they hear from a known face than from an unknown face.
