Please consider using a different web browser for better experience.
Please enable JavaScript in your browser for a better site experience.
ErisX Releases API for Bulk Trading of Bitcoin, Ether
ErisX CEO Thomas Chippas said the new block trading API would improve its over-the-counter trading services. (Credit: CoinDesk archives)
ErisX Releases API for Bulk Trading of Bitcoin, Ether
Crypto derivatives platform ErisX said Tuesday it launched an application programming interface (API) for bitcoin, bitcoin cash, ether and litecoin block trading, allowing for bulk trades.
The API provides greater integration of the firm’s block trading facility, a service for spot and futures market crypto traders looking to strike private, high-volume deals. This applies to spot trades of at least 10 bitcoin , 100 bitcoin cash , 100 ether or 250 litecoin , and futures trades of at least 10 bitcoin contracts or 50 ether contracts, according to a Tuesday blog post .
Such orders might quickly rock those cryptos’ prices if the taker was to place them on the open market. This could trigger price volatility.
By negotiating a trade privately with other ErisX registered members, clearing and settling it through ErisX’s in-house service and then reporting it only at or soon after the fact, the parties avoid destabilizing their own trade.
“They eliminate counterparty settlement risk while limiting market impact,” Carlos Mosquera, Benatuil, CEO of Solidus OTC said in a press statement.
Parties report their trades at the trade date or within 15 minutes of execution, the blog post said.
“We are removing the friction and risks associated with OTC based workflows and expanding the universe of potential counterparties for our Members with a competitively priced service,” CEO Thomas Chippas said in the release.
The leader in blockchain news, CoinDesk is a media outlet that strives for the highest journalistic standards and abides by a strict set of editorial policies . CoinDesk is an independent operating subsidiary of Digital Currency Group, which invests in cryptocurrencies and blockchain startups.
