Ethereum (ETH) shows a price increase of about 25%, as the futures volume on exchanges soars.
Ethereum outperformed the market leader Bitcoin. Analysts suggest that this trend could continue.
Ethereum has shown a positive performance over the last week. The second biggest cryptocurrency by market cap beats Bitcoin in terms of performance and trades at $169 with a 2.26% loss in the last 24 hours. However, in the weekly chart ETH shows gains of 26.74%, in that period the BTC could rise 13.59%. Analysts suggest that this trend may be prolonged.
According to the data analysis platform Skew, on April 6 of this year, Ethereum showed a significant increase in the futures volume as its price rose. In the chart below, it can be seen how the futures volume shot up from around $1 billion on April 4 and 5 to $3 billion on April 6.
— skew (@skewdotcom) April 7, 2020
This increase in futures volume has not been seen since early March when Ethereum traded around $150. As can be seen, the crypto exchanges leading the increase in futures volume are OKEx with $1.1 billion, Huobi with $1.1 billion and Binance with $450 million.
On the other hand, the open interest for Ethereum on Bitmex has shown an increase with the volume of futures. The open interest represents the total amount of pending positions of the investors for the financial derivatives that have open contracts. As can be seen in the chart below, this indicator had a significant increase on April 6th when it reached $65 million dollars.
Another major reason behind the positive performance of Ethereum is the growth in the DeFi sector. As stated by ConsenSys, DeFi applications could be worth up to a billion dollars. There is currently around $740 million in the DeFi sector, which underlines Ethereum’s dominant position. During March, the DeFi sector faced major crises due to market volatility. This caused the capital placed in the DeFi sector to decrease, but has begun to rise again as the cryptocurrency market shows stability and attracts new investors.
Research firm Glassnode has pointed out that the MVRV ratio of the ETH indicates that the ETH price is below its ‘fair value’. Currently, as indicated by Glassnode, the MCRV of the EH is at 0.8 and indicates that the cryptocurrency is undervalued. This metric was created by the research firm and measures whether the current price of a cryptocurrency is moving downward or upward. The metric, according to Glassnode, uses a wide range of fundamental data. From this metric, it could be argued that the ETH could test the $200 mark and thus continue its upward trajectory.
#Ethereum 's MVRV Ratio, a metric used to assess if price is above or below "fair value", currently sits at 0.8 – indicating that it is currently undervalued. $ETH 's realized price is currently $202 while current market value is $164. https://t.co/1Ds0PoTar9 pic.twitter.com/etfwk8t4WW
Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and don’t miss any hot news anymore! Do you like our price indices ?
