That's all from us today - thanks for coming along.
Here's a quick recap of what happened today...
World stock markets rose as coronavirus lockdowns were relaxed and China-US tensions appeared to be easing.
In Europe, Frankfurt was the star performer as German investors played catch-up after a long holiday weekend and eyed hopes for a new Covid-19 domestic stimulus package.
Paris equities, also solidly higher, ignored the French government's dire prediction that the economy will shrink 11pc this year.
Oil marched higher on hopes of recovering demand, and amid speculation that key producers including Saudi Arabia and Russia will extend massive output cuts that have helped support the virus-plagued market.
Sterling pushed to its highest level in over a month as crunch talks between UK and EU officials over future trading relations kicked off.
Cable climbed as high as $1.2576 on its fourth consecutive day of gains, topping off a 1.2pc jump on Monday
What to look forward to tomorrow:
Fashion retailer Reiss said it will reopen its first 26 UK stores on June 15. The chain is in the latest stage of its phased reopening plans, having already resumed trading in some Europe stores.
It will implement a number of health and safety procedures to help comply with Government guidance, such as restricting the number of customers and limiting access to fitting rooms.
London's benchmark index climbed 0.87pc today, ending at 6,220.14 while the FTSE 250 rose 0.92pc to 17,436.31.
In the eurozone  the Frankfurt DAX hit its highest level since early March after being closed yesterday for Whit Monday.
Primrose Hill was buzzing on Sunday. In the surrounding streets, pub landlords were serving pints from the windows of their empty boozers.
The sun was out - and so were the public. In this upmarket part of north London, you could be forgiven for thinking lockdown was all but over.
But for pubs, this peddling their wares from a hatch on the side of the premises was little more than a token - not to mention loss-making - effort. Their woes are far from over.
Boris Johnson’s adherence to two-metre social distancing, even if the nation’s watering holes open in July as expected, will leave more than two-thirds of landlords little choice but to keep their doors shut, according to industry leaders.
Stock markets in Europe have just closed and we will have a look at the closing figures once they settle.
David Madden of CMC Markets says:
Stock markets in Europe have posted decent gains for a second day in a row as a slight thawing of US-China trade relations, combined with hopes surrounding the easing of lockdown restrictions has boosted equity sentiment.
It was reported last night that Chinese state controlled companies placed orders to purchase agricultural goods from the US. The purchases send out a positive message that the two largest economies in the world are still trading, despite the rising tensions in relation to Hong Kong.
The bullish momentum is also being helped by the fact that governments are taking measures to reopen their economies. In terms of economic activity, things are still way below where they were before the lockdowns, but the small bit of progress is welcomed by dealers.
With a just a few minutes of trading left, it’s time for me to hand over to my colleague LaToya Harding, who will steer things into the evening. Thanks for following along today!
P.S. I have corrected my 3:36pm post, which accidentally showed the FTSE 100 instead of the pound – apologies for the error.
Airlines have brushed off the threat of ministers' two-week quarantine plan by ramping up flight schedules, suggesting they expect the proposal to be scrapped and replaced with so-called air bridges within weeks.
My colleague Simon Foy reports:
Carriers such as easyJet and Ryanair have announced they will scale up their operations from July as they attempt to save at least part of the crucial summer season.
EasyJet said it will resume flights to almost three-quarters of its network by the end of August, operating holiday trips from all its UK airports in July and August.
The plans are going ahead despite a pledge to force all international arrivals at UK airports to self-isolate for two weeks.
Stephen Furlong, an analyst at Davy, said there is an assumption within the industry that air bridges to other low-infection countries will soon be established for short-haul flights so that customers can go on holiday.
The FTSE 100’s still lagging its peers on the continent – a performance that can at least in part be blamed on pressure from a strong pound. Here’s how sterling stands:
The currency’s strong performance is being pinned on a report in the Times this morning, which said the UK is expected to signal compromises during trade talks with the EU this week.
As Rabobank’s Jane Foley notes:
If a bare bones of a trade deal can be put in place this week, it would provide significant relief for the pound. That said, any rally could prove to be short-lived if any trade deal is deemed to be lacking the components of a ‘good deal’ for the UK.   Additionally, the pound remains subject to concerns about the depth and length of the Covid-related downturn and these concerns are ensuring that the risk of negative interest rates in the foreseeable future is perceived to be still on the table.
My colleague Russell Lynch has a full report on this morning’s consumer credit data. He writes:
Fearful households scrambled to pay back an unprecedented £7.4bn of loans and credit card debt in April but businesses loaded up on borrowing to weather the coronavirus storm, Bank of England figures have shown.
Concerns over a record recession, shuttered shops and cancelled holidays meant Britons cleared a net £5bn off their credit cards and paid back a further £2.4bn of other non-mortgage debt such as personal loans and car finance, the figures showed.
The total net repayment made by consumers was almost twice as high as £3.8bn of debt shed in March, itself a record. While borrowers took out £11.8bn of new consumer debt over the month, this was dwarfed by £19.1bn in repayments. It is a dramatic reversal of a years-long trend which had sent debt surging to record highs.
Oil near neared $40 a barrel for the first time in months today, as hopes of further production cuts drive prices higher.
My colleague Ed Clowes has more details:
The world's biggest oil producers are close to extending output cuts as part of a battle to shore up prices following a collapse in demand.
Russia and Saudi Arabia are inching closer to a deal which will keep production low as much of the world slowly emerges from lockdown.
Talks between the two sides sent the Brent crude benchmark rallying to almost $40 a barrel, its highest since early March. Oil prices rise if less of the fossil fuel is being sold on the market because buyers are forced to outbid each other.
A conference call between Moscow and nations in the Saudi-led Opec cartel which was originally planned for June 9 has been brought forward to this Thursday in a bid to secure agreement.
The previous Treasury Committee pressed the need for an investigation into events at LC&F.
When the Treasury rightly used its powers to direct the FCA to commission a review last year, my predecessor urged the regulator and the Treasury to ensure that the investigation was conducted and report published as soon as possible.
The delay in the investigation is particularly concerning. As Dame Elizabeth has said, the decision to delay may cause anguish to those who invested in LC&F.
We will want to get to the bottom of what role the FCA had in the delay when we next take evidence from them.
Full story on our website here shortly: https://t.co/30t5Qe5EPr pic.twitter.com/rHjK89aguT
US markets continuing to shrug off concerns surrounding the nationwide protests.
US markets are set to open in just over 20 minutes, and futures are pointing higher despite the protests.
Aerospace and defence firm Safran plans to cut 700 jobs in the UK, as well as roles in the US, Poland and Germany, AFP reports.
The news agency cited a statement from the CGT union. It did not offer more detail on where the cuts will fall. Safran has 12 locations in the UK.
Last month, the group, which is the world’s third-largest aerospace supplier, cut 3,000 jobs in Mexico.
The group warned then that is faces a “sharp drop in customer orders”, with turmoil in the aviation sector caused by Covid-19.
A report on the collapse of mini-bond firm London Capital & Finance (LCF) will be delayed by nearly three months due to delays caused by the City watchdog and difficulties created by the Covid crisis.
My colleague Michael O’Dwyer reports:
Dame Elizabeth Gloster announced that her investigation had been held up by the length of time it took to receive documents from the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which in turn delayed interviews with employees at the regulator.
The inquiry was further hampered by Covid as interviewing staff who were working at home had created logistical and security issues, the former Court of Appeal judge said.
Dame Elizabeth is examining the approach taken by the watchdog to regulating LCF, which collapsed into administration in January 2019 leaving 11,600 ordinary investors at risk of losing £237m.
Both the Serious Fraud Office and the FCA are investigating individuals and companies connected to LCF amid allegations of fraud.
Oddbins had 300 stores at its peak Credit: JM
Some Oddbins branches will remain open after an unknown suitor bought them out of administration.
My colleague Laura Onita reports:
Advisors at Duff & Phelps said the deal was inked “despite the current financial situation” and 28 sites were sold.
A spokesperson for Duff & Phelps, however, refused to say who the new owner is or give details about the number of jobs that are secure.
The group, which also has other brands such as Simply Drinks and Booze Buster, collapsed in February last year for the second time, putting 550 jobs at risk, most of them in its 100 odd stores.
According to an administrators’ report in March, 53 sites were still trading in administration.  The company first collapsed in 2011 after HMRC, its biggest unsecured creditor, refused to back a rescue deal that involved a company voluntary arrangement.
At its peak it had around 300 sites.
In a letter to health secretary Matt Hancock , UK Satistics Authority chair Sir David Norgrove said:
The way the data are analysed and presented currently gives them limited value for the first purpose. The aim seems to be to show the largest possible number of tests, even at the expense of understanding. It is also hard to believe the statistics work to support the testing programme itself. The statistics and analysis serve neither purpose well.
He also highlighted other problems with how the data is being handled and presented:
the headline total of tests adds together tests carried out with tests posted out. This distinction is too often elided during the presentation at the daily press conference, where the relevant figure may misleadingly be described simply as the number of tests carried out. There are no data on how many of the tests posted out are in fact then successfully completed. The slides used in the daily press conference do not show the date when the tests were carried out;
the notes to the daily slides rightly say that some people may be tested more than once and it has been widely reported that swabs carried out simultaneously on a single patient are counted as multiple tests. But it is not clear from the published data how often that is the case. Figures for the overall number of people being tested have previously been published but are not available in the published time series;
the top summary presents the number of positive results from diagnostic tests (pillars 1 and 2) alongside the total number of tests across all pillars. This presentation gives an artificially low impression of the proportion of tests returning a positive diagnosis;
more generally the testing figures are presented in a way that is difficult to understand. Many of the key numbers make little sense without recourse to the technical notes which are themselves sometimes hard to follow. This includes the supporting spreadsheets, which, while welcome, make it difficult to extract even basic trends.
Sir David called for more detailed data on test results to be made available, including types of employment, age, sex and location. he called for the creation of a “systematically” developed process for publishing data from the Government’s test and trace systems as it launched.
— UK Statistics Authority (@UKStatsAuth) June 2, 2020
Reuters has the background to Sir David’s intervention:
Criticism from the independent UKSA is likely to add to questions surrounding the government’s handling of a pandemic that has killed almost 50,000 people in the United Kingdom, according to the latest data.
Concerns over the test data first came to light when the government set itself an ambitious target to carry out 100,000 tests per day by the end of April – a goal it said it met.
But in doing so, it included in its figures tests mailed out to people but not necessarily completed.
My colleagues Russell Lynch and Melissa Lawford have a full report on this morning’s data on mortgages and house prices. They write:
A property market shuttered by Covid-19 endured the biggest collapse in mortgage approvals in April, Bank of England figures revealed on Tuesday.
Its latest statistics showed just 15,800 loans for house purchase given the go-ahead over the month - 80pc down on pre-pandemic February and just half the level seen at the nadir of the financial crisis.
The dire figures - the worst since the Bank’s records began in 1993 - came as house prices data from Nationwide showed a 1.7pc slide in prices during May. That marked the biggest fall over a single month since 2009.
Agents are pinning hopes on a rapid bounce-back after the property market made a cautious reopening last month using socially distanced property viewings, and the industry catches up with an estimated backlog of sales approaching 400,000.
Electric vehicles continued to gain market share despite the lockdown which caused near-total seizure of the automotive industry in April.
My colleague Alan Tovey reports:
New data from JATO Dynamics shows that across Europe, 17pc of the total volume of new cars sold during April were electric, some 50,400, up just 7pc a year ago.
He added: “Electric vehicles were already driving part of the small growth that remained in 2019. This year, as governments have acted quickly to protect their people and economies, electric vehicles have gained even more traction and visibility due to incentives.
A reminder to check out our other live blogs:
Electrical and industrial components suppliers Electrocomponents has risen today despite warning of sharp declines in demand because of Covid-19.
My colleague Alan Tovey reports:
Posting annual results, the FTSE 250 business warned that revenue had dropped 14pc in the first eight weeks of new financial year, the drop eased towards the end of the period as lockdown controls began to ease.
However, for the year ending March 31, anti-coronavirus measures only knocked a little of the company’s performance, with revenue up 3.7pc at at £1.96bn and pre-tax profits 2.3pc better at £199.6m.
To help strengthen the business – which sources much of its electrical components in South East Asia – the company said it is taking “tactical action to protect profit and conserve cash”, including deferring the annual dividend.
EasyJet plans to operate flights on 50pc of its 1,022 routes in July and 75pc in August according to an emailed statement – but a lower frequency of flights will mean its capacity is about 30pc of its regular capacity.
European stocks have built up some momentum this morning, and the FTSE 100 is now trading a percentage point higher despite pressure from the pound. Germany’s DAX is the standout, however: having missed out on  yesterday’s gains due to a market holiday, it’s soaring this session.
The total cost of Britain’s fiscal support measures to combat the economic effects of coronavirus has hit £56bn, according to the latest data released by the Treasury.
The Government is paying 8.7m workers’ wages via the furlough scheme, with £17.5bn paid out under that initiative alone.
Bloomberg has rounded up the costs so far:
By midnight on 31 May there's been a total of:
Here are some of the day’s top stories from the Telegraph Money team:
The pound has extended its gains today, touching its highest level in over a month.
Perhaps the most standout statistic in this morning’s release is consumer credit, which shows UK household borrowing dropped to its lowest level since comparable records began in 1993.
Households repaid £7.4bn on balance, mirroring a major slump in retail sales.
Bank of England money & credit report: Key findings
Those mortgage approval numbers come from the bank of England’s latest Money and Credit report, which can be read in full here .
Here are the key points picked out by the BoE:
UK households and businesses are continuing to increase their deposits in banks and building societies. Sterling money holdings of households, non-financial businesses, and financial businesses rose by £37.3 billion in April, following an increase of £67.3 billion in March.
Households and private businesses have been repaying loans from banks, on net, but corporates have accessed significant funds through corporate bond and commercial paper issuance. Households repaid £7.4 billion of consumer credit, on net, in April, the largest net repayment since the series began.
The cost of credit fell in April. For individuals, effective rates on overdrafts fell 15 percentage points. The interest rate on new fixed-rate mortgages was little changed, but floating-rate mortgage borrowing rates fell by 46 basis points. The interest rate paid on new borrowing by businesses fell by 10 basis points, with larger falls on rates for SMEs.
Just in: Data from the Bank of England shows mortgage approvals plunged to 15,800 in April amid a near-total shutdown of the housing market – the lowest level since records began in 1993.
The drop, from 56,100 in March, is even more severe than expected – economist polled by Bloomberg had anticipated 24,000 approvals. It’s about half as many approvals as there were at the lowest point of the financial crisis.
Shares in Tesco have dipped this morning after the supermarket said its chief financial officer Alan Stewart has decided to retire in April next year.
Mr Stewart, who joined Tesco in 2014, said:
Being part of the team that has delivered the turnaround at Tesco and set it up for the next stage means an incredible amount to me. I shall continue to focus on delivering the strategy, supporting the business and my colleagues through the next 11 months, knowing that the business is in a strong position as we move forward.
Its board has launched a search for his successor.
Shore Capital’s Clive Black called the announcement a “surprise”, adding:
The timing of his retirement is interesting, in that it overlaps with the appointment of Ken Murphy, Tesco's new chief executive, who commences work in October 2020...
Alan Stewart came into Tesco, with a garden leave waiver from Marc Rolland at Marks & Spencer, at a remarkable time in the group’s history, its darkest hours in fact. Along with Dave Lewis he is a key component in effectively saving Tesco, something that the Group's shareholders will no doubt acknowledge.
Card Factory will reopen about 10pc of its branches Credit: Jonathan Hordle / Rex Features
Shares in greetings card retailer Card Factory popped higher this morning, after the group laid out plans to reopen 10pc of its stores on June 15th to trial new safety measures.
We have worked through the detail of social distancing in our stores, received appropriate PPE and other equipment.  Subject to our early learnings, we have plans for further openings of stores ensuring that we do so with customers and colleagues safety at the forefront of our approach.
Card Factory said its online sales have been “strong” since lockdown began, up 302pc since lockdown and 153pc year to date on its cardfactory.co.uk site.
Presenting its preliminary full-year results for the twelve months to January 31st, the group reported a narrow rise in fin revenues, from £436m to £451.5m, and a 4.4pc dip in profit before tax, from £68.2m to £65.2m.
Liberum analysts said there were “no surprises” in the preliminary results, adding:
Plans to trial store openings from mid-June are encouraging, while continued online momentum is also helpful. We leave our forecasts unchanged and we do not foresee any liquidity issues.
France’s economy will contract even more due to Covid-19 than previously warned, finance minister Bruno Le Maire said.
The country’s GPD will shrink by 11pc – more than the 8pc the French government previously predicted, and more than the 9pc forecast by economists.
Le choc économique est brutal. Notre prévision de croissance pour 2020 est de -11%. Je suis convaincu que nous allons rebondir en 2021 grâce à nos plans de soutien massifs et notre plan de relance. #Covid19 #RTLMatin
— Bruno Le Maire (@BrunoLeMaire) June 2, 2020
Mr Le Maire said a solidarity fund will be extended to the end of the year to help the worst-affected companies such as restaurants to pay rent, and the government will phase out its furlough program only gradually. The government has also announced specific support plans for the car and tourism industries and will detail plans for the aircraft industry next week.
European shares have pushed higher at the open, with the FTSE 100 feeling some pressure from a stronger pound, which has extended its rise ahead of today’s UK/EU trade talks.
Britain’s house prices fell by the most in more than 11 years in May as the coronavirus crisis hammered the market, mortgage lender Nationwide said on Tuesday.
Nationwide said its measure of house prices fell by 1.7pc last month from April, the biggest decline since February 2009.
In annual terms, prices rose by 1.8pc, slowing from 3.7pc in April.
A Reuters poll of economists had pointed to a monthly fall of 1.0pc and an annual rise of 2.8pc.
The Government relaxed some of its restrictions on the housing market in England in May. Property website Rightmove said on Saturday it had its busiest day on record last week, suggesting activity was picking up.
But Nationwide said the medium-term outlook remained highly uncertain.
Pantheon Macroeconomics’ Samuel Tombs said the low confidence points to further price falls in the coming months, writing:
The big month-to-month drop in Nationwide's house price index in May – the largest since February 2009 – surely is just the start of a protracted decline over the remainder of this year. GfK’s composite index of consumers’ confidence currently matches the lowest level observed in the 2008-to-09 recession, when the peak-to-trough fall in house prices was a hefty 19pc. Unless a full V-shaped recovery emerges in the next six months, the unemployment rate likely will exceed its peak of 8.5pc in the wake of the last recession.
Good morning. Yesterday blue-chips rose amid a relief rally, as investors reacted to softer-than-expected action from the White House towards Beijing, as tensions simmer between the US and China over Hong Kong.
The FTSE 100 shrugged off pressure from the pound, which rose to its highest level since early May ahead of continued trade talks between the UK and EU today.
1) Eight insurers face a courtroom showdown with the City watchdog after refusing payouts to crisis-hit small businesses. Judges will be asked to rule on whether business interruption insurance policies sold by the likes of Hiscox, RSA and Zurich cover losses caused by Covid-19 and the nationwide lockdown.
2) Goldman is less gloomy in wake of Wall Street rally : The investment bank’s analysts said they were surprised by the “magnitude and persistence” of a 35pc rebound in the benchmark S&P 500 from the bear market low it hit in March.
3) Race to run the World Trade Organisation heats up : The meeting was postponed, however, when director-general Roberto Azevedo, the Brazilian diplomat who has been in post since 2013, announced his surprise resignation last month – a year before his mandate expired.
4) Rishi Sunak faces biggest challenge yet with emergency Budget : The Chancellor is reportedly exploring ways to help the economy emerge from its biggest downturn in 300 years on the front foot but experts warn the usual policy levers cannot be easily pulled.
5) Britain’s largest care home chain has been threatened with the closure of an “unsafe” London property in the midst of coronavirus after a report showed it left residents at risk of infection. The care provided by HC-One at Cedar House in Harefield was ruled inadequate after an inspection by the social care watchdog which discovered safety breaches.
Shares were mostly higher in Asia on Tuesday, lifted by moves to reopen many regional economies from shutdowns aimed at containing the coronavirus pandemic.
Benchmarks rose in Tokyo, Hong Kong and Seoul but fell in Shanghai and Sydney. Jakarta’s main index jumped 2pc and Singapore’s was up 1.2pc as authorities were winding down some pandemic precautions.
The gains also tracked a modest advance on Wall Street overnight. Investors are balancing cautious optimism about the reopening of businesses shut down because of the pandemic against worries that widespread protests in the US over police brutality could disrupt the economic recovery and widen the outbreak.
Japan’s Nikkei 225 rose 0.9pc in morning trading to 22,264.22 and Hong Kong's Hang Seng gained 0.4pc to 23,833.76. South Korea’s Kospi added 0.8pc to 2,082.37.
Australia's S&P/ASX 200 slipped a fraction of a percent to 5,817.90, while the Shanghai Composite lost 0.2pc to 2,911.17.
