Discover how to trade litecoin, as well as how litecoin works, what moves its price and whether you’ll need to buy and sell the cryptocurrency on an exchange.
Interested in litecoin trading with IG?
Litecoin (LTC) is often referred to as the silver to bitcoin ’s gold – and with silver often the more volatile of the two precious metals, that could make litecoin an intriguing prospect for traders. To start speculating on litecoin’s price movements, follow these three steps:
Bet a certain amount of pounds per point on the direction in which its price is headed.
So if you bet £5 per point that LTC is headed up in price, then you’ll make £5 for every point of upward movement. For every point it moves down, you’ll lose £5.
Open a contract in which you agree to exchange the difference in price of LTC from when you open your position to when you close it. If you ‘buy’ a CFD, then you’ll pocket any upward price movement as profit, but have to pay any downward movement as loss. If you ‘sell’, then the opposite is true.
But litecoin is different to bitcoin in a few important ways. Firstly, it is mined much faster, with the average block being verified and added to the blockchain in just 2.5 minutes, compared to ten minutes for bitcoin. That makes transactions faster, and should make it cheaper to transfer LTC.
There is also a cap of 84 million litecoins that can ever be mined. That is four times bitcoin’s cap, and combined with the faster transactions times has some people – including litecoin’s founder Charles Lee – claiming that LTC could be a better payment solution than bitcoin.
Finally, litecoin is based on a different algorithm to bitcoin: scrpyt to BTC’s SHA-256.
Considering its many similarities to bitcoin, it shouldn’t come as a surprise that the factors affecting litecoin’s price are fairly similar to those for the world’s first cryptocurrency.
However, there are some unique things to watch out for as well:
Many point to litecoin’s wider supply as a key reason for its lower price point than bitcoin. Despite launching two years later, there are far more litecoins available on the market – and faster transactions ensure that supply remains fluid.
Negative headlines surrounding litecoin – or negative headlines surrounding cryptocurrencies in general – will tend to play out on its price in a big way.
LTC’s value is entirely down to its public perception, which makes it even more dependent on favourable news.
People may claim that litecoin has many benefits over bitcoin as a payment solution, but until it is accepted by businesses across the globe that will remain an unsubstantiated claim. So a major company adopting the cryptocurrency could see its price spike.
It may be touted as a new currency, but investors buying and holding litecoin are the biggest reason for its rises in price. And those investors will pay attention to its market cap when deciding whether to buy more or sell.
It may not have been Charles Lee’s intention, but one way in which litecoin is similar to silver is in the price relationship it shares with its more illustrious cousin. Where gold goes, silver often follows; where bitcoin goes, litecoin often follows.
Sign up for our free three-part cryptocurrency guide.
Form has failed to submit. Please contact IG directly.
I’d like to receive information from IG Group companies about trading ideas and their products and services via email.
For more info on how we might use your data, see our privacy notice and access policy and privacy webpage .
You’ll need a leveraged trading account to start speculating on litecoin via CFDs or spread betting, or an exchange account to buy it in the open market. Getting an exchange account can be problematic – sometimes taking days to open, and without the infrastructure needed to respond to support requests quickly.
Opening an IG trading account takes minutes, and you can chat to one of our dedicated experts 24 hours a day Monday to Friday if you have any problems. Once your account is open, there’s no obligation to fund or trade.
A comprehensive trading plan is a great way of taking the emotion out of your decisions, setting out the trades you should make as well as when to take profit or cut losses. Here are five steps that you can follow to create a trading plan:
Choose an acceptable level of risk from each trade, and use it to set out your risk-reward ratio
Start a trading diary so that you know what is working, and what isn’t
Before you open your first position, you’ll want to make sure that you are up to date with all the latest litecoin developments. Take a look at what our dedicated team of market experts has been saying about cryptocurrency in our news and analysis section – or if you’ve opened an account, read the latest updates in My IG .
You might also want to consider running some technical analysis on litecoin. The charts in the IG Trading platform come equipped with a range of indicators to help you identify trends, and plan your first trade accordingly.
Now it’s time to open your first position. With IG, you can trade litecoin using a variety of platforms, including:
Whichever platform you use, you can select the size of your position in deal ticket, which will determine your profit or loss. Then if you’d like to open a long litecoin position, hit ‘buy’. If you’d like to go short, hit ‘sell’.
To close your position, simply make the opposite trade to the one you made to open. So if you bought £10 per point to open, then you’d sell £10 per point to close. If you sold five LTC CFDs to open, you’d buy five LTC CFDs to close.
Enjoy flexible access to more than 17,000 global markets, with reliable execution
Enjoy flexible access to more than 17,000 global markets, with reliable execution
Trade on the move with our natively designed, award-winning trading app
Trade on the move with our natively designed, award-winning trading app
With 45 years of experience, we’re proud to offer a truly market-leading service
With 45 years of experience, we’re proud to offer a truly market-leading service
