The film was produced by the Los Angeles-based film production company and Litecoin advocates Common Enemy and was released digitally on April 10.
On April 13, the Litecoin Foundation shared the trailer for a satanic heavy metal-themed comedic horror movie for which it acted as executive producer. The foundation’s logo can be seen in the trailer’s opening credits.
We Summon the Darkness stars Alexandra Daddario and Amy Forsyth, and also features an appearance from Johnny Knoxville. The movie premiered at Fantastic Fest in Texas during September 2019 and was released digitally last week.
The film was produced by Common Enemy, a production company Jarod Einsohn and Kyle Tekiela — with the foundation having previously described Tekiela as a Litecoin community volunteer. Three of the 11 videos currently hosted on Common Enemy’s YouTube channel promote Litecoin ( LTC ) as a means of payment.
The Litecoin Foundation has been quietly working to cultivate a presence in the film world for roughly one year, with the organization sponsoring the San Diego International Film Festival in October 2019.
Festival-goers who purchased a six-day pass were given Litecoin they could donate to films accepted for screening at the event. The film to collect the most LTC donations would win the "Litecoin Foundation Award" and receive an additional $1,000 in Litecoin. Guy Davies’ "Philophobia" won the foundation’s award.
Litecoin creator Charlie Lee stated, “Mass adoption requires two things: awareness and real-world use cases. The film industry checks off both of these boxes in a compelling way.”
Lee added, “Litecoin has the potential to be a powerful tool for film financing, and by collaborating with the creative and influential people in this space we have an opportunity to introduce Litecoin to millions of individuals across the globe.”
In May 2019, Anthony Mackie, the actor who played Hawkman in "The Avengers," promoted Litecoin in an “Everything I Do In A Day" video published by Vanity Fair.
