Litecoin price recovery stalls under $40 as bearish pressure takes over to push towards $30.
The confluence levels hint that support at $34.87 and $33.37 is vital to the bulls amid calls to step above $40.
Following the support shattering breakdown on Thursday and Friday, Litecoin price found support at $25. An immediate recovery pulled the price above $30, however, the momentum lost steam under $40. Sideways action took over as the level at $30 stood out as key immediate support (completing the right shoulder of the inverted head-and-shoulders pattern).
Meanwhile, LTC/USD is dancing at $35.19 after suffering a 7.39% loss on the day. Sellers are still the winners and don’t seem to be taking a breather anytime soon. The completion of the inverted head-and-shoulders pattern hinted that Litecoin was getting ready for a massive recovery. However, the slow action towards $40 as well as the prevailing selling activity has thwarted the hopes of seeing LTC/USD above $40 this weekend.
Resistance one: $35.94 – Bollinger Band one-day lower.
Resistance two: $37 – Fibonacci 23.6% one-day.
Support one: $34.84 – BB 15-mins lower and the previous low one-hour.
Support two: $33.37 – Fibonacci 23.6% one-week.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
