Litecoin is trading over 8% lower on Monday in another horrible day for cryptos.
There has been some support at lower levels and now the price has bounced of 30.00.
Litecoin has been in free fall recently but as you can see from the chart below the price has started to consolidate on the lower time-frames. The key low on the chart is marked in red at the lows and if this gets breached it surely means there is more trouble ahead. Although, I would look out for lots of volume and a candle close below the level to confirm the bearishness.
More recently, The light blue line closer to the 29.00 level has acted like a near term support zone. When the price moved higher it stopped just short of the 34.00 resistance zone and is now stuttering. I think a break either way now will tell us lots about the future direction of the LTC/USD pair. Obviously the longer-term bias is with the sellers but short term there is no reason why the top of the consolidation at the black line (41.00) may be tested.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
Bitcoin (BTC/USD) has entered a phase of consolidation after reversing sharply from the late-Saturday spike to $9195.19 highs. The choppy trend is likely to extend until a fresh volatility wave hits the crypto space again. Markets await a strong catalyst to revive the near-term bullish momentum.
Top 3 Price Prediction BTC, ETH, XRP: Crypto bears return starting out a fresh week
Bears are back amid a fresh selling wave across the crypto board. Bitcoin eyes Thursday’s low amid lack of healthy supports. Ethereum breaches key support, paving way for extra declines. Ripple is ranging in a tight band around 0.1770 so far this Sunday.
Note: All information on this page is subject to change. The use of this website constitutes acceptance of our user agreement. Please read our privacy policy and legal disclaimer.
Trading foreign exchange on margin carries a high level of risk and may not be suitable for all investors. The high degree of leverage can work against you as well as for you. Before deciding to trade foreign exchange you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience and risk appetite. The possibility exists that you could sustain a loss of some or all of your initial investment and therefore you should not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. You should be aware of all the risks associated with foreign exchange trading and seek advice from an independent financial advisor if you have any doubts.
Opinions expressed at FXStreet are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily represent the opinion of FXStreet or its management. FXStreet has not verified the accuracy or basis-in-fact of any claim or statement made by any independent author: errors and Omissions may occur.Any opinions, news, research, analyses, prices or other information contained on this website, by FXStreet, its employees, partners or contributors, is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment advice. FXStreet will not accept liability for any loss or damage, including without limitation to, any loss of profit, which may arise directly or indirectly from use of or reliance on such information.
WELCOME We use cookies to enhance your experience like remembering your Time Zone. We have updated our privacy policy please check our Terms&Conditions
