The $0 options trading commission is a rarity in the industry. While most of the brokers who have dropped their standard stock trading commission have also dropped the base commission on options trades, a lot of them still charge a small per-contract commission. Robinhood allows traders to buy and sell as many options contracts as they want with no commissions at all.
Since Robinhood offers zero-commission stock trades, this also means that you can trade ETFs free of charge.
However, Robinhood doesn't currently offer mutual fund trading at all, which is a big negative differentiator from many of its competitors. While it may integrate mutual fund capabilities into its platform someday, for the time being, it's not possible to buy shares of your favorite mutual funds through Robinhood.
To be perfectly clear, Robinhood doesn't charge commissions for stock, ETF, and options trades placed through its online and mobile platforms. However, that doesn't mean that Robinhood is completely fee-free; there are some things you might still have to pay for. Here a few of the more common charges you might face:
Returned check or ACH fee: $9
For much of its history, Robinhood was a trading app -- period. There wasn't much of a functional web portal.
That's changed, as Robinhood has rolled out expanded capabilities through the web version of its platform. Both the web portal and mobile app versions are simple in design and are intended to be easy to learn and use.
Customers who value simplicity love Robinhood's trading platform. The company's app currently has ratings of 4.8 and 4.5 out of five on the App Store and Google Play Store, respectively.
If you pay $5 per month for the Robinhood Gold premium version of the platform, one of the perks you get is the ability to invest with margin (aka borrowed money).
Not only that, but the first $1,000 of margin balances are absolutely free, meaning you won't pay any interest on smaller margin trades. Plus, Robinhood charges a flat margin interest rate on the portion of your balance in excess of $1,000, and it's quite a competitive rate. As of February 2020, Robinhood's flat margin rate is just 5%, which is much lower than most competitors.
It's also worth mentioning that you'll need $2,000 in your account to use margin. This is a regulatory requirement that applies to all brokerages, not just to Robinhood.
The standard (free) Robinhood platform is light on features, and research is one of them. In fact, the only research offered on the Robinhood app is available only to its premium Robinhood Gold customers who have access to stock research reports from Morningstar. If you want access to stock research from several different firms, Robinhood likely isn't the best choice for you.
This is another negative of Robinhood's "no frills" approach: Customer service is primarily handled through the help page on Robinhood's website, or through its automated chat system. You can email customer service, but it's tough to get a quick (and human) response to a question. In fact, Robinhood's human-driven customer support is done almost exclusively by email. There's not even a published phone number on Robinhood's website.
Robinhood is right for you if:
You want to trade for free: Robinhood not only offers free web- and app-based stock trading, but it also offers free options and cryptocurrency trading.
You like simplicity: Robinhood's trading platform was designed with simplicity in mind. It's not packed with features, but what it lacks in features, it makes up for in user-friendliness.
You want to trade cryptocurrencies: Few brokerages allow investors to trade cryptocurrencies, but Robinhood allows clients to trade 17 different cryptocurrencies in the same trading app.
You're a newer investor with limited capital: With the ability to buy fractional shares of stock with as little as $1, Robinhood is a good choice for investors who are just getting started.
You want a savings and brokerage account in one: Robinhood essentially treats clients' uninvested cash as a high-yield savings account, with an APY that rivals even the best online savings banks .
You don't want to invest in mutual funds or bonds: Robinhood is excellent for stocks, ETFs, options, and even cryptocurrencies, but if you want to hold mutual funds or individual bonds in your brokerage account, you're out of luck.
You just want a standard brokerage account: In addition to not offering mutual fund investing , Robinhood doesn't offer retirement accounts such as IRAs. You also cannot open a trust, partnership, Coverdell, 529, custodial, or any other type of brokerage account through Robinhood.
Matt is a Certified Financial Planner® and investment advisor based in Columbia, South Carolina. He writes personal finance and investment advice for The Ascent and its parent company The Motley Fool, with more than 4,500 published articles and a 2017 SABEW Best in Business award. Matt writes a weekly investment column ("Ask a Fool") that is syndicated in USA Today, and his work has been regularly featured on CNBC, Fox Business, MSN Money, and many other major outlets. He’s a graduate of the University of South Carolina and Nova Southeastern University, and holds a graduate certificate in financial planning from Florida State University.
We’re firm believers in the Golden Rule, which is why editorial opinions are ours alone and have not been previously reviewed, approved, or endorsed by included advertisers.
  The Ascent does not cover all offers on the market. Editorial content from The Ascent is separate from The Motley Fool editorial content and is created by a different analyst team.
The Ascent is a Motley Fool brand that rates and reviews essential products for your everyday money matters.
