Stock Pick Update: May 27 – June 2, 2020
The Energy, Communication Services and Consumer Discretionary sectors were relatively the strongest in the last 30 days.
The broad stock market has slightly extended its uptrend in the last five trading days (May 20 – May 26). Two months ago on March 23, the S&P 500 index sold off to new medium-term low of 2,191.86. It was a stunning 35.4% below February 19 record high of 3,393.52. The corona virus and economic slowdown fears have erased more than a third of the broad stock market value. Then we saw huge come-back rally, as the index got back close to 3,000 mark. The S&P 500 index has broken slightly above 3,000 mark yesterday. However, then it has retraced some of the intraday rally and closed at 2,991.77.
The S&P 500 index has gained 1.29% since last Wednesday’s open. In the same period of time our five long and five short stock picks have gained 1.85%. So stock picks were relatively stronger than the broad stock market last week. Our long stock picks have gained 3.71% and they have outperformed the index by far. Short stock picks have resulted in a loss of 0.01%. The overall results remain relatively better than the S&P 500 index over last months.
If stocks were in a prolonged downtrend, being able to profit anyway, would be extremely valuable. Of course, it’s not the point of our Stock Pick Updates to forecast where the general stock market is likely to move, but rather to provide you with stocks that are likely to generate profits regardless of what the S&P does.
This means that our overall stock-picking performance can be summarized on the chart below. The assumptions are: starting with $100k, no leverage used. The data before Dec 24, 2019 comes from our internal tests and data after that can be verified by individual Stock Pick Updates posted on our website.
Below we include statistics and the details of our three recent updates:
Let’s check which stocks could magnify S&P’s gains in case it rallies, and which stocks would be likely to decline the most if S&P plunges. Here are our stock picks for the Wednesday, May 27 – Tuesday, June 2 period.
We will assume the following: the stocks will be bought or sold short on the opening of today’s trading session (May 27) and sold or bought back on the closing of the next Tuesday’s trading session (June 2).
We will provide stock trading ideas based on our in-depth technical and fundamental analysis, but since the main point of this publication is to provide the top 5 long and top 5 short candidates (our opinion, not an investment advice) for this week, we will focus solely on the technicals. The latter are simply more useful in case of short-term trades.
First, we will take a look at the recent performance by sector. It may show us which sector is likely to perform best in the near future and which sector is likely to lag. Then, we will select our buy and sell stock picks.
There are eleven stock market sectors: Energy, Materials, Industrials, Consumer Discretionary, Consumer Staples, Health Care, Financials, Technology, Communications Services, Utilities and Real Estate. They are further divided into industries, but we will just stick with these main sectors of the stock market.
We will analyze them and their relative performance by looking at the Select Sector SPDR ETF’s.
Based on the above, we decided to choose our stock picks for the next week. We will choose our top 3 long and top 3 short candidates using trend-following approach, and top 2 long and top 2 short candidates using contrarian approach:
