The crypto whiz kid who paid $4.6 million to have lunch    with Warren Buffett asked Donald Trump and a slew of crypto bosses to join    them.
Tron founder and CEO Justin Sun invited executives from    Ethereum, Litecoin, Binance, Circle, Huobi, and eToro to attend    the charity meal.
Sun is working to reschedule the lunch after postponing it in    July, a move that sparked conspiracies he was in trouble with the Chinese    government.
The crypto whiz kid who paid $4.6 million to have lunch with  Warren Buffett asked Donald Trump and a slew of crypto bosses to join them.
Justin Sun - the founder and CEO of Tron, which operates the 15th largest  cryptocurrency - can bring up to seven companions to the lunch with Berkshire  Hathaway's billionaire CEO. He has invited executives from  Ethereum, Litecoin, Binance, Circle, Huobi, eToro, and other  crypto firms to attend, but not all have accepted.
Sun is working to reschedule the meal after postponing it in July, a  move that sparked conspiracies he was in trouble with the Chinese  government. However, finding a date that fits everyone's diaries  has proven challenging.
"It took about two months for us to get all nine people to come  to San Francisco and sit in one room for five hours with Warren  Buffett," Cliff Edwards, Tron's communications director, told  Blocktv . "We are in the process of corralling all of those  nine people again to get it back on track."
Here's everyone Sun has invited to his lunch with Buffett.
Justin Sun asked Donald Trump to attend his lunch with Warren  Buffett after the president criticized cryptocurrencies on  Twitter.
"I am not a fan of Bitcoin and other Cryptocurrencies, which are  not money, and whose value is highly volatile and based on thin  air," Trump  tweeted on July 12 . "Unregulated Crypto Assets can facilitate  unlawful behavior, including drug trade and other illegal  activity."
Sun invited the president to the Buffett lunch less than three  hours later.
"I'd love to invite you to have lunch with crypto leaders along  with @WarrenBuffett on July 25," he continued. "I guarantee you  after this lunch, nobody will know crypto more than you!"
Trump hasn't publicly responded to Sun's invite.
Charlie Lee is the creator of Litecoin, the fifth-largest  cryptocurrency with a $4.3 billion market capitalization, according  to CoinMarketCap . Lee was at the top of Sun's invite list.
"I'm thrilled to invite my good friend @SatoshiLite, creator of  Litecoin, to be the 1st guest to join my lunch with  @WarrenBuffett," Sun tweeted on June 16 . "More friends to be announced!"
Lee accepted the invite later that day.
Changpeng Zhao is the founder and CEO of Binance, a global  cryptocurrency exchange where users can trade more than 100  cryptocurrencies. Zhao declined Sun's lunch invite, saying he  couldn't make the trip to San Francisco.
".@justinsuntron kindly invited me to go, but I can't make it," Zhao  tweeted . "Too far. I guess that's like turning down  $1,000,000, assuming 5 guys going, lol... But very much  appreciated."
However, Zhao made time to ridicule Buffett, a vocal  cryptocurrency critic who has dismissed bitcoin as " rat  poison squared ."
"I guess Buffet will be eating a lunch funded by 'rat poison'  after all, lol," Zhao  tweeted . "It's good to be famous, people pay millions of  dollars to educate you," he added in another  tweet .
Livio Weng is the CEO of Huobi, a Hong Kong-listed company  founded in China and run out of Singapore. Huobi runs a major  online cryptocurrency exchange and operates Huobi Token, the 14th  largest cryptocurrency .
We couldn't find Sun's invitation to Weng on Twitter, but the  Tron boss name-checked Huobi in another tweet.
"As of now we've only invited @SatoshiLite of Litecoin, @Binance  and @HuobiGlobal to the @WarrenBuffett lunch," Sun wrote  on July 5 .
Vitalik Buterin is the co-founder of Ethereum, the second-largest  cryptocurrency with a market cap of $19 billion, according to  CoinMarketCap . Sun invited Buterin to the lunch, but the  Ethereum co-founder hasn't publicly accepted, FT Alphaville said .
Sun and Buterin have jostled and clashed on Twitter in the past.
When Elon Musk tweeted the word " Ethereum "  in April, Buterin invited the Tesla and SpaceX boss to attend his company's Devcon  conference in October. Eager to share the spotlight, Sun replied  to Musk's tweet with the names of his two companies: " TRON "  and " BitTorrent ."
Moreover, after Sun tweeted last December that Ethereum's bull run was fueled by hype,  Buterin suggested Sun was a "self-identified shill" who's "not worth listening to."
Jeremy Allaire is the founder and CEO of Circle, a peer-to-peer  payments company that has received over $100 million in funding from the likes of Goldman  Sachs . Circle aims to bring digital currency into the  mainstream.
"I'd like to invite my good friend  @jerallaire, Co-founder & CEO of Circle,  to join my lunch with @WarrenBuffett," Sun  tweeted . "7 days to go and more friends to be  announced!"
Allaire replied three minutes later.
"Count me in. Crypto is now a major global policy issue and  there is a great deal for Mr Buffet to understand and for us to  learn from him as well," Allaire added.
Helen Haiyu is the head of blockchain at Binance Charity  Foundation, the cryptocurrency exchange's non-profit arm. The  foundation engages in blockchain-powered philanthropy, and has  raised money for causes such as disaster relief,  education, and  combating hunger, according to its website .
"I'd like to invite my good friend @helenhaiyu, Head of  @BinanceBCF, to join my lunch with @WarrenBuffett," Sun  tweeted . "5 days to go and more friends to be announced!  @binance."
Haiyu replied five minutes later.
Yoni Assia is the CEO of eToro, a social-trading platform where  users can buy and sell multiple assets including stocks, ETFs,  and cryptocurrencies, as well as mirror other investors' trades.
"I'd like to invite my good friend  @yoniassia, Founder & CEO of  @eToro, to join my lunch with  @WarrenBuffett," Sun  tweeted . "4 days to go and more friends to be  announced!"
Assia replied in under 10 minutes.
"Justin, it is my honor to join you for lunch with  @WarrenBuffett, A big step for bridging between the  traditional finance world and the new one!" he  wrote .
"There is a huge opportunity to use #BlockChainForGood and happy  to share our research on @TheGoodDollar with  #TheOracleFromOmaha," he added.
Chris Lee - also known as Li Shufei - is the head of finance at  Huobi, the crypto exchange.
"I'd like to invite @Chrislee_crypto, the CFO, Board Secretary  and VP of International Business Development from @HuobiGlobal to  join my Charity lunch with @WarrenBuffett," Sun tweeted . "3 days to go and more friends to be announced!"
"@warrenBuffett Lookin forward to meeting with blockchain iconic  fellows & Mr. Buffett to share knowledge of blockchain/crypto  and traditional finance world @HuobiGlobal," he added.
