Here’s a quick look at small-cap ETF positions after major stock exchanges are closed for trading.
There have been no price changes in this timeframe.
Jul 2, 2020 4:00 pm – Jul 2, 2020 7:59 pm
Why Invest in Small-Cap ETFs?
Here are our top 4 reasons you should take a look at investing in small-cap ETFs.
1. They reflect a benchmark index.
You can find lucrative small-cap ETFs listed on major stock exchanges such as NYSE and NASDAQ. In many cases, small-cap ETFs are customized to mirror a benchmark index — great examples include Standard & Poor’s Small-Cap 600, Dow & Jones Small-Cap Index, CNX Small-Cap Index and Russell 2000.
An investment in small-cap ETFs means you can effectively track and analyze the performance indices of different companies in the same industry side-by-side. These handy insights can help you buy or sell your ETFs on time because you’ll catch industrial surges and downward spirals early on.
2. They’re traditionally less expensive than other investment types.
Trading stocks of large-cap companies can be expensive compared to small-cap ETFs. Not only is investing in small-cap ETFs cheaper, but it also holds the promise of higher returns. Established mid- and large-cap companies with a valuation of $10 billion or more have most likely passed their peak. On the other hand, budding small-cap companies hold the promise of 200% or even 300% growth in its valuation in the years to come.
Small-cap companies have the potential for exponential growth, but they’re riskier than large-cap companies because they have the potential to fail. Fortunately, small-cap ETFs offer you the privilege of owning stocks in multiple start-ups and small firms to limit the impact of new businesses going under. You can make small-cap ETF investments at a comparatively lower-risk rate than penny stocks .
Small-cap ETFs can also help you manage your risk in volatile markets. The diversified assets you own through small-cap ETFs can protect you against unprecedented losses and provide stability for your investments. You can do this all by yourself with adequate research, without the assistance of a paid fund manager. A paid fund manager can bring added expense to your investments.
4. You can tap into low expense ratios.
ETFs charge an expense ratio to cover the cost of managing the funds. For example, if the expense ratio for a small-cap ETF is 0.3%, it will cost you $3 per year for every $1,000 you invest. Unlike fund managers and investment companies that charge you anywhere between 0.5% to 1% to manage your financial portfolio, small-cap ETF expense ratios average 0.47% .
Small companies are prone to market malpractices such as pump-and-dump schemes and manipulated balance sheets. Find credible sources to track and monitor the companies you invest in — no matter how big or small they are.
Consider a few key factors such as expense ratios, historical performance data, liquidity and total assets under management (AUM) before investing in small-cap ETFs. Based on these criteria, Benzinga has hand-picked ETFs with small capitalizations for you to invest in.
Vanguard Small-Cap ETF has been on the market since Jan. 30, 2004. It tracks the CRSP U.S. Small-Cap Index and offers exposure to small-cap firms in the U.S. equity market.
Its opening rate as of March 30, 2020 was $116.79 with a daily change rate of 2.04%. It has a low expense ratio (0.05%) and a total AUM of $20 million. VB has high liquidity with a daily average trade volume of 2,139,900 shares.
