After previous weeks of strong sell-offs on gold, in the back of USD strength, two major reasons have been driving gold prices higher from Monday 23rd March.
First, we started with FED announcement signaling it would do practically anything – extending loans to big and small businesses and purchasing unlimited amounts of government debt – to help an American economy in a race against time.
Secondly – and most important – due to the coronavirus outbreak, three of the major refineries worldwide have suspended gold production in Switzerland. As of now they will be suspended between 29th March and 5th April. This decision produces a divergence in the offer between the physical GOLD and the futures market.
The effect on the market is huge, given that Switzerland is a crucial hub for the precious metal, 80% of the world supply goes through Switzerland, 70% are in the region they decided to suspend their operation and the physical market is going to be materially impacted as a result.
Traders have been facing today (24th march 2020) a significant increase in the volatility leading to gold spreads blowing out, starting from the Asian session and expanding during the all European and American ones.
During our activity today, we had the chance to speak directly with some dealers in one of the tier one banks LPs, confirming that the link between CME futures and OTC spot has broken down.
Here at Mayfair Brooks, our outlook is still very much long Gold, which it has been pretty for the last few years, where we are buying any dip possible and extending our positions. With the world in turmoil, we believe we are going to see the gold price break all records, by testing its all-time highs at $1,900, eventually breaking it and going past the $2,000 mark.
We will keep an eye on the markets though and remember that the markets dictate our trades and not the other way round. Especially in the times we live in now.
The article was written by Rosario Pisana, Chief Trader and Analysist at MayfairBrooks
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
