Diamond Hill Capital recently released its Q1 2020 Investor Letter, a copy of which you can download below. The Diamond Hill Small Cap Fund posted a return of -36.17% for the quarter, underperforming its benchmark, the Russell 2000 Index which returned -30.61% in the same quarter. You should check out Diamond Hill Capital's top 5 stock picks for investors to buy right now, which could be the biggest winners of the stock market crash. There weren’t a lot of funds who could deliver these kinds of returns without shorting the market or using aggressive put options.
In the said letter, Diamond Hill Capital highlighted a few stocks and Wesco International Inc (NYSE: WCC ) is one of them. Wesco International is a holding company for WESCO Distribution, a multinational electronics distribution and services company. Year-to-date, Wesco International Inc (NYSE: WCC ) stock lost 30.3% and on June 4th it had a closing price of $38.29. Here is what Diamond Hill Capital said:
"WESCO International, Inc. is a leading distributor of electrical, industrial and communications materials, and a provider of supply chain management and logistics services. Wesco recently announced that it will be buying one of its largest competitors, Anixter International, creating the largest electrical and data communications distribution company in North America. Distribution is an industry where scale is extremely important, and this merger will give them increased bargaining power with its suppliers as well as significant cost-cutting opportunities. Since the merger was announced just prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, the company will now face a recession with an elevated debt load, but we believe the risks are mitigated somewhat by the combined company’s strong free cash flow generation potential and the significant upside potential created by the merger."
In Q1 2020, the number of bullish hedge fund positions on Wesco International Inc (NYSE: WCC ) stock increased by about 23% from the previous quarter ( see the chart here ), so a number of other hedge fund managers seem to agree with WCC's growth potential. Our calculations showed that Wesco International Inc (NYSE: WCC ) isn't among the 30 most popular stocks among hedge funds .
The top 10 stocks among hedge funds returned 185% since the end of 2014 and outperformed the S&P 500 Index ETFs by more than 109 percentage points. We know it sounds unbelievable. You have been dismissing our articles about top hedge fund stocks mostly because you were fed biased information by other media outlets about hedge funds' poor performance. You could have doubled the size of your nest egg by investing in the top hedge fund stocks instead of dumb S&P 500 ETFs. Below you can watch our video about the top 5 hedge fund stocks right now. All of these stocks had positive returns in 2020.
At Insider Monkey we leave no stone unturned when looking for the next great investment idea. For example, 2020's unprecedented market conditions provide us with the highest number of trading opportunities in a decade. So we are checking out trades like this one . We interview hedge fund managers and ask them about their best ideas. If you want to find out the best healthcare stock to buy right now, you can watch our latest hedge fund manager interview here . We read hedge fund investor letters and listen to stock pitches at hedge fund conferences. Our best call in 2020 was shorting the market when the S&P 500 was trading at 3150 after realizing the coronavirus pandemic’s significance before most investors. You can subscribe to our free enewsletter below to receive our stories in your inbox:
