tumbled 8%, or a loss of $-1.15 per share, to close at $13.23. After opening the day at $13.97, shares of Donegal Group Inc. Class A Common Stock traded as high as $14.03 and as 
low as $13.21. Volume was 54,674 shares over 916 trades, against an average daily volume of n/a shares and a total float of 29.03 million.
As a result of the decline, Donegal Group Inc. Class A Common Stock now has a market cap of $384.07 million.  In the last 
year, shares of Donegal Group Inc. Class A Common Stock have traded between a range of $16.20 and $11.23, and its 50-day SMA is currently $n/a and 200-day SMA is $n/a.
For a complete fundamental analysis of Donegal Group Inc. Class A Common Stock, check out Equities.com’s Stock Valuation Analysis report for 
Still paying commissions on stock trades? Equities.com now offers $7.99/month unlimited trading and flat-fee options trading for $89.99/month! Get started today by https://www.equities.com/trading-start
Donegal Group Inc is an insurance holding company that offers personal and commercial lines of property and casualty insurance to businesses and individuals. The company's reportable segments are its Investment function, Personal lines of insurance, Commercial lines of insurance. Personal lines products consist primarily of homeowners and private passenger automobile policies. The Commercial lines products of its insurance subsidiaries consist primarily of commercial automobile, commercial multi-peril, and workers' compensation policies. The group primarily operates in the United States.
Donegal Group Inc. Class A Common Stock is based out of Marietta, PA and has some 0 employees. Its CEO is Kevin Gerard Burke.
Donegal Group Inc. Class A Common Stock is a component of the Russell 2000. The Russell 2000 is one of the leading indices tracking small-cap companies in the United States. It's maintained by  Russell Investments, an 
industry leader in creating and maintaining indices, and consists of the smallest 2000 stocks from the broader Russell 3000 index.
Russell's indices differ from traditional indices like the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or S&P 500, whose members are selected by committee, because they base membership entirely on an 
objective, rules based methodology. The 3,000 largest companies by market cap make up the Russell 3000, with the 2,000 smaller companies making up the Russell 2000. It's a simple approach that gives 
a broad, unbiased look at the small-cap market as a whole.
To get more information on Donegal Group Inc. Class A Common Stock and to follow the company’s latest updates, you can visit the company’s profile page here: DGICA’s Profile . For more news on the financial markets and emerging growth companies, be sure to visit Equities.com’s 
email newsletter to ensure you don’t miss out on any of our best stories.
All data provided by QuoteMedia and was accurate as of 4:30PM ET.
DISCLOSURE: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not represent the views of equities.com . Readers should not consider statements made by the author as formal recommendations and should consult their financial advisor before making any investment decisions. To read our full disclosure, please go to: http://www.equities.com/disclaimer
