Stocks were off to a positive start for the third quarter on Wednesday, climbing after June hiring data showed a sharp reversal vs. May, manufacturing was stronger than expected and as positive coronavirus vaccine news bolstered confidence. FedEx took an early lead following a strong earnings report. Beyond Meat spiked on a new partnership with Alibaba Group. Meanwhile, Pfizer spiked nearly 4%, leading the Dow Jones today, as its vaccine candidate performed well in accelerated clinical trials .
The Dow Jones industrials steadied up with a 0.5% advance. The S&P 500 also gained 0.5%. The Nasdaq swung back and forth on the stock market today, trading up 0.2% a healf hour into the session. Pfizer ( PFE ) set the pace on the Dow Jones today, followed by Boeing ( BA ), which reversed premarket losses and rose 0.8%.
FedEx ( FDX ) bolted 16% higher, leading the S&P 500 after delivering stronger-than-expected fourth-quarter results late Tuesday . Peer United Parcel Service ( UPS ) earned a sympathy boost, its shares surging almost 7% early Wednesday.
United Airlines Holdings ( UAL ) jetted ahead almost 10%, to the top of the Nasdaq 100. The company announced it would add nearly 25,000 domestic and international flights in August, nearly tripling its capacity relative to July. Other airlines also rallied, with Delta Air Group ( DAL ) and American Airlines Group ( AAL ) both trading more than 5% higher.
Pfizer surged nearly 6% at the open, while trading was halted for Pfizer vaccine partner BioNTech ( BNTX ). The companies announced early positive results from trials of an investigational vaccine candidate developed to deal with SARS CoV-2 , the virus behind the global pandemic.
Boeing stock fell in premarket trade after Reuters reported that a government investigation found that Boeing failed to report proper documentation related to changes in the flight control systems designed into its 737 MAX airliners, prior to two fatal air crashes in  2018-19. Boeing shares reversed early losses on the Dow Jones today, following United Air's capacity announcement.
IBD 50 stock Futu Holdings ( FUTU ) rose 2.2% at the open. The China-based online brokerage platform logged a 2.6% decline for the week through Tuesday, after a 79% run up from a late-May breakout.
Food protein innovator Beyond Meat ( BYND ) seared out a 12% gain in early action. The company announced Tuesday it would begin selling its meatless burger patties in China, through a partnership with Alibaba Group Holdings' ( BABA ) Freshippo grocery chain. Alibaba shares gained 0.3% in premarket trade.
Among Russell 2000 stocks, Akero Therapuetics ( AKRO ) spiked 31% as three price-target hikes followed strong clinical trial results announced Tuesday for its efruxifermin, for treatment of patients with the liver disease nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.
Also on the Russell 2000, trucking fleet YRC Worldwide ( YRCW ) surged 62%, still trading below 5, after reporting it would receive a $700 million CARES Act loan from the U.S. Treasury.
Further, several telecom providers also traded sharply higher, after Comcast earned an upgrade to outperform from Bernstein. The note included a message to Comcast management to consider a spinoff of the NBC Universal/Sky unit, saying the current environment encouraged bold moves. Comcast ( CMCSA ) shares rose 2.9%.
ADP's National Employment Report showed the continued, massive movement underway in labor data. U.S. nonfarm private sector employers added 3.369 million workers in June. The number was a vast reversal from May's steep job losses of 2.760 million, although short of economist estimates for 3.5 million new hires in June.
Small and large business ran unusually close for the month, with employers of 49 or fewer workers adding 937,000 names to their payrolls. Businesses with more than 500 employees took on 837,000 new workers during the month. Service providers did the most hiring, with 1.912 million additions. Construction companies took on 394,000 employees. Manufacturers added 88,000.
The ADP report is typically seen as a precursor to the Labor Department's June payrolls report due out on Thursday.
Manufacturing data also helped give a boost to the Dow Jones today, as researcher Markit reported its June manufacturers purchasing managers index rose to a reading of 49.8. That was a sharp jump above May's 39.8 tally, and above forecasts for an increase to 49.6.
The June manufacturing PMI from the Institute for Supply Mangement was even strong, surging to 52.6 — back above the 50 mid-point which separates expansion from contraction.
In addition, minutes from the Federal Reserve's June 10 meeting are set for release at 2 p.m. ET. In addition, automakers are expected to release second-quarter or June sales numbers throughout Wednesday's session.
Globally, the number of coronavirus cases confirmed since the onset of the pandemic rose above 10.609 million, more than 1.232 million over week-ago levels. Deaths rose above 514,000, with 34,229 deaths reported, a 7.1% increase, over the past seven days.
Countries of the European Economic Area share of the cumulative case count fell below 15%. Deaths in EEA countries were 34.7% of the global total. U.S. cases were 25.7% of the cumulative total, with about 25.3% of the total deaths
Brazil was next in line, with 13.3% of the total global cases and 11.9% of the deaths. Outside of the U.S. and Brazil, the highest number of deaths have occurred in the U.K., Italy, France and Spain, though increases in both cases and deaths in those countries have slowed sharply. India and Mexico are among the fast-growing areas.
Countries of the European Union reopened to international air travel from 14 countries on Wednesday. Travelers from the U.S. will remain under a ban due to Covid-19 infection rates.
In the U.S., 17 states have reportedly paused their phased reopening programs as the total case count topped 2.272 million, adding more than 300,000 new cases for an increase of more than 12.5% over the past seven days. Deaths rose a more moderate 5.3%, up slightly more than 6,600, as healthcare professionals find more effective ways to treat the virus.
Despite that progress, the number of new active cases continues to jump to new highs, rising above 1.45 million on Tuesday. Active cases, which are confirmed infected patients in hospitals or under supervised care, have jumped more than 2% in four of the past six days – the highest levels of increase since April.
Each 2% jump effectively represents a 2% decrease in hospital capacity. On the positive side, testing levels are also pushing to record highs, with more than 600,000 tests administered in three of the past six days.
California's Riverside County reported hitting 99% capacity for its intensive care units as of Sunday. Hospitals in Salt Lake City warned they were at danger of exceeding capacity during the July 4 holiday. California and major population areas in Texas were generally reporting sufficient hospital capacity.
While the Nasdaq and S&P 500 have continued to show some recent muscle , the Dow Jones today does not look set to break any recent trends. Soft premarket action suggests at least an early pullback, although premarket activity often does not reflect market behavior after the starting bell – and is certainly no indicator of how benchmarks might look at the end of the day. But while the Nasdaq and S&P 500 have rallied, the Dow has traded between its 50- and 200-day moving averages since April 27.
The Dow managed to spend four days above the 200-day line in early June. Then it pulled all the way back to test its 50-day line on Friday. Meanwhile, the 50-day line has stopped advancing — not a bullish sign.
For more detailed analysis of the current stock market and its status, study the Big Picture .
It's true that the market logged one of its best quarters on record. And the Nasdaq continues to hover near the several new record highs it notched in June. The S&P 500 remains well off its February high, and closed Tuesday about 4% below an early June high. The DJIA today is more than 6% off its June 8 high, and down almost 13% from its February peak.
A lagging Dow has not appeared to hold back the stock market's confirmed uptrend. While the majority of stocks on the Dow Jones today continue to wrestle vs. uncertainties tied to the coronavirus economy, Apple ( AAPL ) and Microsoft ( MSFT ) continue to march higher.
Nike ( NKE ), Visa ( V ) and Home Depot ( HD ) remain poised near buy points. Cisco Systems ( CSCO ) has arrived below a new buy point in a four-month bottoming base. UnitedHealth Group ( UNH ) is testing support, and could potentially retake its prior buy point, after a failed breakout attempt in May and June.
