Apple rolls out new iPhones, iPad and Watch
U.S. stocks closed at session highs Tuesday as a rally in energy, industrials and materials stocks overshadowed a selloff in momentum-driven technology shares, helping the Dow extend its win streak to five sessions and the S&P 500 index avoid consecutive declines after trading in the red for most of the session.
was in the spotlight as it announced new model iPhones and other products at its annual launch event Tuesday afternoon.
How did the major benchmarks fare?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
At session lows, the Dow fell 118.46 points, or 0.4%, the S&P 500 lost 21.42 points, or 0.7% and  the Nasdaq was down 85.75 points, or 1.1%.
Investors eyed a potential rotation in market leadership from defensive names and fast-growing tech stocks into cyclical sectors, including energy, industrials and materials, all of which have posted gains Tuesday, in contrast with the S&P 500.
“The big story is the continuing rotation that we saw begin a couple days ago,” Willie Delwiche, market strategist with R.W. Baird told MarketWatch. “If we can actually move away from narrow, defensive leadership into cyclical and small-cap leadership, that would be a healthy development for the market.”
Defensive sectors, including real estate, utilities and consumer staples weighed on the major indexes Tuesday while small capitalization stocks, as measured by the Russell 2000 RUT,
Information technology shares were also under pressure Tuesday, down 0.5%, one day after the attorneys general of 50 U.S. states announced an investigation into Google’s ‘potential monopolistic behavior’ on Monday, underscoring regulatory concerns surrounding large tech firms.
“The risk is that we get half-way through this rotation, stall out and are left with no momentum anywhere,” Delwiche said.
Meanwhile, concerns about the U.S.-China trade battle appear to have moved to the back burner for investors after being blamed for volatile market action in August.
China has reportedly offered to buy more American agricultural products in exchange for a delay in upcoming tariffs and the easing of a ban against doing business with Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei Technologies, according to the South China Morning Post . The report comes on the heels of comments by U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, who told Fox Business Network Monday that he views renewed discussions with Beijing as a sign of good faith.
“The U.S. and China are due to meet next month, and according to Steven Mnuchin…the U.S. is prepared to do a deal, as long as it is good for the U.S.,” said David Madden, market analyst at CMC Markets UK, in a note. “The lack of hostilities between the U.S. and China is likely to keep stocks in their upward move.
The European Central Bank is expected to deliver additional monetary stimulus when its policy makers meet Thursday, though some officials have appeared to push back against expectations for an aggressive package of measures combining further interest-rate cuts with a new bond-buying program.
The U.S. National Federation of Independent Business on Tuesday said its small-business optimism index fell 1.6 points to a seasonally adjusted 103.1 in August , its worst showing since March.
The rate at which Americans quit their jobs hit an all-time high in July, the Labor Department estimated Tuesday, suggesting that workers are confident in the strength of the job market. Job openings fell slightly during the month, while layoffs remained at low levels.
Which stocks were in focus?
Investors were watching shares of Apple AAPL,
after it held its annual fall roll-out event, where it introduced  a new TV streaming service that will cost $4.99 a month and be free for a year to purchasers of new iPhone, iPad or Mac products. It also introduced a new video game service and a suite of new smartphones: the iPhone 11, iPhone 11 Pro and the iPhone 11 Max. Apple shares rose 1.2%.
