The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart, however, momentum is trending lower.
June E-mini Dow Jones Industrial Average futures are trading nearly flat late Friday as traders prepared for the long U.S. holiday weekend. Volume was well below average. Despite an earlier sell-off, the market is still in a position to finish the week with strong gains.
Helping to drive the earlier volatility were concerns over U.S.-China tensions amid ongoing uncertainty about the pace of economic recovery from the coronavirus. Contributing to the week’s 2% gains were optimism about an eventual coronavirus vaccine and the easing of virus-related curbs.
At 20:12 GMT, June E-mini Dow Jones Industrial Average futures are trading 24418, up 42 or +0.17%.
Some of the price action this week was driven by mixed earnings from retailers Walmart, Inc. , Best Buy Co. Inc. and Home Depot, Inc. The results showed online shopping gaining traction with the lockdown orders, a trend that could damage brick-and-mortar players already feeling pressure from internet rivals.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart, however, momentum has been trending lower since the formation of the closing price reversal top on May 19.
A trade through 24765 will negate the closing price reversal top and signal a resumption of the uptrend. The main trend will change to down on a trade through 22704.
The minor trend is also up. A trade through 24076 will change the minor trend to down. This will confirm the shift in momentum to down.
The main range is 29506 to 18086. Its retracement zone at 23796 to 25144 is controlling the longer-term direction of the market.
The intermediate range is 26962 to 18086. Its retracement zone at 23571 to 22524 is potential support.
Combining the two zone creates a major support cluster at 23796 to 23571.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
