There have been few days in Wall Street history to try an investor’s patience like March 16. The S&P 500 index fell 12%, its worst day since 1987, which followed the almost-as-awful 9.5% decline on March 12. The market, of course, has continued to register several jarring one-day drops , including more than 5% on March 18 and 4.3% on March 20. Investors are getting stressed as their portfolios are being put to the test.
There is a valuable lesson here: Now you know how your portfolio holds up during periods of market volatility.
Turning this lesson into an analysis is a worthwhile exercise: Investors can examine how each mutual and exchange-traded fund in a portfolio functions on days with such extreme drops, versus their long-term performance. Granted, recently almost nothing has done well, but some funds have played defense better than others. And of course, one day’s return still shouldn’t trump a long-term record. CGM Focus (ticker: CGMFX), for instance, cut the market’s loss on March 16 almost in half, falling 6.6%, thanks to its short positions (bets against individual stocks), but it has terrible long-term numbers because of its manager’s aggressive style.
More interesting are funds like AMG Yacktman Focused (YAFFX), which fell 8.9% on March 16 but has beaten 84% of its peers in Morningstar’s Large Value category over the past 10 years with an 8.1% annualized return. In theory, value stocks , which are cheaper than growth, are supposed to offer more downside protection, having less room to fall. But that hasn’t been the case in both this bear market and the 2008 one, as cheap stocks are often of weaker, more cyclical companies vulnerable to downturns. In the 30 days that ended on March 16, the iShares Core S&P 500 (IVV) lost 29%; the iShares Russell 1000 Value (IWD), 32%; and iShares Russell 1000 Growth (IWF), 28%.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
Yacktman Focused has lost 26% instead of 32% during that 30-day period, though valuation-conscious manager Stephen Yacktman also seeks high-quality companies with strong businesses and balance sheets. You can find a similar pattern at many funds that outperformed during the latest slide. Manager Scott Moore of the Nuance Concentrated Value fund (NCAVX) has a list of 250 companies with what he calls “leading business franchises” that he has researched his entire career, modeling how they have performed in past crises to see how resilient they are. “We want traits of leaders, and one of those is having an above-average balance sheet over time versus industry peers,” he says. His fund fell 28% over the 30 days ended March 16 and has beaten 91% of its peers over the past five years.
Having manageable debt is crucial in the current environment, as many companies levered up their balance sheets in recent years to buy back stock. Now that the U.S. will probably enter a recession , that debt could be difficult to repay. “There has never been more leverage in companies in the Russell 2000 Growth [small-cap index],” says Craigh Cepukenas, manager of Artisan Small Cap (ARTSX). “If you look at the historical Russell 2000 Growth net debt to [cash flow ratio] number, it’s approaching three times. If you went back to January 2010, it was under one-time leverage.” He also says that money-losing, profitless companies now make up a third of the benchmark, and “that’s completely unprecedented.” His own fund seeks the opposite—low-debt companies with consistent earnings growth. It fell 33% for the month ended March 16 versus the Russell 2000 Growth’s 38% loss. Over the past decade, it has beaten 97% of its peers.
Of course, winning by losing less during such a terrible drawdown is still too painful for most. What about more-diversified portfolios? Vanguard Balanced (VBINX) is a good benchmark—and investment in its own right—to stress-test your portfolio, as it’s indexed to a spliced benchmark of 60% stocks and 40% bonds. During the 30 days that ended March 16, it fell 19%, besting 63% of its peers in Morningstar’s Allocation—50% to 70% Equity category. Over the past decade, it has outperformed 90% of them.
