Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
NetApp Inc. (NTAP) is the featured stock in June’s Safest Dividend Yields Model Portfolio.
NetApp has grown revenue by 3% compounded annually and net operating profit after-tax (NOPAT) by 6% compounded annually over the past decade. More recently, NetApp grew NOPAT from by 28% compounded annually since 2016. The firm’s NOPAT margin increased from 11% in 2010 to 14% in 2020, while its return on invested capital (ROIC) improved from 30% to 42% over the same time.
NetApp has paid a dividend in each of the past six years and stated in its 1Q20 earnings call that it was “going to stay with the dividend.” The firm increased its dividend payments from $0.72/share in 2016 to $1.92/share in 2020, or 28% compounded annually. The current quarterly dividend, when annualized provides a 4.4% dividend yield.
NetApp’s dividend payment is supported by the firm’s strong free cash flow (FCF). NetApp generated $2.9 billion (31% of current market cap) in FCF while paying $1.5 billion in dividends from 2016 to 2020, per Figure 2. Last year, NetApp generated $937 million in FCF and paid out $439 million in dividends.
Companies with strong FCF provide higher quality dividend yields because I know the firm has the cash to support its dividend. On the other hand, dividends from companies with low or negative FCF cannot be trusted as much because the company may not be able to sustain paying dividends.
At its current price of $44/share, NTAP has a price-to-economic book value (PEBV) ratio of 0.7. This ratio means the market expects NetApp’s NOPAT to permanently decline by 30%. This expectation seems overly pessimistic given that NetApp has grown NOPAT by 6% compounded annually over the past decade.
Even if NetApp’s NOPAT margin falls to 11% (10-year average vs. 14% in 2020), and the firm grows revenue by just 2% compounded annually, which results in NOPAT falling by less than 1% compounded annually over the next decade, the stock is worth $57/share today – a 30% upside. See the math behind this reverse DCF scenario .
As investors focus more on fundamental research, research automation technology is needed to analyze all the critical financial details in financial filings as shown in the Harvard Business School and MIT Sloan paper, " Core Earnings: New Data and Evidence ”.
Below are specifics on the adjustments I make based on Robo-Analyst findings in NetApp’s 2020 10-K:
Balance Sheet: I made $3.7 billion of adjustments to calculate invested capital with a net decrease of $2.1 billion. The most notable adjustment was $220 million (6% of reported net assets) in deferred tax assets. See all adjustments to NetApp’s balance sheet here .
Valuation: I made $4.5 billion of adjustments with a net effect of increasing shareholder value by $786 million. Apart from total debt, one of the most notable adjustments to shareholder value was $2.6 billion in excess cash. This adjustment represents 28% of NetApp’s market value. See all adjustments to NetApp’s valuation here .
Disclosure: David Trainer, Kyle Guske II, and Matt Shuler receive no compensation to write about any specific stock, style, or theme.
[1] Harvard Business School features the powerful impact of my firm’s research automation technology in the case New Constructs: Disrupting Fundamental Analysis with Robo-Analysts .
[2] This paper compares my firm’s analytics on a mega cap company to Bloomberg and Capital IQ (SPGI) in a detailed appendix.
New Constructs provides unrivaled insights into the fundamentals and valuation of private & public businesses. Combining human expertise with NLP/ML/AI technologies ( feat
New Constructs provides unrivaled insights into the fundamentals and valuation of private & public businesses. Combining human expertise with NLP/ML/AI technologies ( featured by Harvard Business School ), we shine a light in the dark corners (e.g. footnotes) of hundreds of thousands of financial filings to unearth critical details. As featured in the HBS & MIT Sloan paper, Core Earnings: New Data and Evidence , our superior data drives uniquely comprehensive and independent debt and equity investment ratings, valuation models and research tools.
This paper compares our analytics on a mega cap company to other major providers. The Appendix details exactly how we stack up.
See what HBS & MIT Sloan professors say in the paper:
“…the NC dataset provides a novel opportunity to study the properties of non-operating items disclosed in 10-Ks, and to examine the extent to which the market impounds their implications.” – page 19
Avoid losses from using other firms’ data:
“These results suggest that the adjustments made by analysts to better capture core earnings are incomplete, and that the non-core items identified by NC produce a measure of core earnings that is incremental to alternative measures of operating performance in predicting an array of future income measures.”  – page 26
“An appropriate measure of accounting performance for purposes of forecasting future performance requires detailed analysis of all quantitative performance disclosures detailed in the annual report, including those reported only in the footnotes and in the MD&A.” – page 31
Elite money managers, advisors and institutions have relied on us to lower risk and improve performance since 2004. See our client testimonials . Leading media outlets regularly feature our research.
David is CEO of New Constructs (www.newconstructs.com). David is a distinguished investment strategist and corporate finance expert. He was a 5-yr member of FASB's Investors Advisory Committee. He is author of the Chapter “Modern Tools for Valuation” in The Valuation Handbook (Wiley Finance 2010).
