Learn how futures contracts use tick sizes to track how much positions gain or lose each day.
By Bruce Blythe September 13, 2019 5 min read
Futures contracts have a minimum price fluctuation, or tick, established by an exchange
Like a scorecard at a baseball game, tick sizes are a fundamental scorekeeping mechanism for trading the markets. They help us track how much prices go up or down on a given day, revealing how much money we made or lost.
For stocks, tick sizes are fairly straightforward—basically, it’s dollars and cents times the number of shares. But for stock index futures based on the S&P 500 Index (SPX) and other benchmarks, it’s a different sort of game.
What Is a Futures Tick?
Futures contracts have a minimum price fluctuation, also known as a “tick.” Tick sizes are among the “contract specifications” set by futures exchanges, such as the Chicago-based CME Group, and are calibrated to encourage efficient, liquid markets through “tight” bid/ask spreads. But futures tick sizes are not all the same. They vary depending on the type of contract, size of financial instrument, and requirements of the marketplace.
Why should the typical investor try to understand tick sizes and tick values in futures market? As with stocks or other assets, it’s critical to keep close tabs on how much an investment or position gains or loses over the course of an hour, a day, or other time period. If you’re not familiar with a contract’s tick size, you may be at risk of putting on a position that’s too large or too small. It might also be hard to measure your trading results. “You’ll want to familiarize yourself with the minimum price fluctuation—the tick size—for whatever futures contracts you plan to trade,” according to the National Futures Association (NFA) website. “You’ll also need to know how a price change of any given amount will affect the value of the contract.”
For example, CME Group’s E-mini S&P 500 futures, which are one-fifth the size of the exchange’s standard S&P 500 futures contract, are widely used by traders and other market professionals to speculate on the broader equity market or hedge against adverse movements in a portfolio of stocks.
E-mini S&P 500 futures (/ES) are the most actively traded U.S. equity index futures contract, with more than 1.5 million contracts changing hands on average each day during the first seven months of 2019, according to CME Group’s exchange data. Other CME Group e-mini futures include contracts based on the Nasdaq-100 Index (NDX), Dow Jones Industrial Average ($DJI), and the Russell 2000 Index (RUT).
