shares jumped 2.84% to close at $185.15. About 92,206 shares traded hands on 2,106 trades for the day, compared with an average daily volume of 
n/a shares out of a total float of 17.76 million. After opening the trading day at $183.85, shares of Quaker Chemical Corporation stayed within a range of $187.09 to 
and $108.14 over the last year, and it had a 50-day SMA of $n/a and a 200-day SMA of $n/a.
Quaker Chemical Corp manufactures and sells a variety of chemicals and chemical-based products. The company's product portfolio includes rolling lubricants, machining and grinding compounds, and corrosion preventives that are used by steel and aluminum manufacturers. Quaker Chemical also sells hydraulic fluids used to operate hydraulic equipment, bio-lubricants used by the forestry and construction industries, and chemical milling maskants for the aerospace industry. The company's geographically reportable segments are Americas, EMEA, Asia/Pacific and Global Specialty Businesses.
Quaker Chemical Corporation is based out of Conshohocken, PA and has some 4,500 employees. Its CEO is Michael F. Barry.
For a complete fundamental analysis of Quaker Chemical Corporation, check out Equities.com’s Stock Valuation Analysis report for 
Still paying commissions on stock trades? Equities.com now offers $7.99/month unlimited trading and flat-fee options trading for $89.99/month! Get started today by https://www.equities.com/trading-start
Quaker Chemical Corporation is also a component of the Russell 2000. The Russell 2000 is one of the leading indices tracking small-cap companies in the United States. It's maintained by  Russell 
Investments, an industry leader in creating and maintaining indices, and consists of the smallest 2000 stocks from the broader Russell 3000 index.
Russell's indices differ from traditional indices like the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or S&P 500, whose members are selected by committee, because they base membership entirely on an 
objective, rules based methodology. The 3,000 largest companies by market cap make up the Russell 3000, with the 2,000 smaller companies making up the Russell 2000. It's a simple approach that gives 
a broad, unbiased look at the small-cap market as a whole.
To get more information on Quaker Chemical Corporation and to follow the company’s latest updates, you can visit the company’s profile page here: KWR’s Profile . For more news on the financial markets and emerging growth companies, be sure to visit Equities.com’s 
email newsletter to ensure you don’t miss out on any of our best stories.
All data provided by QuoteMedia and was accurate as of 4:30PM ET.
DISCLOSURE: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not represent the views of equities.com . Readers should not consider statements made by the author as formal recommendations and should consult their financial advisor before making any investment decisions. To read our full disclosure, please go to: http://www.equities.com/disclaimer
