As US stocks rally on expectations of a deceleration in the spread of Covid-19, our models are ... [+] telling us now is the time to hedge your portfolio with options.
After today’s rally in markets, we would use these “rally days” to find portfolio defense for portfolios in case the market faces future disappointments in the future. Continue to see iShares iBoxx High Yield Corporate Bond ETF (HYG) as a better hedge for equity risk than SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (SPY), iShares Russell 2000 ETF (IWM), or Invesco QQQ Trust Series 1 (QQQ). iShares 20+ Year Treasury Bond ETF (TLT) range trading between $145 and $170 looks productive until economic data clarifies. Invesco CurrencyShares Japanese Yen Trust (FXY) looks to be best multi-asset hedge to Dollar and Covid-19 disappointment risk. Be wary of outperformance of iShares Silver Trust (SLV) against SPDR Gold Shares (GLD). Stick with SPDR Gold Shares (GLD) and VanEck Vectors Gold Miners ETF (GDX). For income iShares National Muni Bond ETF (MUB) looks to be most favored by our Covariance models. Equities could continue to rise on the more sanguine Covid-19 data but it is doubtful the full economic impacts have been properly understood.
US stocks are rallying on a belief that Covid-19 cases and deaths are decelerating. While it is true that this wave may be receding in the very near future there are still many epidemiological and economic uncertainties. But in a world where the VIX still prints at over 40 for the past month despite historic promised levels of fiscal and monetary support, it’s easy to understand why bi-polar market behavior reigns. Bonds are weakening but SPDR Gold Shares (GLD) is up, as a result we don’t see a cleark “risk message” being sent to investors.
Throughout this note, we discuss the following ETFs:
HYG correlations to the S&P 500 are still running at about 86% with volatility in the 70% of S&P 500 levels: there is still room for the unwinding of credit risk to hurt high yield credit valuations. Remember high yield credit maturities usually lie in the 3-5 year range. Even if the Covid-19 economic damage lasts only 3 quarters, that’s a big part of the expected lifetime of the issues. Large Cap equities are glorified perpetuity instruments - meaning they have a much longer term to make up for lost ground. Under Black Scholes optionality, stocks should have much better value than more limited high yield credits. Hedge HYG with put strategies. Correlations continue to remain expanded and FXY still showing greater negative correlation to S&P 500 than even TLT.
MUB (municipals ETF) looks like a solid investment for yield seeking investors on a total return basis. It’s not clear any of us will ever pay taxes again (tongue in cheek) so we’re not giving tax advice.
