DENVER--( BUSINESS WIRE )-- ServiceSource (NASDAQ: SREV), the digital customer journey experience company, announced today that it is set to join the broad-market Russell 3000® and Russell 2000® Indexes at the conclusion of the 2020 Russell indexes annual reconstitution, effective after the U.S. market closes on Friday, June 26, 2020.
The annual reconstitution of the Russell indexes captures the 4,000 largest U.S. stocks as of May 8, 2020, ranking them by total market capitalization. Membership in the U.S. all-cap Russell 3000® Index, which remains in place for one year, means automatic inclusion in the large-cap Russell 1000® Index or small-cap Russell 2000® Index, as well as the appropriate growth and value style indexes. FTSE Russell determines membership for its Russell indexes primarily by objective, market-capitalization rankings and style attributes.
“We are very pleased that ServiceSource has been added to the Russell Indexes,” said Gary B. Moore, chairman and chief executive officer of ServiceSource. “This inclusion recognizes our efforts to enhance stockholder value and the progress we are making on our long-term transformation strategy.”
Russell indexes are widely used by investment managers and institutional investors for index funds and as benchmarks for active investment strategies. Approximately $9 trillion in assets are benchmarked against Russell’s U.S. indexes. Russell indexes are part of FTSE Russell, a leading global index provider. For more information on the Russell Indexes and reconstitution, go to the “Russell Reconstitution” section on the FTSE Russell website .
ServiceSource International, Inc. (NASDAQ: SREV) brings the world’s greatest brands closer to their customers through digitally-enabled solutions and data-driven insights that personalize and power the “moments that matter”. Backed by 20 years of experience, an industry-leading technology platform, a robust global footprint and a powerful suite of solutions that enhance every touchpoint along the Customer Journey Experience (CJX), we deliver impactful revenue growth for global market leaders. Operating out of eight countries with more than 3,000 sales delivery professionals speaking 45 languages, ServiceSource drives billions of dollars in client value annually. To learn more about how we help our clients more effectively find, convert, nurture, grow and retain their customers, visit www.servicesource.com .
FTSE Russell is a leading global index provider creating and managing a wide range of indexes, data and analytic solutions to meet client needs across asset classes, style and strategies. Covering 98% of the investable market, FTSE Russell indexes offer a true picture of global markets, combined with the specialist knowledge gained from developing local benchmarks around the world.
FTSE Russell index expertise and products are used extensively by institutional and retail investors globally. Approximately $16 trillion is currently benchmarked to FTSE Russell indexes. For over 30 years, leading asset owners, asset managers, ETF providers and investment banks have chosen FTSE Russell indexes to benchmark their investment performance and create investment funds, ETFs, structured products and index-based derivatives. FTSE Russell indexes also provide clients with tools for asset allocation, investment strategy analysis and risk management.
A core set of universal principles guides FTSE Russell index design and management: a transparent rules-based methodology is informed by independent committees of leading market participants. FTSE Russell is focused on index innovation and customer partnership applying the highest industry standards and embracing the IOSCO Principles. FTSE Russell is wholly owned by London Stock Exchange Group.
This press release contains forward-looking statements, including statements regarding our ability to execute our long-term strategy and enhance stockholder value. These forward-looking statements are based on our current assumptions and beliefs, and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Those risks and uncertainties include: a decline in client renewals, the loss of one or more of our key clients or the contraction in our revenue from one or more of our key clients, in each case resulting in churn, or our clients not expanding their relationships with us; errors in estimates as to the renewal rate improvements and/or service revenue we can generate for our clients; changes in market conditions that impact our ability to sell our solutions and/or generate service revenue on our clients’ behalf; economic or other adverse events or conditions affecting the technology industry, including as a result of the coronavirus disease 2019 ("COVID-19") pandemic; and other risks and uncertainties described more fully in our periodic reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which can be obtained online at the Commission's website at http://www.sec.gov . All forward-looking statements in this press release are based on information currently available to us, and except as may be legally required we assume no obligation to update these forward-looking statements.
ServiceSource®, and any ServiceSource product or service names or logos above are trademarks of ServiceSource International, Inc. All other trademarks used herein belong to their respective owners.
