ST. LOUIS, June  22, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Stereotaxis (NYSE: STXS), the global leader in innovative robotic technologies for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias, today announced that the company will be added to the Russell 2000® and Russell 3000® Indexes, effective after the U.S. stock market closes on Friday, June 26, 2020, as part of the Russell Indexes annual reconstitution.
FTSE Russell is a global index provider that makes available a comprehensive range of reliable and accurate indexes used by investors to measure and analyze global markets. The Russell Indexes have been widely accepted by institutional investors for their integrity and usability. The Russell 3000® Index measures the performance of the largest 3,000 publicly-traded companies in the United States, and the Russell 2000® Index is the most common benchmark for small capitalization companies. For more information on the Russell Indexes go to the “Russell Reconstitution” section on the FTSE Russell website.
“We are excited to be included in the Russell Indexes,” said David Fischel, Chairman and CEO. “This is another step forward in our effort to improve awareness of our differentiated technology, clinical value and growth opportunity.”
Stereotaxis is the global leader in innovative robotic technologies designed to enhance the treatment of arrhythmias and perform endovascular procedures. Its mission is the discovery, development and delivery of robotic systems, instruments, and information solutions for the interventional laboratory. These innovations help physicians provide unsurpassed patient care with robotic precision and safety, improved lab efficiency and productivity, and enhanced integration of procedural information. The core components of Stereotaxis’ systems have received regulatory clearance in the United States, European Union, Japan, Canada, China, and elsewhere. For more information, please visit www.stereotaxis.com .
This press release includes statements that may constitute “forward-looking” statements, usually containing the words “believe,” “estimate,” “project,” “expect” or similar expressions. Forward-looking statements inherently involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements. Factors that would cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, the Company's ability to continue to manage expenses and cash burn rate at sustainable levels, continued acceptance of the Company's products in the marketplace, the effect of global economic conditions on the ability and willingness of customers to purchase its systems and the timing of such purchases, competitive factors, changes resulting from healthcare policy in the United States, including changes in government reimbursement of procedures, dependence upon third-party vendors, timing of regulatory approvals, the impact of the recent coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and our response to it, and other risks discussed in the Company's periodic and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. By making these forward-looking statements, the Company undertakes no obligation to update these statements for revisions or changes after the date of this release. There can be no assurance that the Company will recognize revenue related to its purchase orders and other commitments in any particular period or at all because some of these purchase orders and other commitments are subject to contingencies that are outside of the Company's control. In addition, these orders and commitments may be revised, modified, delayed or canceled, either by their express terms, as a result of negotiations, or by overall project changes or delays.
