Stocks moved lower on Wednesday after Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell took a cautious stance on the state of the economy. The central bank chief said that while a recovery will come, it may be slower than expected.
The Dow is 21.38% below its intraday all-time high of 29,568.57 from Feb. 12
The S&P 500 is 16.9% below its intraday all-time high of 3,393.52 from Feb. 19
The Nasdaq is 9.9% from its intraday all-time high of 9,838.37 from Feb. 19
The major indexes trimmed some of their losses in the final minutes of trade but still posted sizable drops as a rough week for stocks continued. The Dow fell 516 points, or 2.17%. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq fell 1.75 % and 1.55%, respectively. Smaller stocks underperformed their larger counterparts, with the Russell 2000 sliding 3.69%. —Pound
Stocks fell to near session lows in the final hour of trading for the second consecutive day. The Dow extended its loss on the day to about 650 points, or 2.7%. The S&P 500 fell 2.4%, while the Nasdaq was down 2.3%. —Pound
Guggenheim global chief investment officer Scott Minerd said on Twitter that the stock market has reached the top of its rally and "now we find out if this is 1930 all over again." Minerd is the latest high profile market voice to say they are bearish on the market, following Appaloosa Management's David Tepper earlier on Wednesday and Stanley Druckenmiller on Tuesday night. —Pound
With roughly one hour left in the trading session, the major averages were headed for steep losses once again after a stark warning from Fed Chairman Jerome Powell. The Dow was down more than 500 points, or 2.2%. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq also slid 2%. Airline stocks reached new coronavirus crisis lows, with American Airlines hitting a record low. —Imbert
An Axios reporter tweeted that President Donald Trump's tweet earlier in the day regarding U.S.-China trade relations came "amid discussions over whether Trump blows up the China trade deal." China and the U.S. struck a so-called Phase One agreement in January, as the coronavirus began to spread around the world. —Imbert
" There are some crazy pockets of misallocation ," Appaloosa Management founder David Tepper told CNBC on Wednesday. One example he highlighted was "SPACs – buying pools – that were trading at crazy levels, because they're taking over a company." Tepper declined to mention any specific  (special purpose acquisition company) by name, simply saying that "there's definitely some companies misvalued" as investors were "getting caught in sort of a frenzy." —Sheetz
Shares of Walmart traded higher on Wednesday – one of just three Dow components in the green – following price target hikes from Bank of America and RBC. Bank of America sees shares hitting $145 based on e-commerce growth in North America and China. RBC's new target on the stock is $129, since the firm believes the retailer will be a "net winner in a recessionary/slow recovery scenario." Walmart gained about 1% to trade at $124. – Stevens
Bank stocks were down across the board as the broader market sold off on Wednesday, continuing a stretch of weak performance for the sector. Wells Fargo was one of the worst performers, with shares dropping more than 6%. Shares of Citi and Bank of America both lost more than 3%. Smaller banks struggled as well, with the SPDR S&P Regional Bank ETF ( KRE ) falling 4.3%. — Pound
Airline stocks came under pressure again on Wednesday, as the coronavirus outbreak continues to hit the industry hard. American Airlines sank to a new all-time low, while Delta and Southwest dropped to 52-week lows. The group has proved to be polarizing among some of the biggest investors. Earlier this month Warren Buffett said he sold all of his airline positions , while Bill Miller, who owns Delta, American and United Airlines, according to FactSet, said that if you don't own airlines you're betting against a vaccine . – Stevens
According to data from JPMorgan, since the coronavirus outbreak began in March in the U.S., 33 S&P 500 companies have suspended their dividend, while 12 names have cut their dividend. The firm, which has been tracking the numbers, said that 260 companies have maintained or raised their dividend, while 117 have yet to declare what they plan to do. JPMorgan pointed to a few notable announcements over the last week, including Disney saying it would forego its semi-annual dividend payment in July, as well as Pepsi raising its divided by 7%. – Stevens
Appaloosa Management founder David Tepper said Wednesday that the market is the most overvalued he's seen it , behind only '99. Before Wednesday's sell-off, it was "maybe the second-most overvalued stock market I've even seen," Tepper said Wednesday on CNBC's "Halftime Report." - Li
The major averages were headed for another day of sharp losses on Wednesday as worries over the economy reopening sent the market tumbling. The Dow traded 450 points lower, or 1.9%. The S&P 500 slid 1.6% while the Nasdaq dropped 1.5%. Comments from Fed Chairman Jerome Powell also hurt market sentiment. —Imbert
Gasoline demand continues to bounce from the March low as states begin to reopen their economies. The U.S. Energy Information Administration said Wednesday that for the week ending May 8 demand jumped to 7.5 million barrels per day up from 6.7 million bpd the prior week. This is about 50% higher than the March low of 5.1 million bpd, but is still significantly below last year's average of 9.4 million bpd for this time of year. – Stevens, Domm
CFRA downgraded shares of Beyond Meat to sell from hold, mainly on valuation concerns. "We think much of BYND's 40%+ appreciation over the last week is speculation of a meat shortage spurring demand for plant-based meat. We think a meat shortage, if any, will be short-lived since 1) plants are reopening with help from the federal government; 2) plants are switching production from foodservice to retail; and 3) cold-storage protein reserves are near record levels," the firm said. The red-hot stock is up 8% this week and over 90% this year. - Bloom
General Electric's stock fell more than 4% during trading, dropping below $5.73 a share — the lowest level it hit during the financial crisis in 2009. The troubled industrial conglomerate saw a steep decline in first-quarter revenue due to the coronavirus pandemic and warned shareholders last month that it expects to take an even worse hit during the second quarter. - Sheetz
The tech-heavy Nasdaq was the only major index in the green in early trading, gaining roughly 0.2%, with Zoom and Netflix some of the biggest movers. Tech has been outperforming other sectors so far this year but fell in a late sell-off on Tuesday.
Bill Callahan, an investment strategist at Schroders, said the outperformance of tech could continue in the coming weeks until investors learn more about the impact of the pandemic on the sector. "As long as these companies continue to deliver on earnings, they will be fine. My big question will be Q2 earnings," Callahan said.
The market may be overconfident on some of these stocks, including those that rely on enterprise customers, Callahan said. "The question is will these companies be able to collect what they're owed from their customers and maintain their pricing power as their customers struggle. I'm not sure of the answer to that, but the implied price and multiple says that the market right now believes they will," Callahan said. — Pound
10:28 am: Bill Miller sticks by airline holdings, says not owning them is 'bet against the vaccine'
Legendary investor Bill Miller said Tuesday evening he was sticking by his investments in the airline industry despite the sharp drop in those stocks amid the coronavirus outbreak. "If you don't own the airlines, then you're making a bet against the vaccine," said Miller, founder and CIO of Miller Value Partners. "If there is a vaccine, that will eliminate all the issues people have about flying and these (stocks) will come back very, very quickly," Miller added. —Imbert
Morgan Stanley reiterated its overweight rating on shares of Adobe Wednesday, saying it's the right stock at the right time. "In volatile environments, we favor owning the most durable EPS stories – where the business model and management commitment to sustaining (or improving) operating margins could enable profitability to better weather a difficult spending environment," analyst Keith Weiss said. The stock has gained more than 10% this year. - Bloom
9:57 am: Here are Wednesday's biggest analyst calls of the day: Norwegian, Beyond Meat, Peloton & more
JMP raised its price target on Peloton to $59 from $53.
Argus raised its price target on Beyond Meat to $180 from $130.
Jefferies initiated WW as a buy.
Mizuho upgraded JD.com to buy from neutral.
Stephens resumed coverage of Cheesecake Factory at underweight.
Citi initiated a 90-day positive catalyst watch on Spirit Airlines.
Wells Fargo downgraded Norwegian to equal weight from overweight.
Stocks opened in the red on Wednesday following cautious remarks from Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell. The Dow shed 122 points for a loss of 0.5%, while the S&P 500 lost 0.2%. The Nasdaq Composite bucked the trend to rise 0.15%. – Stevens
"I know there are fans of the policy, but for now it's not something that we're considering," he said. "We think we have a good toolkit and that's the one that we will be using. " - Cox
"There is a growing sense that the recovery may come more slowly than we would like, but it will. And that may mean that it's necessary for us to do more," Powell said. – Stevens
"It will take some time to get back to where we were. I have every reason to think we can get back there. The economy should substantially recover once the virus is under control," Powell said. – Stevens
"In terms of getting back, I would say that probably over the course of the next month or so, unemployment will peak. And then as we return to more normal levels of economic activity, it's a reasonable expectation that unemployment will start to decline again and it may decline sharply. But it's also likely to remain well above the levels that we saw earlier this year and all through 2019 and 18, which were 50-year lows in unemployment," Powell said. The unemployment rate jumped to 16% in April, topping the post-war record of 10.8%. – Stevens
Stock futures turned negative following the release of Fed Chair Powell's remarks. Dow futures were last down 15 points. The 10-year Treasury yield declined by 4 basis points to 0.65%. Gold jumped by 1% and the U.S. dollar declined versus major currencies. - Melloy
While the Fed continues efforts to prop up the economy, Powell said that the biggest future response may need to come from the government.  "Additional fiscal support could be costly, but worth it if it helps avoid long-term economic damage and leaves us with a stronger recovery. This tradeoff is one for our elected representatives, who wield powers of taxation and spending," he said. - Cox
Fed Chairman Jerome Powell said more measures likely will be needed to pull the economy out of its current downturn. "While the economic response has been both timely and appropriately large, it may not be the final chapter, given that the path ahead is both highly uncertain and subject to significant downside risks," Powell said in prepared remarks for a webcast event with the Peterson Institute for International Economics. - Cox
Legendary investor Stanley Druckenmiller told the Economic Club of New York on Tuesday night that stock market is historically overvalued and that the market is overreacting to news of progress on potential virus treatments, like Gilead's remdesivir. "The risk-reward for equity is maybe as bad as I've seen it in my career. The wild card here is the Fed can always step up their (asset) purchases," Druckenmiller said, according to the organization's Twitter account. — Pound
Uber announced on Wednesday morning that it is planning to sell $750 million in senior notes , continuing a torrent of major debt deals during the pandemic. Ride share rival Lyft announced the pricing of a $650 million convertible debt offering on Tuesday. Other recent debt announcements include Disney, PayPal and General Motors, with $25.7 billion of investment grade debt hitting the market on Monday alone. — Pound, Domm
Troubled retailer J.C. Penney is in talks with lenders to secure $450 million in financing for a possible bankruptcy filing, people familiar with the situation told CNBC. The financing would require the retailer to hit certain goals to receive the second half of the loan. A bankruptcy filing could come as soon as Friday, although that timing could still be delayed, according to one source. Once worth billions of dollars, the stock now trades at just 20 cents. – Hirsch, Stevens
A measure of underlying U.S. producer prices fell more than expected in April as the economy reeled from restrictions imposed to contain the coronavirus. The U.S. producer price index dropped 1.3% last month, more than the 0.5% decline expected by economists polled by Dow Jones. The reading came after data on Tuesday showed consumer prices dropped by the most on record in April. – Li
Bank of America said in a note that buybacks by its clients are down 35% year-to-date and that the second quarter is on track to be the lowest total on record . Share repurchases by Bank of America clients have generally tracked total S&P 500 buybacks over the past decade."Buybacks remained extremely anemic, with QTD buybacks tracking just over $1bn — on pace for a record-low ~$2bn quarter in our data history," the note said. —Pound
8:01 am: Grubhub could fetch $75 a share in Uber takeover, says Barclays
News broke that Uber Technologies approached Grubhub with a takeover offer, sending Grubhub shares soaring nearly 30% on Tuesday. Barclays expects the potential deal to value Grubhub at $75 per share , nearly 25% upside from Tuesday's close of $60.39 per share. The bank said the move would combine two of the biggest players in the meal-delivery business at a time when the industry faces "significant tailwinds" amid the coronavirus pandemic. "Now is the right time," Barclays analyst Deepak Mathivanan said in a note on Wednesday. "The food delivery industry has seen significant tailwinds over the past few months during the COVID-19 pandemic, with volume growth ranging from 70-100%." –Li
7:52 am: Powell appearance likely to focus on economy, negative rates
The market will hear Wednesday morning from Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell, who is expected to address the weakening national economy and the potential for negative interest rates. Powell will appear at 9 a.m. on a webcast with the Peterson Institute for International Economics. Though it's not clear if the events are connected, the appearance was scheduled just after futures traders last week began making bets that the Fed's benchmark overnight interest rate would go negative by the end of the year. Powell and other Fed members have repeatedly pushed back on the kinds of negative rates that are prevalent in much of Europe and in Japan. – Cox
Shares of the biggest tech companies all traded higher in the premarket Wednesday, a day after they rolled over and pressured the broader market into a sharp decline. Facebook gained about 0.5% before the bell along with Amazon and Apple while Netflix shares advanced 0.9%. Google-parent Alphabet rose 0.8% and Microsoft traded 0.5% higher. These stocks have been among the best performers since the S&P 500 hit a bottom on March 23. —Imbert
Stock futures were higher, rebounding from Tuesday's losses as big technology shares including Microsoft gained in premarket trading. The big event traders are waiting on is Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell's virtual speech at 9:00 am ET . The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost more than 450 points on Tuesday. But Dow futures were higher by 148 points Wednesday morning . -Melloy
