Stocks close at new records on rosier U.S. economic data, trade deal hopes
Stocks edged up for a fourth straight day to score another round of records Wednesday, supported by rosier U.S. economic data and ongoing hopes for a U.S. - China trade deal, but Wall Street trading volumes were thinner than usual ahead of the Thanksgiving Day holiday Thursday.
U.S. financial markets will be closed Thursday for Thanksgiving Day and will have an abbreviated trading schedule on Friday.
What are major indexes doing?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
ended up 57.24 points or 0.66% at 8,705.18.
Each of the three major indexes closed at a record.
The small-cap Russell 2000 RUT,
Investors waded through a heavy round of U.S. economic data Wednesday, including a revised estimate of third-quarter GDP that showed the U.S. economy expanded at a 2.1% annual pace versus a previous estimate of 1.9%.
The number of people who applied for first-time unemployment benefits fell sharply in the week before Thanksgiving, putting claims back near historic lows. Initial claims declined 15,000 to 213,000 in the week ended Nov. 23, the Labor Department said, though many economists caution against reading too much into any one week’s worth of claims data around this time of year.
Also, orders for durable goods rose 0.6% in October, the government said, defying forecasts for a 1.1% drop, though most of the gain was tied to defense-related goods such as jet fighters and ships.
U.S. consumer spending rose in October for the eighth month in a row, a potentially good sign for the holiday shopping season that gets underway after Thanksgiving with Black Friday specials.
A gauge of inflation favored by the Federal Reserve dipped to a 1.6% yearly gain in October, from a previous 1.7% run rate, the government said. Personal incomes were flat, and consumer spending rose 0.3% while the savings rate ticked down modestly.
Finally, the Federal Reserve’s Beige Book reported U.S. businesses have seen continued growth in economic activity , wages and prices during recent weeks, and they maintain a generally positive outlook.
The economy “expanded modestly” from October through mid-November, the Fed said in its periodic report of anecdotes from business contacts around the country, in what was an improvement from the October report, when the Fed described growth as “slight to modest.”
“We can be thankful that the economy is still in a good place with economic growth a little better, a rebound in business durable equipment expenditures, and a sharp decline in joblessness which together tell the story that recession is nowhere to be seen and should not be on anyone’s radar in 2020,” MUFG chief economist Chris Rupkey said.
“Political uncertainty, impeachment, trade war with China and the world, none of these headlines as yet show an economy that is about to go down,” he added.
The positive tone for U.S. equities this week has also been attributed in large part to upbeat expectations for a U.S. - China trade deal. President Donald Trump on Tuesday said U.S.-China negotiations were in the “final throes,” while China’s Commerce Ministry said Vice Premier Liu He, the country’s top trade negotiator, spoke with U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.
But some analysts worry investors have gotten too euphoric, leaving the stock market vulnerable to a pullback in the case of another trade-related setback, or even if an agreement is reached in the near term.
See: Beware stock-market ‘FOMO’ as Wall Street churns out record highs, says long-term bull
“Looking ahead, extra caution may be warranted. With markets having broken new records again and again on signals that this phase one deal is drawing closer, it’s fruitful to ask how much upside – if any – there’s still in store once that agreement is officially completed,” said Marios Hadjikyriacos, investment analyst at XM, in a note.
“Is a phase one deal practically priced in by now, and are we therefore looking at a potential ‘buy the rumor sell the fact’ reaction once it’s wrapped up?” he asked.
