So much for the little guy.
America may love stories about scrappy underdogs that sometimes overcome the odds and win. But we also love favorites, and these days they come in pretty much one size only—the bigger the better, at least when it comes to the stocks we buy.
Just consider this past week’s market returns . A quick look at the S&P 500 index’s 3% gain suggests that everything is going to be all right despite the economic slowdown caused by the coronavirus. The small-company Russell 2000 ,
      however, dropped 1.4% to 1229.1, implying that everything isn’t A-OK. It’s the third time the weekly gap between the two indexes has been that large since March 13, but one has to go back to 2002 to find a similar occurrence.
Considering the economic news of the week, one would almost have to assume small-caps have it right. Retail sales plummeted the most on record. The Empire State index of manufacturers in the New York region fell to its lowest level ever . Industrial production suffered its largest decline since 1946. Banks like JPMorgan Chase (ticker: JPM) and Bank of America (BAC) reported massive loan-loss reserves for good debt gone bad.
The only real good news on the week came on the health front, including tentative steps to reopen the economy and a report that Gilead Sciences ’ (GILD) antiviral drug remdesivir appeared to be working in a small Covid-19 trial at the University of Chicago.
Still, the two indexes responded in such dramatically different fashions that it’s almost as if they live in two different worlds—and in some ways, they do.
Because of their small size, the companies in the Russell 2000 are much more sensitive to economic growth rates than the much bigger ones in the S&P 500, explains RBC Capital Markets strategist Lori Calvasina. She notes that the small-caps generally underperform large-caps ahead of drops in the Institute for Supply Management’s manufacturing survey. “We’ve been confronted by the grim reality of how severe the economic damage has already been this week,” Calvasina says. Small-cap underperformance suggests it’s going to get worse.
This isn’t a one-week trend, and it even shows up within the S&P 500 itself. Since the index peaked on Feb. 19, its 100 largest stocks by market cap on that day have dropped an average of 16%, six percentage points less than the next quintile of stocks. The 100 smallest stocks in the S&P 500 have dropped 35%, nearly twice as much as the largest. The world is really divided between the haves and the have-nots, and that may continue as the economy deteriorates.
“I don’t know why there would be any rule against the strong getting stronger in a difficult environment,” says Larry Pitkowsky of GoodHaven Capital Management. “That may be how it plays out.”
You don’t have to dig into index performance to see that the big and the strong are just getting bigger and stronger as the small and weak get crushed. Amazon.com (AMZN) and Netflix (NFLX), two companies that have benefited from the crisis in two different ways, hit new all-time highs as investors flocked to the same giant tech stocks they always did. Procter & Gamble (PG), Johnson & Johnson (JNJ), and Costco Wholesale (COST) all raised their dividends —and each finished the week up more than 5%. Meanwhile, smaller S&P 500 companies such as oil-services company Helmerich & Payne ( HP ) and retailer L Brands (LB) suspended theirs.
It wasn’t supposed to be this way. The performance disparity comes even as the Federal Reserve and the U.S. government pump trillions of dollars into the U.S. economy as companies try to bridge the gap between the shutdown and the reopening. Part of that goal has been to protect jobs , but also to help smaller companies weather the storm. If the market is any indication, those plans have failed.
Or maybe not. Observant investors will recognize that these trends were largely in place before the current crisis began. Amazon’s rise had put other retailers down years ago; the energy sector was under pressure long before Covid-19 destroyed demand for crude; big tech stocks were the go-to investments long before the novel coronavirus became part of everyone’s vocabulary. That’s a reflection of a world where growth is slow, and where stocks of large companies that can make their own growth will outperform. For small companies to finally outperform, the stimulus is needed not only to bridge the gap until the crisis is over but to get the economy moving once again.
“The government programs are a safety net, and small-cap companies need a safety net,” says Jefferies strategist Steven DeSanctis. “They also need the government to kick-start the economy.”
When that happens, the underdog might finally have a fighting chance.
Read the rest of The Trader column: A Small-Cap Stock That’s Ready to Pounce
So much for the little guy.
