Morgan Stanley will buy discount broker E-Trade Financial; Russell 2000 pops higher as large caps slump
U.S. stocks finished lower Thursday, after clawing back from steep late-morning losses, as investors struggled to find their footing amid uncertainty about the impact of China’s coronavirus epidemic.
Although investors have been heartened by daily reports of a slowing rate of the spread of the COVID-19 disease, the spread of virus  outside China is sparking some anxiety, analysts said.
lost 12.92 points, or 0.4%, to end at 3,373.23. The Nasdaq Composite Index COMP,
shed 66.21 points, or 0.7%, to settle at 9,750.96, after hitting an intrasession nadir at 9,636.94.
The small-cap Russell 2000 index RUT,
, meanwhile, added 3.5 points, or 0.2%, to finish at 1,696.07.
Stock markets settled lower after partially recovering from a midday pullback as investors found few reasons to drive equity benchmarks to fresh highs, with the declines being attributed to lingering jitters about the impact of epidemic in China.
“I think investor are starting to question the idea that the economic impact of the epidemic is going to be only transitory,”  said Adam Phillips, director of portfolio strategy at EP Wealth Advisors, in an interview with MarketWatch, noting that all three major stock indexes on Thursday still were less than 1% from their all-time highs.
“That begs the question: is the whole impact of the coronavirus baked in? We may have lower to go here, over the short-term,” Phillips said.
That announcement, however, came against the backdrop of deaths from COVID-19 outside of China. A report from South Korea’s Yonhap News Agency said the infection had claimed its first life, and the mayor of the South Korean city of Daegu urged its 2.5 million people to refrain from going outside, according to the Associated Press . Reports indicate that cases of the disease in South Korea have more than doubled to 104 in a day, with 35 additional cases cropping up in Daegu on Thursday.
“We’ve had a six-month uptrend,” Joe Saluzzi, co-head of equity trading at Themis Trading, told MarketWatch about the midday slump. “Certainly this was a warning shot across the bow for everyone to wake up a little. You can sell off in the middle of the day,” he said.
also climbed for a third session against major currencies, pressuring exporters, as the currency was viewed as a haven.
Earlier in the session, U.S. equity benchmarks briefly punched into positive territory, amid a burst of corporate deal activity that pointed to optimism about the domestic economy. Meanwhile, U.S. corporate earnings for the fourth quarter also have quelled some fears that stock gains have come purely on the back of momentum and speculation rather than fundamentals, like earnings.
“We now have Q4 results from 411 S&P 500 members that combined account for 88.6% of the index’s total market capitalization. Total earnings for these 411 index members are up +1.1% from the same period last year on +4.6% higher revenues,” wrote Sheraz Mian, research director at Zacks, in a note.
Even so, Thursday’s action comes as a reminder of how quickly sentiment can shift to pressure stocks lower, with the uncertainty of epidemic injecting some volatility into markets, even as China attempts to pre-empt the pain.
Read: Can stocks keep soaring as the U.S. dollar surges? What investors need to know
China’s central bank cut its benchmark lending rate on Thursday , as widely expected, in a move to lower financing costs for businesses. The epidemic has disrupted global supply chains and factory activity in China. The benchmark one-year loan prime rate was cut by 10 basis points, and the five-year loan prime rate by 5 basis points. The coronavirus has infected nearly 76,000, and claimed more than 2,100 lives.
Goldman Sachs’ chief global equity strategist Peter Oppenheimer said that the chances for a correction or pullback in U.S. stocks were rising due to the spread of the contagion out of Asia. “In the nearer term…we believe the greater risk is that the impact of the coronavirus on earnings may well be underestimated in current stock prices, suggesting that the risks of a correction are high,” the strategist said .
What did the data show?
The number of Americans filing for first-time unemployment benefits ticked up marginally in the most recent week but still hovered near multiyear lows. A gauge of manufacturing activity in the mid-Atlantic area surged to a two-year high in February. The new orders component of the Philadelphia Fed’s survey was at its highest since May 2018.
Which stocks were in focus?
Shares of L Brands Inc. LB,
ended 3.6% lower, after announcing it would sell a 55% stake in Victoria’s Secret to private-equity firm Sycamore Partners for around $525 million.
shares shed 0.2% after rocketing higher in early trade, but ending an 8-day win streak.
Shares of Zillow Group Inc. Z,
gained 16.8% after a set of upgrades following a fourth-quarter earnings call late Wednesday.
