8@eight: ASX set for positive start, Nasdaq hits record high
The Australian sharemarket is poised to inch higher at the open after Wall Street finished in positive territory, though it pared gains in the afternoon. The Australian dollar continued to strengthen overnight to be fetching 69.30 US cents this morning.
1. Stocks push higher as Nasdaq hits record high: Global equities continue to edge higher, with major indices across the US and Europe climbing overnight. Broadly speaking, it was a low impact night’s trade, and the low activity in the market reflected that.
The US VIX eased once more, to drop towards the 31 mark, enabling a 0.43 per cent gain for the S&P500. Again, it was the US tech sector that shined. The Nasdaq surged in Wall Street trade, rallying 0.74 per cent to hit new record highs.
2. Sentiment bolstered by global PMIs, US stimulus talk: The night’s news flow was mixed, but tipped slightly in favour of the bulls last night. The spate of flash PMI surveys released across the globe showed the pick-up in business activity which investors have been looking for.
Both US and European services and manufacturing PMI topped expectations, with US manufacturing activity returning to a state of expansion last month. Also fuelling optimism about the growth outlook last night, US Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin stated his belief that a new wave of US fiscal stimulus was likely to be passed by July.
3. US still staring down a second wave: On the other side of the ledger, simmering about the COVID-19 pandemic, and the possibility of a "second wave" of infections, knocked US stocks from their intra-session highs. US COVID-19 cases continue to rise, with the state of California and the state of Texas both recording their biggest daily jump in cases yesterday.
The lift in the US caseload has prompted EU leaders to canvas barring American travellers to the continent, in order to limit the risk of a second wave throughout Europe.
4. Markets hit patch of turbulence on Navarro trade comments: On top of COVID-19 concerns, trade-war woes returned to the fore yesterday – albeit briefly. Risk assets took a swan dive in Asian trade, after US President Trump trade adviser Peter Navarro stated in an interview that the US-China trade-deal was "over".
In a very rapid about-face as global markets went into a tail-spin, the White House moved quickly to extinguish the market’s panic, with Navarro stating in a separate media interview that the comments were "taken wildly out of context" and US President Trump taking to Twitter to reassure the US-China trade pact was "fully intact".
5. ASX200 continues to trade sideways: The trade-war hiccup resulted in a bumpy session for the ASX200 yesterday. Ultimately, it proved to another lukewarm day’s trade for Australian stocks. The index finished 0.17 per cent higher, in a day’s trade that saw the market trade in a relatively narrow range.
Perhaps a heartening sign for market participants, the ASX200’s gains were paced by the COVID-19 sensitive real estate and consumer discretionary sectors. That dynamic arose despite still simmering fears that the state of Victoria is teetering on the edge of its own second wave of the pandemic. SPI Futures are indicating a 9-point jump for the ASX200 this morning.
6. FX markets reflect glimmers of hope: Once again, currency markets portrayed best the prevailing sentiment in the market. The US Dollar eased slightly with the Japanese Yen, while the Euro and European currencies edged higher with European sovereign bond yields, courtesy of the much better than expected European PMI surveys.
The Australian Dollar was marginally higher, still following approximately the swings in US equities. Likely owing to a drop in the US Dollar, along with another fall in real yields, Gold prices hit the $US1770 mark in US trade, to trade at a fresh 8 year high.
7. What to watch in the day ahead: The economic calendar remains relatively light-on today. The Asian session will be highlighted by the meeting of the RBNZ this afternoon, with that central bank expected to keep policy settings unchanged.
All eyes will be on the RBNZ’s accompanying statement, for any hint it may be canvassing the possibility of any further unorthodox monetary policy such as negative interest rates, or a foreign asset purchasing program. The overnight session will be relatively quiet when it comes to data, but traders will be keeping an eye on this week’s US Crude Inventory data.
This column was produced in commercial partnership between The Sydney Morning Herald, The Age and IG
Information is of a general nature only.
