Asian stocks edged lower Wednesday after the International Monetary Fund said the global economy will suffer its worst year since the Great Depression of the 1930s due to the coronavirus pandemic.
Benchmarks in Tokyo and Hong Kong were flat while Shanghai and Sydney declined despite Wall Street’s overnight gain driven by buying of technology stocks.
The IMF’s latest forecast said global economic output will shrink by 3% this year, a bigger loss than 2009’s 0.1% decline. That was a marked reverse from the Fund’s previous forecast in January of 3.3% growth before the virus prompted governments to shut down factories, travel and other industries.
“The IMF forecast a deep economic winter,” said Hayaki Narita of Mizuho Bank in a report. However, Narita said, investors appear to be looking past that to the IMF’s outlook for a “spring-back in growth” to 5.8% next year.
The IMF’s chief economist, Gita Gopinath, said the loss top global gross domestic product, the broadest gauge of economic output, could amount to $9 trillion, or more than the economies of Germany and Japan combined.
The Shanghai Composite Index SHCOMP,
edged 0.1% lower to 24,423.19.
in Sydney lost 0.5% to 5,462.10. New Zealand and Singapore gained while Jakarta declined.
On Wall Street, the benchmark S&P 500 index SPX,
climbed 3.1% to 2,846.06. The benchmark index surged 12% last week, though it is about 16% below its all-time high set in February.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
climbed 4.5% after reporting a stronger profit for the first three months of the year than Wall Street expected. It raised its dividend, bucking a trend as companies try to conserve cash, even though the health care giant also had to slash its outlook.
Investors are focusing on how and when authorities may begin to ease business shutdowns and limits on people’s movements imposed to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
President Donald Trump has been discussing with officials how to roll back federal social distancing recommendations that expire at the end of the month. And governors around the U.S. have begun collaborating on plans to reopen their economies in what is likely to be a gradual process to prevent the coronavirus from rebounding.
The discussions follow signs the outbreak may be leveling off in some of the hardest-hit areas, including New York City.
In Italy, Spain and other places around Europe where infections and deaths have begun stabilizing, the process of reopening economies is already underway. Some businesses and industries are allowed to reopen in a calibrated effort aimed at balancing public health against their countries’ economic well-being.
The IMF expects economic contractions this year of 5.9% in the United States, 7.5% in the 19 European countries that share the euro currency, 5.2% in Japan and 6.5% in the United Kingdom. The Fund said China, where the pandemic originated, should eke out 1.2% growth this year, better than some private sector forecasters who expect little to no growth in the world’s second-biggest economy.
China has reopened factories, shops and other businesses after declaring victory over the outbreak while the United States and Europe still are tightening controls. Still, forecasters say it will be months before Chinese industries return to normal output and exporters will be hurt by depressed global demand.
While Wall Street expects profits will be down for most companies in the S&P 500, the focus is on what management teams have to say about what profits look like for the rest of the year.
Analysts are forecasting a drop of roughly 10% in earnings per share for S&P 500 companies for the first quarter and 21% for the second quarter.
