Forex futures positioning data for the week ending April 7, 2020
EUR long 80K vs 74K long last week. Longs increased by 6k
GBP long 4K vs 5K long last week. Longs trimmed by 1K
JPY long 22K vs 18K long last week. Longs increased by 4K
CHF long 6K vs 5K long last week. Longs increased by 1K
AUD short 35k vs 31K short last week. Shorts increased by 5K
NZD short 15K  vs 16K short last week. Shorts trimmed by 1K
CAD short 24k vs 22K short last week. Shorts trimmed by 2K
Prior week report can be found here.
The EUR remains the largest position and continued to get larger (by 6K) and was also the largest change in position of the major currencies.  The EURUSD did correct higher during the week from the lowest level since March 25th
The 2nd largest position is a 35K short in the AUD. The AUD position was not so fortuitous as the AUD corrected higher in trading this week.
The other changes in positions were 4k or less in the current week.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
