Covid-19 to shave 1 trillion euro off from European brands: Report
The automobile sector led mostly by the German companies will be the main winners.
This brand erosion will be mostly felt by airlines, oil & gas, tourism & leisure, restaurants, and retail companies whose businesses are the worst hit.
Mumbai: The top 100 European corporations will see their brand value erode by a whopping 1 trillion euros this year due to the impact of coronavirus pandemic on their revenue as well as profit, says a report.
This brand erosion will be mostly felt by airlines, oil & gas, tourism & leisure, restaurants, and retail companies whose businesses are the worst hit, Brand Finance said in a report.
However, the automobile sector led mostly by the German companies will be the main winners. Mercedez topped the list of gainers.
Hotels, airlines and airports are the worst affected by the pandemic and the impact on them will increase as more and more cities are under lockdowns and governments unveil more measures of social distancing by shutting down public transport, closing borders, the report said.
It can be noted that continental Europe has become the nerve centre of the pandemic. Already Italy has overtaken China in the number of deaths by a huge margin and Spain and France are also in the grip of COVID-19 .
The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has killed over 13,000 and sickened lakhs of people around the globe.
"Brand value of the Europe's largest corporations is set to lose up to 1 trillion euros as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak, with the aviation sector being the most affected,” Brand Finance, an independent brand valuation consultancy said.
In comparison, the impact from the 2003 SARS outbreak, which infected over 8,000 people and killed 774, was only 50 billion euros.
Noting that aviation will be hit the hardest, the report said the global airline industry has already called for up to 200 billion euros in emergency support and Boeing alone has called for 60 billion euros in assistance for aerospace manufacturers.
The International Air Transport Association has said most carriers will run out of money within two months as a result of the closure of borders.
