EUR/USD, DAX 30, European Union, Non-Farm Payrolls, Europe Open – Talking Points:
Germany’s DAX 30 index seems poised to break higher as price tracks in a bullish Symmetrical Triangle. Could the benchmark index move back above 13,000?
The positivity from last night’s Wall Street session carried into Asia-Pacific trade with risk assets broadly outperforming their haven-associated brethren.
The US Dollar and Japanese Yen trekked lower as investors were notably buoyed by news from pharmaceutical juggernaut Pfizer, confirming one of their potential vaccines was successful in producing antibodies against the novel coronavirus.
Despite recording the largest daily increase of Covid-19 cases in California and Houston, the S&P 500 nudged back above 3,100. It was followed higher by the risk-sensitive Australian Dollar as market participants seemingly dismiss lockdown concerns in favor of relatively positive manufacturing data.
Looking ahead, US non-farm payrolls data headlines the economic docket of the last trading day for the week, as US market participants celebrate the Independence Day holiday on July 4, with financial markets closed.
A shortened trading week results in an early release of the volatility-inducing US non-farm payrolls figure, with expectations of 3 million jobs being added to the local economy in June.
Flashing back to last month’s surprising addition of 2.5 million jobs, grossly surpassing estimates of an 8 million decline, calls into question the accuracy of the forecast this time around.
Nevertheless, a better than expected print may continue to lift sentiment already bolstered by news of progress in the development of a coronavirus vaccine and building on a modest, yet positive monthly increase in private payrolls – slightly undershooting estimates of 3 million with 2.37 million employees hired in June.
An interesting dynamic has developed over the last few days of trade as the Momentum indicator diverges with RSI and recent bullish price action.
Although EUR/USD seems to be carving out a Bull Flag formation above bearish invalidation at the 61.8% Fibonacci (1.1167) Momentum continues to fade into negative territory.
With this in mind, price action may not be as cut and dry as it seems. A daily close above resistance at the 78.6% Fibonacci (1.1312) potentially validates a break of the bullish continuation pattern, with the implied move suggesting a surge above the March high (1.1495).
However, a bearish tilt remains should the Momentum indicator fail to catch up with its technical cousin, the RSI, potentially leading the Euro to break down against its US Dollar counterpart.
