The yen, euro and Swiss franc are backed by countries that run strong external surpluses.
In particular, were the euro to close above the December peak of $1.1239, it would breach a down channel from August 2018 and signal a clear break of the bull trend.
SYDNEY: The dollar NSE -1.67 % nursed savage losses against the yen and euro on Friday as a plunge in US yields to record lows wiped out the currency's single greatest attraction for investors - higher interest rates.
Mounting fears over the fallout from the coronavirus has driven a truly tectonic shift in expectations for US rates as markets wager the Federal Reserve will have to cut rates by 50 basis points for a second time this month.
The resulting collapse in Treasury yields has been the death of one of the most popular carry trades globally - borrowing at negative rates in the euro and yen to buy US assets. "Select USD pairs like EUR/USD are turning because of a dramatic and decisive shift in US rate expectations and related spreads," said Alan Ruskin, global head of G10 FX strategy at Deutsche Bank.
"The USD has lost the single most important source of its over-valuation, a strong carry advantage," he added, warning this could end a dollar uptrend that has lasted since mid-2018.
In particular, were the euro to close above the December peak of $1.1239, it would breach a down channel from August 2018 and signal a clear break of the bull trend.
The single currency was almost there, being up at $1.1226 on Friday having surged 0.9 per cent overnight and a world away from the February trough of $1.0775. It was already up 1.9 per cent for the week which would be the largest such gain since June 2017.
There were lots of other miserable milestones, with the dollar sinking to a six-month low on the yen at 105.96 having shed 1.2 per cent overnight. The next bear targets were 105.72 and 104.44, lows from August and September last year.
It also sank to a two-year trough against the Swiss franc at 0.9443 francs, and was down 2 per cent for the week so far.
The yen, euro and Swiss franc are backed by countries that run strong external surpluses, while Japan has the added advantage of being the world's largest creditor nation.
Those safe-haven attributes had grown in importance as US 10-year yields tumbled to just 0.91 per cent, a drop of 66 basis points in just 11 sessions.
Fed fund futures were also pricing in more than 80 basis points of further easing by year end.
Yet the dollar was not down and out everywhere, as it still held safe haven status compared to emerging market currencies and those exposed to commodities.
That left it holding gains on the Canadian, Australian and New Zealand dollars, along with a raft of currencies across Asia.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
