EUR/GBP pushes higher beyond 0.9160 on Monday.
The sell-off in the sterling is sustaining the move in the cross.
German flash June CPI next of relevance in the docket.
The selling pressure continues to pick up pace around the British pound and is now lifting EUR/GBP to the 0.9160 region, levels last traded in late March.
EUR/GBP climbed to fresh multi-month tops following an exacerbated sell-off in the sterling and a firmer note surrounding its ex-European peer.
In fact, the quid is adding to Friday’s losses following unabated concerns around the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on the UK economy as well as uncertainty surrounding the Brexit talks.
On the latter, negotiators D.Frost (UK) and M.Barnier (EU) will meet today in Brussels in what will be the start of a crucial week in the EU-UK trade negotiations, with the deadline to extend the post-Brexit transition period (that ends on December 31) finishing on June 30.
On the data front, all the attention will be on the publication of the flash June CPI in Germany. Earlier in the session, the BoE’s Consumer Credit contracted by nearly £5 billion in May while Mortgage Approvals dropped to 9.27K during the same period. Closer to home, EMU’s Consumer Confidence matched the preliminary reading at -14.7 for the current month.
The pound is expected to remain under the microscope this week, as the EU and the UK will try to clinch a trade deal always with an extension of the transition period in the centre of the debate. Further drivers weighing on the quid come in the form of probable extra stimulus by the BoE (negative rates?) in the near-term and further deterioration of UK fundamentals amidst the coronavirus pandemic.
The cross is gaining 0.80% at 0.9161 and faces the next hurdle at 0.9324 (2019 high Aug.12) followed by 0.9499 (2020 high Mar.19) and finally 0.9649 (monthly high January 2009). On the downside, a breach of 0.8864 (monthly low Jun.9) would expose 0.8818 (100-day SMA) and then 0.8701 (200-day SMA).
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
