Currently, a euro buys 1.08 francs. In the last month, the franc has weakened from 1.05 against the euro on 8 May, although it remains stronger than a year ago, when the euro bought 1.12 francs on 7 June 2019.
A clear picture of the relative stability of the exchange rate can be seen by going back five years, to 12 June 2015, when the euro once again bought 1.05 francs.
Recent movements in the euro/franc rate have been driven, at least in part, by the ebb and flow of demand for so-called safe haven assets. The “Swissie” rivals the dollar and gold bullion as a store of value during periods of crisis, a status bolstered by Switzerland’s rock-solid banking system. No-one would call the euro a soft currency, but its management can be problematic, given the different countries and economies involved.
However, it would be a mistake to imagine the Swiss authorities welcome the inflow of funds that accompanies crises such as the coronavirus epidemic. The increase in the value of the franc harms the country’s exports, by making them more expensive in local currency terms, and depresses inflation at a time when the Berne authorities are concerned about deflation.
Thus the reserve institution, the Swiss National Bank (SNB), has been selling francs in the market to try to hold down its value.
This has brought criticism from the US. In a report to Congress in January on the economic and foreign exchange policies of America’s trading partners, the US Treasury wrote: “More recently, foreign exchange purchases by the SNB [of foreign currency in return for francs] increased markedly over July and August as global risk appetite deteriorated.  While recent purchases come amidst disinflationary pressures, they have been undertaken even as inflation remains positive.  [The US] Treasury continues to encourage the Swiss authorities to transparently publish all intervention data on a higher frequency basis.”
It added: “Given the current dip in economic growth and substantial external surplus, Treasury urges Switzerland to adjust its macroeconomic policies to more forcefully support domestic economic activity.  Despite borrowing costs for the Swiss government being among the lowest in the world, fiscal policy remains underutilised.”
