The euro rose 0.1% to $1.1315, staying close to $1.1422, the three-month high it reached on Wednesday.
The Aussie dollar rose 0.4% to 0.6881, after falling to a 10-day low of 0.6799 in the Asian session.
LONDON: The euro edged up slightly against the U.S. dollar NSE -1.67 % on Friday, not far from the three-month high it rose to earlier in the week, as traders paused from cashing in the latest profits.
During the Asian trading session, the Australian dollar and other risk-sensitive currencies gave up ground, before recovering and trading higher against the safe-haven greenback , following a rise in European stocks.
Investors had earlier decided to unwind their positions after a rapid build-up of bets on risk assets that had taken off on hopes of further re-opening of the economies of many countries.
"As long as governments around the globe continue to ease their lockdown measures, and as long as economic data continues to point that the deep economic wounds due to the coronavirus are behind us, we would treat the retreat as a corrective phase of the broader recovery," said Charalambos Pissouros, senior market analyst at JFD Group.
"We still see decent chances for equities and other risk-linked assets to rebound again, and for safe havens to come under renewed selling interest," said Pissouros.
The euro rose 0.1% to $1.1315, staying close to $1.1422, the three-month high it reached on Wednesday.
The Aussie dollar rose 0.4% to 0.6881, after falling to a 10-day low of 0.6799 in the Asian session.
The Nordic currencies also rose, as did the oil-sensitive Canadian dollar, which was last up 0.3% at 1.3585. The Norwegian crown was the biggest mover, rising by 0.6% to 9.5665 against the U.S. currency.
Elsewhere, the British pound remained unfazed by the fact that Britain's economy shrank by a record 20.4% in April from March as the country spent the month in a tight coronavirus lockdown, official data showed on Friday.
Investors saw the number as what is likely to be the bottom of the crash before a long and slow recovery.
Sterling was last flat at $$1.2606 and down 0.1% versus the euro at 89.79 pence.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
