Euro Paper Talk: Decision made on value of Arsenal, Man Utd target
Arsenal and Manchester United will get no discounts on a midfield target, while a Chelsea star could be set for a shock exit – according to Friday’s European papers.
Atletico Madrid will only allow Arsenal target Thomas Partey to leave this summer if his €50m release clause is activated.
That’s according to AS, who claim that the midfielder – usually known by just his forename – is the subject of a “big dilemma” for Atletico. The La Liga giants are not planning too many changes to their squad for next season, but Thomas could make way.
Arsenal have been linked with a move for the Ghana international for some time, while Manchester United were recently told to consider a bid .
Previous reports indicated that Atletico would even consider accepting a low-ball offer for Thomas, below his €50m release clause – but that does not appear to be the case.
According to AS , Atletico are only willing to let Thomas leave if another club can meet his exit clause – and the paper says Arsenal are “ready” to take him.
The midfielder is out of contract in 2023, but Atletico have had an offer of an extension on the table for three months. However, despite the promise of trebled wages, he is yet to put pen to paper.
Arsenal could be set to revamp their midfield, with doubts over the futures of Matteo Guendouzi and Dani Ceballos, among others.
Reports in Thomas’ home country suggest that his agent is ready to travel to London for talks over a potential move to the Emirates.
The 27-year-old has been at Atletico since 2012, making more than 170 appearances for the first team. He has 10 goals from 27 international caps, and has started 24 of Atletico’s 31 La Liga games this season.
Bayern Munich have joined the race for Manchester United target Jude Bellingham, who is currently at Birmingham City (Kicker)
Tottenham have been in touch with Napoli over the potential signing of Arkadiusz Milik . The striker is also linked with Juventus and Schalke, though, and would only move to Spurs if Harry Kane left (Tuttomercatoweb)
Spurs are ready to make a bid for Freiburg defender Robin Koch, whose contract expires next year. He has also been linked with Leeds United and could be available for less than €15m (Bild)
Layvin Kurzawa could perform a U-turn and sign a new contract with PSG. He had been linked with Arsenal (RMC Sport)
Roma could offer a new contract to former Manchester City striker Edin Dzeko, despite him only signing a renewal last year (Gazzetta Dello Sport)
Matteo Guendouzi has told Arsenal that he is ready to leave. Manchester United are mentioned as a potential destination, while they face competition from Barcelona, Real Madrid, Juventus and Inter Milan (L’Equipe)
Spurs missed out on the signing of Thomas Meunier despite the right-back being open to the move after a call from Jose Mourinho. Daniel Levy wasn’t willing to go ahead with the deal (L’Equipe)
Celta Vigo are desperate to keep hold of Rafinha Alcantara next season. He is currently on loan with them from Barcelona, who are looking to sell (El Desmarque)
Lazio are set to reach an agreement to sign Verona defender Marash Kumbulla for around €30m. He had been linked with Arsenal, Tottenham and Chelsea (Corriere Dello Sport)
Chelsea forward Pedro is house hunting ahead of his move to Roma, which has been agreed but is not yet official (Gazzetta Dello Sport)
Timo Werner will earn a salary of around £14m-per-season at Chelsea, making him their highest-paid player (Bild)
