The euro has recovered some ground this month after sliding to a two-year low under $1.09 at the start of October.
For European Central Bank president Mario Draghi , the battle to save the euro may be over, but for investors the risk of a continued slump in the currency persists.
The euro has fallen more than 3 per cent so far this year and the top forecaster in Bloomberg surveys predicts it will slide as much again to $1.07 by the end of 2019. State Street Global Advisors, Millennium Global Investments and Henderson Rowe are among funds seeing little on the radar to make it worth buying, given the region’s struggling economy and global trade tensions. “The euro is a big short position for us,” said James Binny, who oversees $129 billion as head of currencies at State Street Global Advisors. “The trade war really impacts Europe quite badly, with Germany very dependent on China. And though the mood music is a little bit better now, this is a story that is probably a multi-year or even multi-decade story.”
The euro has recovered some ground this month after sliding to a two-year low under $1.09 at the start of October, as the European Union looks set to avoid a disruptive Brexit split with the UK Binny, who sees this move higher as just a temporary blip, is particularly bearish on the euro versus Scandinavian peers that are the worst-performing major currencies this year.
Few people are predicting a big drop for the euro, more a continuation of the steady subsidence seen since the start of last year --keeping it some way below its average since the single currency was created.
The lack of bets on sharp moves is reflected in one-year implied volatility for the euro-dollar currency pair being at its lowest since 2007.
Rabobank, which came first in Bloomberg’s latest rankings of forecasters for major currencies, is among the most negative. It sees the euro sliding more than 3 per cent through the remainder of the year as growing global growth concerns hurt German exports and favor the dollar as a haven.
“While a Brexit deal would be a good thing, the outlook for Germany really is not that positive,” said Jane Foley, the bank’s head of currency strategy. “The ECB will have to ease further. All of these factors are negative for the euro.”
In Draghi’s last press conference as ECB president this month, the man credited with saving the euro by doing “whatever it takes” offered an gloomy assessment of the region’s economy. He said everything since the central bank’s previous meeting validated the central bank’s decision to unleash a fresh round of stimulus, which is keeping pressure on the currency.
