Man Utd have been cleared to sign a prolific striker after positive talks, Chelsea could swap Jorginho for a Brazil winger, while Newcastle are nearing a €100m club-record deal, according to Wednesday’s Euro Paper Talk.
The Monaco striker finished the season as joint top scorer in Ligue 1 after scoring 18 times and weighing in with seven assists in 26 appearances.
But the Ligue 1 outfit accept they face an impossible task retaining his services after finishing outside the European places.
As such, Le 10 Sport claim they are willing to santion his sale for the same €40m (£35.6m) fee they paid Sevilla for his services last summer.
Furthermore, it’s claimed United have already held a series of transfer talks with the player’s agent Meissa N’diaye and it’s claimed the move to Old Trafford is of interest to Ben Yedder.
The 29-year-old is seen as a long-term replacement for Odion Ighalo, who despite extending his stay until January, will return to Shanghai Shenua when his loan expires.
In addition, it’s claimed Monaco have initiated talks over a deal to sign Andrea Belotti as his replacement.
Italy striker Belotti – once on United’s radar himself – is set to leave Torino this summer if the price is right.
If United do land Ben Yedder, there’s no doubting they’ll be landing a player who knows his way to goal. The striker has netted 171 goals in 366 career appearances – a notch every 2.14 outings.
Philippe Coutinho is leaning towards a €100m move to Newcastle this summer after it was claimed his representatives “believe in the project” at St James’ Park. Any deal would depend entirely on the Saudia Arabia takeover going through, however (France Football)
Super Lig club Goztepe have emerged as contenders to sign Loris Karius, with Liverpool open to offers for the German, who could leave for a nominal fee this summer (Aksam)
Everton remain favourites to sign Barcelona defender Jean-Clair Todibo ahead of Schalke, but have been told to raise their initial €22m bid to nearer the €25m mark (Sport)
RB Leipzig would rather sell Arsenal , Tottenham and Man Utd target Dayot Upamecano this summer, than lose the 21-year-old French defender on a free transfer when his contract expires in June 2021 (Bild)
Paris Saint-Germain midfielder Idrissa Gueye says he has no intention of leaving, after the 30-year former Everton man was linked with a summer move to Wolves (Le 10 Sport)
Parma are looking into a summer swoop for Lecce teenager Filippo Falco, who they view as a replacement for Juventus-bound Dejan Kulusevski (Nicolo Schira)
Valencia are keen to sign Mexico defender Cesar Montes, who plays his football for Monterrey (Marca)
Ajax are ready to sanction the sale of Manchester United target Donny van de Beek this summer after making an approach to sign Davy Klaasen, the former Everton man, as his successor (VI)
Napoli are in negotiations to sign RB Salzburg midfielder Dominik Szoboszlai, who has also been linked with Lazio and AC Milan (Gianluca Di Marzio)
Thiago Silva wants to stay in Europe after being told his Paris Saint-Germain contract will not be renewed, and believes he can play at a top club for at least two more seasons (ESPN)
Chelsea, Manchester City and Tottenham are all chasing a deal to sign Real Madrid full-back Achraf Hakimi, who is currently on loan at Borussia Dortmund (90 minutes)
