Went into the tournament as one of the most exciting young players on the planet having first made his mark for boyhood club Everton at the age of just 16.
Performed impressively in opening 2-1 defeat by France despite not getting on the scoresheet, running with the ball at every opportunity.
Became the youngest scorer in EURO history – a record taken by Johan Vonlanthen four days later – with two goals in England's second group game, a 3-0 defeat of Switzerland.
Rooney added another two to his tally in the 4-2 victory against Croatia.
Headed into the quarter-final against Portugal as England's talisman but lasted just 27 minutes before being forced off with what was later confirmed to be a broken bone in his foot. The Three Lions lost on penalties following a 2-2 draw after extra time.
Only Milan Baroš (5) scored more goals than Rooney, who was also named in the official UEFA EURO 2004 Team of the Tournament.
Rooney started a player-coach role at English second-tier side Derby County in early 2020; he is now playing in midfield.
Rooney's first appearance in a UEFA tournament was the 2002 UEFA European Under-17 Championship; he scored five goals in Denmark including a hat-trick against Spain in a 4-1 third-placed play-off victory
He met his wife, Coleen, while they were at secondary school and the couple now have four sons; Kai Wayne, Klay Anthony, Kit Joseph and Cass Mac.
Rooney's favourite band are Welsh rock group the Stereophonics; he has a tattoo of the title of their third album 'Just Enough Education to Perform'.
Rooney is now a weekly columnist for broadsheet newspaper The Sunday Times.
“I can’t play forever so I need to think about my future after my playing days. I love the game, I want to stay in it. I think it’s a shame when you see players who have been great players walking away and not really having a go at managing or coaching."
"Wayne's emerged as one of EURO 2004's best players. He's a very exciting talent who shows maturity and composure beyond his young years."
UEFA club competition (including qualifying): 106 appearances, 40 goals
