Hopes faded at the end of the European session and the beginning of the American one, when the DAX and SP500 surged back inside the triangle.
Another bearish chance for a bigger drop has been wasted. Yesterday, sellers were hoping for a bigger slide on global indices, coming from the bearish breakout from the good-looking symmetric triangle pattern. Hopes faded at the end of the European session and the beginning of the American one, when the DAX and SP500 surged back inside the triangle. In theory, that leaves us with a false bearish breakout, which is usually considered a strong signal in the opposite direction, so in our case – north.
Let’s start with the SP500. You can clearly see the false breakout here and then a nice pullback above the lower line of the triangle. The European session however, didn’t start well and it’s negatively affecting futures on the SP500. The price is correcting the bullish movement from yesterday and is testing the lower line of the triangle again but this time from above. Long story short, as long as the price stays above the lower line of the triangle, sentiment is positive.
Short update about the EURUSD, which is currently forming a flag formation. The flag is a trend continuation pattern, which in this case promotes further rise. In the past few days, the price was making higher lows, supported by the blue up trendline. This may indicate a willingness for a bigger upswing. In the mid-term, as long as the price stays inside the flag, buyers can still have hope for a bigger upswing.
When mentioning the Euro, we have to talk about the EURCAD , which is ahead of a bigger movement. The thing is we don’t know the direction yet. After the flag patten, the price created a rectangle formation. So, simply speaking, the price is currently in a tight range. The way price action enthusiast trade this is by buying when the price breaks the upper line of this pattern and selling when the price breaks its lower line.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
