Gold is having a fantastic run. All-time price highs are in sight, and all the indicators are pointing to this bull market running well into 2021- if not beyond.
Since August 2018, the price of the precious metal has risen from around $1,200 an ounce (“/oz”) to its current $1,729/oz. In 2020 alone, it has surged from $1,500/oz.
bull market was back in 2011. This heralded the start of a two-year spree of
their smaller peers in a bid to boost their reserves.
It now looks like we are on the cusp of history repeating itself.
The trick will be to invest in the right companies.
In its 10-million-ounce Rovina Valley gold project in Romania, Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ) owns Europe’s second-largest commercial gold resource. With permitting for mine construction also well on the way to completion, the asset has to be one of the sector’s most attractive takeout targets.
However, with Euro Sun’s ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ) market-cap sitting at just $36.9 million, Rovina Valley’s gold is currently valued at only $2-3 an ounce (“/oz”).
quality, and at this late stage of development, valued closer to $20/oz
But with the gold price rocketing, something has surely got
resource and is located in one of the world’s safest jurisdictions.
How much longer can Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ) trade at such a discount?
miners now on the hunt to boost their reserves, the answer is almost certainly “not
A big part of the investment case for Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ) comes down to whether you believe gold’s bull market will continue into the medium term?
already performing exceptionally well as we entered 2020, boosted by growing
unprecedented scale, the outlook for many is frightening.
gold loves more than fear.
impact of Covid-19, gold has continued to soar.
The longer this run continues, the better the prospects for companies like Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ).
now, take a step back for a moment.
Look at the graph below.
Gold price in dollars per ounce over the past 12 months ( Source: Kitco )
Bar a very brief dip in mid-March 2020, when a huge S&P sell-off led investors to panic-sell to cover other losses, gold has now traded above $1,500/oz since late December 2019.
Now take a look at this second graph.
Gold prices in dollars per ounce since 2000 ( Source: goldprice.org )
their balance sheets to build up their long-term reserves and resources.
With so much turmoil in the world today, and the extraordinary actions of central banks gathering pace, gold’s run shows no sign of stopping in the near future. Bank of America even predicts that gold will reach $3,000/oz within 18 months !
So, what makes Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ) such an attractive takeover target?
use in their hunt for new projects. These are:
It also boasts a considerable amount of upside potential in the form of the Stanija prospecting permit, where sampling has returned grades of up to 25.9 grams per tonne gold and 0.34% copper. Stanija, also wholly-owned by Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ), is based just six kilometers away from Rovina Valley.#
Location of the Rovina Valley project and neighboring Stanija Prospect (Source: Euro Sun Mining)
Meanwhile, Rovina Valley is based in Romania’s “Golden Quadrilateral”, one of Europe’s largest gold-producing areas. This is a critical jurisdictional de-risking factor for Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ).
Since joining the EU in 2007, Romania has taken full
advantage of its membership of the world’s largest trading block, regenerating
Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ) broke new ground in November 2018 when it became the first non-state-owned firm in Romania to be awarded a mining licence. The clincher was the firm’s deep-rooted commitment to Environmental, Social, and Governance (“ESG”) principals, which saw it win government-backed authorizations at Rovina Valley previously denied to other firms.
In a March 2020 update , Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ) went on to state publicly that it is confident it will win a construction permit and deliver a definitive feasibility study for Rovina Valleyin 2020. Notwithstanding any minor Covid-19-related delays, the asset will at this point be “shovel ready” and primed for production.
and permitting well on the way to completion, Rovina Valley really is an ideal
These backers represent some of the smartest money around.
They recognize true value when they see it.
$2-3/oz, against an expected value of $20/oz, it is obvious what attracted them
Given the huge discount currently being offered by the market, it will not be long before Euro Sun ( TSX:ESM , OTCQB:CPNFF ) sees a significant and hugely positive rerate.
This communication is a paid advertisement.
ValueTheMarkets is a trading name of Digitonic Ltd, and its owners, directors, officers, employees, affiliates, agents
similar articles and certain related banner advertisements. This compensation
provide  unbiased information or opinion.
Readers should beware that third parties, profiled
communication, which has the potential to adversely affect share prices.
marketing, which often ends as soon as the investor awareness marketing ceases.
The investor awareness marketing may be as brief as one day, after which a
large decrease in share trading volume and share price may likely occur.
to be, an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy any security.
to provide a complete analysis of any company or its financial position.
available to the public and on an interview conducted with the company’s CEO,
and does not contain any material, non-public information. The information on
which it is based is believed to be reliable. Nevertheless, the Publisher does
not guarantee the accuracy or completeness of the information. Further, the
The Publisher is not, and does not purport to be, a
broker-dealer or registered investment adviser or a financial adviser. The
companies. The information provided is general and impersonal, and is not
objective(s) and this communication is not, and should not be construed to be,
statements and other pertinent corporate information about the company.
identified and discussed in the advertised company’s SEC, SEDAR and/or other
is speculative and carries a high degree of risk. Past performance does not
in time, which include everything other than historical information, are based
operations. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and
include, among others: the success of the profiled company’s operations; the
size and growth of the market for the company’s products and services; the
relationships; general worldwide economic and business conditions; currency
exchange and interest rate fluctuations; government, statutory, regulatory or
administrative initiatives affecting the company’s business.
you have read and understand this disclaimer in full, and agree and accept that
profiled company and accepts no liability whatsoever. You acknowledge and
accept this disclaimer and that, to the greatest extent permitted under
financial outcome related to or arising from your investment decisions.
agree to the Terms of Use, please contact ValueTheMarkets.com to discontinue
property of their respective trademark holders. Other than Valuethemarkets.com,
the Publisher is not affiliated, connected, or associated with, and the
rights in any third-party trademarks other than Valuethemarkets.com.
or accuracy of this article. The information included in this article is based
solely on information provided by the company or companies mentioned above.
is not a recommendation to deal in any securities or product. News and research
are not recommendations to deal, and investments may fall in value so that you
could lose some or all of your investment. Past performance is not an indicator
in the stock(s) and/or financial instrument(s) mentioned in the above piece. Daniel
