Traders work on the floor at the closing bell of the Dow Industrial Average at the New York Stock Exchange on March 18, 2020 in New York.
A rapid decline and uneven recovery for the stock market have made the difference in valuations among U.S. companies the greatest it has been since the dot-com bubble, according to a study by Goldman Sachs analysts.
Stocks have roared back from their late-March lows, but certain companies and sectors have taken more than their share of the gains—while others have been left behind.
The median S&P 500 stock now trades for 16 times Wall Street’s estimated earnings over the next two years, when the worst of the coronavirus impact should—knock on wood—be long gone. The median stock in the tech-heavy Nasdaq 100 index commands a 34% premium to that, while the median small-cap in the Russell 2000 index trades at a record 40% discount.
Valuation differences are wide even within the S&P 500. The stock in the 80th percentile of the index trades for 24 times estimated earnings in two years, compared with just 10 times for the median stock in the 20th percentile. The average difference between those two stocks since 1980 has been nine times, versus their current 14.
The valuation dispersion on a sector level also reflects recent stock-price performance . Earnings estimates for the energy sector, for example, have fallen so far that the group now trades for almost double the price/earnings ratio of the broader S&P 500’s 17 times. Technology, consumer-discretionary, and materials stocks command premiums to the index, while consumer staples, industrials, and health care are all at discounts. Financials trade for a rock-bottom 0.6 times what the S&P 500 goes for.
Still, the dispersion of long-term growth expectations is only slightly above the historical average, according to Goldman, meaning that investors are focusing more on companies’ current earnings.
“In contrast with expected growth, differences in current profitability across U.S. stocks are much more stark and appear to explain the extreme current degree of valuation dispersion,” wrote the Goldman analysts.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
They found that when valuation dispersion widened to extreme levels in the past, it was followed by the cheaper stocks catching up to more expensive ones. They see the current extreme valuation gap closing as the U.S. economy improves.
“Most of these inflections occurred near the trough of a recession or major economic slowdown,” the Goldman analysts wrote. “In these cases, low valuation stocks outperformed a rallying market as economic growth improved.”
They recommend that investors with a long investment horizon and the stomach to withstand some bumps along the way increase their exposure to low-valuation stocks, betting on that mean reversion kicking in. But that doesn’t necessarily mean going straight to the bottom of the barrel for the cheapest stocks on the market—many of those are cheap for a reason.
Instead, the Goldman analysts advise looking at stocks in the fourth quintile of their S&P 500 sector by valuation. The group currently trades for a 25% discount to the index median, much steeper than their 15% long-term average. To avoid stocks that deserve their greater-than-usual discount, the analysts eliminate those with below-average returns on capital.
The 21 stocks in Goldman’s screen are in the table below. Picks include Best Buy (ticker: BBY), UnitedHealth Group (UNH), Oracle (ORCL), General Dynamics (GD), and Gilead Sciences (GILD).
“Although these firms carry discounted multiples, most have stronger balance sheets, generate superior returns, and have faster consensus 2019-2021 earnings-per-share growth than the median S&P 500 stock,” the analysts wrote.
A rapid decline and uneven recovery for the stock market have made the difference in valuations among U.
