, will have to be sold more decisively to drag the stock market to fresh lows.
“The biggest stocks in the S&P500 are a huge weight now and they are all the big tech names, he said. “In order for the market to head lower people will have to start selling the AAPL, MSFT, FB, GOOGL sector because its such a dominant factor now,” the Baird strategist said.
“ ‘While we are not in the clear and many risks still exist, we learn a bit more about our opponent each and every day. As a result, we can better plot our response to it. That is likely being reflected in rising equity prices.’ ”
Brent Schutte, chief investment strategist at Northwestern Mutual Wealth Management Co., told MarketWatch that the market has staged a cautious ascent despite the risks because it is learning more about the virus.
“While we are not in the clear and many risks still exist,” he said, “we learn a bit more about our opponent each and every day.”
“As a result, we can better plot our response to it. That is likely being reflected in rising equity prices,” Schutte explained.
“For example, cyclical sectors and asset classes have risen over the last few days which shows that the market is anticipating that relatively better economic data may be coming,” he said.
“ ‘There might be a little FOMO in the market right now due to the thought of economies starting to open up again and a resumption of business activity across various U.S. states.’ ”
Brian Price, head of investment management at Commonwealth Financial Network, suggests that it won’t be smooth sailing for markets from here, given the lack of clear guidance from companies about the future in the aftermath of COVID-19 and increasingly poor economic results.
“Currently, there seems to be a bit of a dichotomy in the reporting of company earnings reports for the first quarter,” he explained to MarketWatch.
“Results for the current quarter were not as bad as some analysts had predicted, which is positive, but the fact that many companies are unwilling to offer guidance for the rest of the year is a negative in my opinion,” he said.
“There might be a little FOMO in the market right now due to the thought of economies starting to open up again and a resumption of business activity across various U.S. states,” Price told MarketWatch in emailed remarks.
“The market appears to be expecting a V-shaped recovery over the past couple of weeks but if the economic data does not validate that assumption then there is a risk that equities will consolidate from these levels,” the Commonwealth Financial manager said.
“ ‘What happens after that is the real question—we will either get significant follow through or a period of activity, but activity which is much lower than what is needed to sustain the rise in prices. I hope for the former, but am planning for the latter just in case.’ ”
Jamie Cox, managing partner at Harris Financial Group, says the durability of recent gains will hinge on the success of the reopening of the economy.
“What happens after that is the real question—we will either get significant follow through or a period of activity, but activity which is much lower than what is needed to sustain the rise in prices. I hope for the former, but am planning for the latter just in case,” told MarketWatch via email.
