*- as of 4:15 p.m.
In this morning’s Opening Bell , we told you to be on the lookout for Southwest Airlines Co. (NYSE: LUV) after the company was upgraded to a buy by Goldman Sachs Group Inc. (NYSE: GS). Shares of Southwest Airlines rose 9.6%.
We also told you about Boeing Co. (NYSE: BA) as the company and Federal Aviation Administration began certification flights for its 737 Max jet on Monday. Boeing shares were trading up 14.4%.
Finally, Facebook Inc. (Nasdaq: FB) started the day down nearly 4% but rallied back into the black despite more advertisers pulling away from the social media giant. Shares of Facebook were up 2.1%.
Gold prices were steady Monday, holding close to an eight-year high hit last week as the rapid spread of the coronavirus threatened to dash hopes of a fast economic recovery.
Spot gold rose as much as 0.1% to $1,772 per ounce, just $6.60 short of its highest price since October 2012, hit last Wednesday. Prices were on track for a third straight month of gains and the biggest quarterly rise in more than four years.
Gold futures moved 0.06% higher to $1,781 an ounce as prices were capped by a steady dollar and Wall Street’s gains.
Silver futures fell 0.57% to trade at $18.06 an ounce. Platinum rose 1.18% to $829 an ounce while palladium jumped nearly 2% to trade at $1,931 an ounce.
The recent slump in cannabis stock prices has created a unique opportunity for investors.
Cannabis stocks have lost roughly a quarter of their value in the first half of 2019 — on top of a 50% drop in 2019 — and, according to Bloomberg , it’s a great time for distressed deals.
But in order for these deals to take place, cannabis companies have to be more realistic about the worth of their assets.
A roundtable of chief executives from some of the biggest companies believe the business impact of the coronavirus will last until the end of 2021.
A second-quarter report from The Business Roundtable found that a majority of its members don’t expect business conditions to recover until then. Around 27% expect the recovery to stretch beyond even that.
The survey results speak to the uncertainty of the economic climate as the U.S. continues to battle a health disaster that hasn’t been seen in recent memory.
Check back for the most important news and numbers each day after the Closing Bell, only on Money & Markets .
