The near-term direction of the June E-mini NASDAQ-100 Index is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the all-time high at 9780.50.
June E-mini NASDAQ-100 Index futures are trading nearly flat on Thursday as investor take a breather after posting solid gains the previous session. We could be looking at some light-profit-taking or position-squaring ahead of Thursday key European Central Bank announcement and the release of the U.S. Non-Farm Payrolls report on Friday.
On Wednesday, June E-mini NASDAQ-100 Index futures settled at 9684.75, up 37.00 or +0.38%.
In the cash market, the NASDAQ-100 Index, which tracks the 100-largest nonfinancial companies in the NASDAQ Composite, rose 0.5% to close 0.3% below a record set on February 19. The index has rallied more than 43% from an intraday low set on March 23. The NASDAQ Composite, meanwhile, is just 1.58% below its all-time high.
Advancing issues outnumbered declining ones on the NASDAQ by a 2.26-to-1 ratio. The NASDAQ Composite recorded 96 new highs and four new lows.
Lyft Inc. jumped 8.7% after the ride-sharing platform reported rides increased 26% in May. Microchip Technology Inc. surged 12.3% after the chipmaker raised its forecast for current-quarter sales and profit.
Teleconferencing firm Zoom Communications Inc. nearly doubled its annual sales expectations, but also reported a sharp rise in costs. Its shares were up 7.6%.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. A trade through 9728.25 will signal a resumption of the uptrend. Taking out the February 20 main top at 9780.50 could trigger an acceleration to the upside.
A trade through 8847.00 will change the main trend to down. This is highly unlikely, but the prolonged move up in terms of price and time, has put the index inside the window of time for a potentially bearish closing price reversal top.
The minor trend is also up. A trade through 9172.50 will change the minor trend to down. This will shift momentum to the downside.
The near-term direction of the June E-mini NASDAQ-100 Index is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the all-time high at 9780.50.
At this point in the rally, buyers are either going to take out 9780.50 and trigger an acceleration to the upside, or they are going to start taking profits, perhaps fueling the start of a near-term correction.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
