By signing up you agree to our terms and privacy policy . You will receive access to our Trading Room,
				plus account-related emails and our weekend e-newsletter containing news, updates & promotions from
				ElliottWaveTrader. You can withdraw your consent at anytime.
The relief of EWT philosophy on investing has been such a gift (besides being extremely profitable) that I have to say this is the most enjoyable service offered anywhere on the internet and probably the best investment I have ever made.  Thanks Avi.
My 401K money has been protected during this, and I'm making money in little chunks in my trading accounts. And that is all thanks to Avi, HD, Garrett, Zac, and so many great members here. Sincerely, my account and my family say a huge THANK YOU to you all.
After this week's action and watching how Avi & company nailed the piss out of so many moves, you can't argue with me anymore about the efficacy of EW. . . Just amazing to have a methodology that works so well PLUS the guidance from Avi.
I consider my EWT subscription one of the best and smartest decisions of my investing career.
I will say this about this site and the crew in general:
It is one of the most cohesive, cooperative and harmonious "work" groups I have ever experienced. 
 Everyone's dedication is exemplary, above and beyond the call of duty. The leadership is outstanding. 
 All the trading and money making aside, it is a true pleasure to be here.  I haven't even talked about the quality of the analysis. That, I think speaks for itself.  OUTSTANDING!
Avi, you are the best strategist that I follow and you have made more prescient calls than anyone on the street. I currently subscribe to your service and am very pleased. I have been a licensed financial advisor for over a decade and worked at a number of Fortune 500 companies in my career, including usbank, Morgan Stanley, Russell investment and now am a director and lincoln financial and i can tell you that none of the so called experts have virtually an ability to determine market direction. With you insight, i have made a killing and am basing my strategies around your advice. Keep up the good work and ignore the naysayers who are missing out on your sage advice!
What's incredible is that not only are the analyst's here supremely insightful, collectively presenting multiple scenarios and interpretations, but some of the members too contribute with high quality analysis and charts.  Quite special...putting it kind of mildly :-)!  Keep up the good work, Avi and team.
In following Avi and his team's analysis and checking it with my own charts, the last month has gone from intellectual challenge to honestly life-changing.  While my contemporaries, with whom I speak with regularly, are bemoaning their account balances, mine is up - significantly!  That's because of you, Avi and everyone else at EWT.
		on this Web site without written consent from ElliottWaveTrader LLC is prohibited.
        by ElliottWaveTrader or to become a member of ElliottWaveTrader, you agree to our terms and privacy policy .
