tumbled 7.32%, or a loss of $-0.24 per share, to close at $3.04. After opening the day at $3.41, shares of Hallmark Financial Services Inc. traded as high as $3.41 and as 
low as $3.01. Volume was 385,297 shares over 2,596 trades, against an average daily volume of n/a shares and a total float of 18.12 million.
As a result of the decline, Hallmark Financial Services Inc. now has a market cap of $55.09 million.  In the last 
year, shares of Hallmark Financial Services Inc. have traded between a range of $20.30 and $2.28, and its 50-day SMA is currently $n/a and 200-day SMA is $n/a.
For a complete fundamental analysis of Hallmark Financial Services Inc., check out Equities.com’s Stock Valuation Analysis report for 
Still paying commissions on stock trades? Equities.com now offers $7.99/month unlimited trading and flat-fee options trading for $89.99/month! Get started today by https://www.equities.com/trading-start
Hallmark Financial Services Inc is an insurance holding company, which is engaged in the sale of property/casualty insurance products to businesses and individuals. Its business involves marketing, distributing, underwriting and servicing insurance products, as well as providing other insurance related services. The company operates in segments such as Standard Commercial Segment, Specialty Commercial Segment, and Personal Segment. Geographically, it operates through the region of United States and derives a majority of its revenue from Specialty Commercial Segment, which markets, underwrites, finances, and services commercial lines of insurance products. Its products consist of commercial automobile, general liability, commercial property and commercial excess liability.
Hallmark Financial Services Inc. is based out of Dallas, TX and has some 486 employees. Its CEO is Naveen Anand.
Hallmark Financial Services Inc. is a component of the Russell 2000. The Russell 2000 is one of the leading indices tracking small-cap companies in the United States. It's maintained by  Russell Investments, an 
industry leader in creating and maintaining indices, and consists of the smallest 2000 stocks from the broader Russell 3000 index.
Russell's indices differ from traditional indices like the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or S&P 500, whose members are selected by committee, because they base membership entirely on an 
objective, rules based methodology. The 3,000 largest companies by market cap make up the Russell 3000, with the 2,000 smaller companies making up the Russell 2000. It's a simple approach that gives 
a broad, unbiased look at the small-cap market as a whole.
To get more information on Hallmark Financial Services Inc. and to follow the company’s latest updates, you can visit the company’s profile page here: HALL’s Profile . For more news on the financial markets and emerging growth companies, be sure to visit Equities.com’s 
email newsletter to ensure you don’t miss out on any of our best stories.
All data provided by QuoteMedia and was accurate as of 4:30PM ET.
DISCLOSURE: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not represent the views of equities.com . Readers should not consider statements made by the author as formal recommendations and should consult their financial advisor before making any investment decisions. To read our full disclosure, please go to: http://www.equities.com/disclaimer
