to the list, as the social media giant has witnessed a “significant” uptick in user engagement and impressions growth across a number of its properties as a result of COVID-19 fears.
“Given the seemingly unprecedented and unrelenting volume of news related to the global pandemic, the reliance that a large percentage of the world’s population has on Facebook as its primary source of information, and an increasingly pervasive stay-at-home attitude accentuated in some instances by the government, we believe that many Facebook users have been accessing its properties at meaningfully elevated levels over the last several weeks,” Pachter wrote.
He rates Facebook outperform with a $250 stock price target. The stock has shed 30% over the past month.
He expects the recent positive momentum to continue at least through the rest of the first quarter in many of Facebook’s important geographic regions. As a result, Pachter believes first-quarter revenue growth guidance provided by the company and consensus Wall Street expectations for the year are “overly conservative.”
In late January, the company said it expected first-quarter revenue growth to decelerate from fourth-quarter growth by a “low- to mid-single digit” percentage range.
was added to the list by analyst James Hardiman, who said he believes the exercise equipment company will benefit from the “work-in” trend, that is still in the very early stages. And as governors of a number of states have recently ordered the temporary closure of gyms and fitness clubs, Hardiman said that trend could accelerate. Read more about San Francisco’s ‘shelter-in-place’ order and closure of ‘nonessential’ businesses in other states.
“[N]ot only is [Peloton] arguably the company in our coverage best insulated from the current coronavirus pandemic, but increasingly we see PTON as a potential beneficiary of widespread social distancing efforts, accelerating what we believe is already an inevitable shift,” Hardiman wrote.
While state-mandated lockdowns could hurt deliveries of Peloton’s products, and although a recession could damp demand for the company’s premium-priced products, Hardiman said his research indicates “recessionary churn” could prove to be relatively low given surveys showing a willingness of Peloton members to cut back on other subscriptions before canceling their Peloton memberships.
He has an outperform rating on Peloton and a stock price target of $35. The shares have eased 8% over the past month.
• For Regions Financial RF,
, analyst Peter Winter said he believes the regional bank is best positioned to weather the historically low interest rate environment given its hedging strategy.
Fears of the economic impact of the COVID-19 outbreak has prompted the Federal Reserve to slash the target range for the benchmark overnight rate falling to zero to 0.25%, which sent yields on longer-term Treasurys to record lows.
Winter said given that the company had added $23 billion to its interest-rate hedges, the Fed’s rate cut shouldn’t impact Regions’ near-term net-interest margin outlook.
“However, there will be some pressure in the second half of the year if the 10-year stays below 1%, but they’ve been adding hedges to mitigate some of the downside and the pressure should be less than peers,” Winter wrote.
He said the bank has also done “a tremendous amount of work” to de-risk its loan portfolio, which leaves it well positioned to weather the next economic downturn.
“Post the financial crisis, RF is subject to the Federal Reserve’s annual stress tests and every year it comes out “well capitalized” indicating that the dividend should be safe even in an extreme downturn,” Winter wrote. “RF announced it is joining other banks in suspending its share repurchase program through the end of 2Q20 to ensure it can use its strong capital levels and liquidity to support its customers.”
Regions is rated outperform with a $14 stock price target. The stock has tumbled 46% over the past month, while SPDR S&P Regional Banking exchange-traded fund KRE,
