Is this the time to embrace smaller companies?
Important information: The value of investments and the income from them, can go down as well as up, so you may get back less than you invest.
It’s said that fortune favours the brave and, while there’s more to it than that when it comes to investing, stock markets certainly rewarded investors favouring riskier assets in 2019. Emerging markets, the technology sector and smaller companies often left investments understood to be more defensive trailing in their wake, especially during the second half of the year.
The coronavirus lockdown initially turned some of these trends on their heads. The FTSE Small Cap Index, for instance, moved into sharp reverse in March. However, small cap stocks have rallied smartly off their March lows, and are now more or less in line with the FTSE 100 over the past three months1.
Conversely, in the US, a rapid recovery among the technology and content giants has put what might otherwise have been considered quite an impressive rebound among smaller companies firmly in the shade. The S&P 500 has comfortably outperformed the Russell 2000 – a broad based index that tracks American smaller companies – since both indices hit low points in March2.
Source: Refinitiv, price index as at 30.4.20, in local currency
Disparities are understandable given uncertainty about what the near future holds. With supply chains disrupted and factories and many product outlets closed, it’s now hard to tell what many companies will earn this year. It’s anticipated that some smaller companies will find their resources severely stretched to the point they may not survive.
However, some smaller businesses are already capitalising on an innate agility that larger companies can find hard to replicate. The current, fast-moving environment may test that adaptability to the limit, but some companies definitely appear to be in the right place at the right moment.
This week, BATM Advanced Communications launched its Covid-19 antibody test kit, which it has already started to ship to European customers3.
Last month, Sensyne Health launched a ‘good neighbour’ phone app to assist people caring for digitally disconnected family or community members at risk from the coronavirus4. Meanwhile, Leeds-based 4D Pharma got the go-ahead from the medicines regulator to start a phase II study into the effects of an asthma drug thought to significantly reduce airway inflammation5.
Recent winners have included the smart metering company SMS and the Wakefield-based video games developer and label Team 176. These businesses may be relatively immune from the pandemic. They are among a number that could even emerge the stronger for it.
Unsurprisingly the recent progress of businesses like these contrasts sharply with small cap retailers, travel companies and estate agents , which have been among the worst hit since the coronavirus lockdown started to take its toll.
The reason you might want to invest in smaller companies is for additional capital growth. The possibility of achieving a dividend income probably comes a fair bit later although, for a growing band of smaller companies over recent years, a dividend might become available sooner than used to be the case.
As a matter of course, it makes sense to include an exposure to smaller companies in a diversified portfolio, in order to access faster growth and more rapid innovation. Being able, on average, to respond more quickly than larger businesses to rapidly changing economic and trading conditions can clearly bring worthwhile benefits. UK companies that started out small and are now considerably larger include Fever-Tree Drinks and the online fashion retailers Boohoo and ASOS .
It’s important though to seek out the skills of a fund manager with proven investing credentials. The small cap investment universe is a cauldron of spectacular successes and failures – plenty of dispersion between the performances of individual stocks, in other words. This means there is no real substitute for an experienced manager with a good knowledge of what’s happening on the “shop floor”.
However, choose wisely and you could become an investor in businesses with strong and defensible positions in niche sectors of the economy. A key attraction of smaller companies is that they tend to be less well researched, providing more opportunities for investors to capitalise on information gaps and instances of unrecognised long term growth potential.
Catalysts to future performance gains could come from a rise in takeover activity – should larger companies choose to capitalise on the relative cheapness of smaller businesses at some point – and a greater focus on companies able to deliver secular growth in a world where growth is generally in short supply.
Looking further out, the return of inflation – as record amounts of government spending feed into the real economy – could be of disproportionate benefit to smaller companies, which tend to have more debt. Debt shrinks in real terms as inflation rises.
A number of “go-anywhere” funds on Fidelity’s Select 50 list offer an exposure to smaller alongside larger companies. This can be an attractive route to pursue, because the amounts allocated to smaller versus larger companies is left to an experienced manager with the ability to constantly assess the relative merits of both. This approach offers increased flexibility and more diversification opportunities at the same time.
The Fidelity Special Situations Fund and the JOHCM European Select Values Fund both invest in companies across the size spectrum and have appreciable holdings in smaller companies. The JOHCM fund, for example, had just over one fifth of its assets invested in smaller companies at the end of March7.
6 JO Hambro Capital Management Group, 31.03.20
Important information: Investors should note that the views expressed may no longer be current and may have already been acted upon. Overseas investments will be affected by movements in currency exchange rates. Reference to specific securities should not be construed as a recommendation to buy or sell these securities and is included for the purposes of illustration only. Select 50 is not a personal recommendation to buy or sell a fund. This information is not a personal recommendation for any particular investment. If you are unsure about the suitability of an investment you should speak to an authorised financial adviser.
Thank you. We've emailed you to confirm your subscription.
