tumbled 6.87%, or a loss of $-1.38 per share, to close at $18.70. After opening the day at $20.02, shares of Liberty Media Corporation Series A Liberty Braves Common Stock traded as high as $20.52 and as 
low as $18.65. Volume was 108,972 shares over 1,384 trades, against an average daily volume of n/a shares and a total float of 51.22 million.
As a result of the decline, Liberty Media Corporation Series A Liberty Braves Common Stock now has a market cap of $957.89 million.  In the last 
year, shares of Liberty Media Corporation Series A Liberty Braves Common Stock have traded between a range of $30.16 and $13.60, and its 50-day SMA is currently $n/a and 200-day SMA is $n/a.
For a complete fundamental analysis of Liberty Media Corporation Series A Liberty Braves Common Stock, check out Equities.com’s Stock Valuation Analysis report for 
Still paying commissions on stock trades? Equities.com now offers $7.99/month unlimited trading and flat-fee options trading for $89.99/month! Get started today by https://www.equities.com/trading-start
Liberty Braves Group owns and operates the Major League Baseball (MLB) club, the Atlanta Braves, and Braves Holdings' Development Projects. The firm derives majority revenue from the Baseball operations which include ticket sales, concessions, corporate sales, suites, and premium seat fees, local and national broadcast rights, licensing and other shared Major League Baseball (MLB) revenue streams whereas, its Development operation revenue is derived from the mixed-use facilities which primarily includes rental income.
Liberty Media Corporation Series A Liberty Braves Common Stock is based out of Englewood, CO and has some 86 employees. Its CEO is .
Liberty Media Corporation Series A Liberty Braves Common Stock is a component of the Russell 2000. The Russell 2000 is one of the leading indices tracking small-cap companies in the United States. It's maintained by  Russell Investments, an 
industry leader in creating and maintaining indices, and consists of the smallest 2000 stocks from the broader Russell 3000 index.
Russell's indices differ from traditional indices like the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or S&P 500, whose members are selected by committee, because they base membership entirely on an 
objective, rules based methodology. The 3,000 largest companies by market cap make up the Russell 3000, with the 2,000 smaller companies making up the Russell 2000. It's a simple approach that gives 
a broad, unbiased look at the small-cap market as a whole.
To get more information on Liberty Media Corporation Series A Liberty Braves Common Stock and to follow the company’s latest updates, you can visit the company’s profile page here: BATRA’s Profile . For more news on the financial markets and emerging growth companies, be sure to visit Equities.com’s 
email newsletter to ensure you don’t miss out on any of our best stories.
All data provided by QuoteMedia and was accurate as of 4:30PM ET.
DISCLOSURE: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not represent the views of equities.com . Readers should not consider statements made by the author as formal recommendations and should consult their financial advisor before making any investment decisions. To read our full disclosure, please go to: http://www.equities.com/disclaimer
