was the third-largest  holding of the Alger Small Cap Focus Fund as of Feb. 29, being held by Zhang since 2016. This is a software-as-a-service company, which Zhang called “a leader in critical event management,” or CEM. Everbridge provides software used for mass notifications. Automated messages can be sent to help protect people and keep businesses and government agencies running during all sorts of emergencies.
The company says these messages can be sent through over 100 different types of communication devices, and that the systems can “track progress on executing response plans.”
Zhang called Everbridge “the best in class, with the broadest platform,” and said the company had deployed several million messages related to the coronavirus, locally, nationally and globally this year.
“They still have catalysts — With COVID-19, adoption will accelerate. But over long term, we think the company is well-positioned, with other catalysts,” Zhang said.
Everbridge’s shares were up 47% year-to-date through March 18.
is a pioneer in telehealth, facilitating virtual health care services that connect health providers to patients remotely. This is of obvious importance during the COVID-19 outbreak, but it is also in keeping with the long-term trend of cloud collaboration and greater efficiency. During the current crisis, a virtual meeting with a health provider is of obvious importance but, other than that, many routine visits to doctors’ offices, with  their associated long wait times and other inefficiencies, can be replaced by telehealth.
On March 17, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) announced that President Trump had expanded Medicare telehealth coverage, allowing seniors to communicate with doctors without taking the risk of office visits, for an expanded variety of care scenarios. Click here for the announcement, which has links to documents that provide details to patients and providers about expanded service coverage.
“This is a positive for Teledoc. They’re the leader,” Zhang said, adding that the company is another example of “us wanting to be part of the solution,” through the investment portfolios.
Teladoc said March 13 that it had facilitated about 100,000 U.S. virtual visits in seven days, which was a 24% increase from a year earlier, and a 50% jump from the previous week.
Teledoc’s stock has returned 64% this year through March 18.
“I do not like companies that are economically sensitive,” Zhang said, emphasizing strong balance sheets (“leverage kills”), along with “wide moats” to protect businesses from new competitors. She drew an analogy between “sail boats,” which rely on tailwinds and are economically sensitive, and “motorboats,” that “control their own destiny.”
So she built up cash early this year, in part because tech-stock valuations had risen so high, but also because she was sensitive to the early news of the coronavirus outbreak in China.
“I actually was already worried about the crisis in January,” she said.
It took some time for the broad U.S. market to catch on to the scope of the problem — the S&P 500 SPX,
set record intraday and closing highs Feb. 19.
“Long-duration assets — small- and mid-cap stocks — should come out stronger on the rebound,” she said.
Here’s how the Alger Small Cap Focus Fund’s class A shares (excluding sales charges, but after expenses) have performed this year through March 18, compared with its benchmark, the Russell 2000 Growth Index:
Here are 2020 total returns, through March 18, for the Alger Mid Cap Focus Fund’s class I shares and the Russell Mid Cap Growth Index:
Zhang emphasized the funds’ outperformance on March 18 as evidence that her quality approach holds up even over the short term. The Alger Small Cap Focus Fund was down 6.1% for the day, while its benchmark, the Russell 2000 Index fell 10.4%. The Alger Mid Cap Focus Fund declined 4%, and its benchmark, the Russell Mid Cap Index, lost 8.2%.
Here are the top 10 holdings (of 49) of the Alger Small Cap Focus Fund as of Feb. 29:
