SAINT LOUIS--( BUSINESS WIRE )-- Perficient, Inc. (Nasdaq: PRFT) (“Perficient”), a leading global digital consultancy transforming the world’s largest enterprises and biggest brands, today announced that it has been named a Google Cloud Premier Partner for demonstrating a deep level of technical proficiency, expertise, and customer impact with Google Cloud Platform (GCP). This designation represents the highest status a Google Cloud partner can achieve.
Perficient’s Premier Partner status is the result of shared investment in technical enablement, certifications, sales, and marketing initiatives by both Perficient and Google Cloud, in addition to Perficient’s experience delivering quality solutions on behalf of customers using GCP. As a Premier Partner, Perficient will continue collaborating with Google Cloud on a go-to-market strategy, incorporating management consulting, cloud migration, application development, and other Google Cloud resources to help customers transform their business.
“We’re proud to achieve this Premier Partner status following several years of collaboration with Google Cloud. This achievement emphasizes our commitment to deepening our relationship, expanding our knowledge base, and delivering that expertise through innovative solutions for our clients,” said Hari Madamalla, vice president, Perficient. “With our Premier Partner status, we’re eager to continue deploying the scalable and secure infrastructure GCP offers to maximize our clients’ operational efficiencies and cost savings.”
In addition to becoming a Premier Partner, Perficient is now a Google Cloud Healthcare and Life Sciences Expertise Partner, indicating strong experience with GCP, and demonstrated customer success in the healthcare/life sciences market.
Many modern healthcare companies are increasing their cloud investment to support data security, unify disparate systems, and reduce costs. Outfitted with a costly cloud platform with limited customization options, a San Francisco-based healthcare company partnered with Perficient to create a strategy for migrating their legacy cloud platform to a GCP solution that incorporated application containerization.
Following in-depth roadmap strategy sessions, Perficient created an extensive plan for migrating and analyzing the healthcare company’s tremendous amounts of data. Perficient then executed infrastructure automation and database migration efforts using Kubernetes to establish the design, management, and governance elements required for application containerization. Following the successful migration, the healthcare company realized a 30 percent reduction in associated spending and increased the flexibility and customization options of its IT infrastructure.
Perficient combines the power of Google Cloud technology with strategy and delivery expertise to help solve critical business challenges. With more than 20 years of cross-industry experience, Perficient provides services across a wide range of solutions that help companies capture, process, store, visualize, and analyze data in a cloud-based environment.
For more information about Perficient’s Google Cloud and healthcare expertise, subscribe to Perficient’s blog, and follow us on Twitter and LinkedIn .
Perficient is a leading global digital consultancy. We imagine, create, engineer, and run digital transformation solutions that help our clients exceed customers’ expectations, outpace competition, and grow their business. With unparalleled strategy, creative, and technology capabilities, we bring big thinking and innovative ideas, along with a practical approach to help the world’s largest enterprises and biggest brands succeed. Traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market, Perficient is a member of the Russell 2000 index and the S&P SmallCap 600 index. Perficient is an award-winning Adobe Platinum Partner, Platinum Level IBM business partner, a Microsoft National Service Provider and Gold Certified Partner, an Oracle Platinum Partner, a Gold Salesforce Consulting Partner, a Sitecore Platinum Partner, and a VMware Authorized Partner. For more information, visit www.perficient.com .
Some of the statements contained in this news release that are not purely historical statements discuss future expectations or state other forward-looking information related to financial results and business outlook for 2020. Those statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that could cause the actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by the statements. The forward-looking information is based on management’s current intent, belief, expectations, estimates, and projections regarding our company and our industry. You should be aware that those statements only reflect our predictions. Actual events or results may differ substantially. Important factors that could cause our actual results to be materially different from the forward-looking statements include (but are not limited to) those disclosed under the heading “Risk Factors” in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as supplemented by the risk factor contained under the heading “Risk Factors” in our quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31, 2020.
