Russell 2000, shows signs of consolidation waiting for the coming jobless claim figures. The benchmark that groups the 2,000 small-cap companies in the US, advances 8.09 pts or 0.68% on Thursday, reaching 1.189.38 pts.
Over the past few weeks, the explosive increase in data on new unemployment claims has reflected the negative impact of the spread of the virus. So far, it is estimated that more than 16 million claims for jobless have been initiated. The fresh data adds 5.2 additional claims for a total of over 21 million in four weeks in the US.
On the other hand, the extent of the duration of the confinement measures taken to protect the population is reducing economic activity, which according to the latest IMF projection, the United States could contract by up to 6% in 2020. At the same time, the IMF estimates that the global economic slowdown could reach 3%.
According to the short-term Elliott wave perspective, the Russell 2000 advances in a corrective structure, which belongs to a wave B of Minor degree labeled in green.
The small-cap index has completed a three-wave sequence on Wednesday 15th when it broke down the ascending trendline that connects the ends of the waves (ii) and (iv) of Minuette degree identified in blue. This bullish movement concluded a wave ((c)) of Minute degree in black, and consequently, a wave A of Minor degree identified in green.
According to Elliott wave theory, the movement corresponding to the wave B in green should develop a three-wave sequence. Besides, the structure that began with the March 23rd low at 963.62 pts belongs to a wave (B) of a higher degree of Intermediate degree identified in blue.
According to the alternating principle of wave theory and considering that the higher- degree wave corresponds to a wave (B), there is a possibility that the developing structure will be a triangle pattern.
The Elliott Wave theory defines a triangle pattern as a formation that follows a sequence subdivided into five internal segments divided into 3-3-3-3-3. Also, this pattern tends to appear in waves 4 or B.
In conclusion, in the short-term, our bias remains neutral until the completion of wave B of Minor degree in green. In the mid-term, we expect the end of wave B in green to incorporate us in the upward movement of wave C.
Try Secure Leveraged Trading with EagleFX!
Risk Warning: CFD and Spot Forex trading both come with a high degree of risk. You must be prepared to sustain a total loss of any funds deposited with us, as well as any additional losses, charges, or other costs we incur in recovering any payment from you. Given the possibility of losing more than your entire investment, speculation in certain investments should only be conducted with risk capital funds that if lost will not significantly affect your personal or institution’s financial well-being. Before deciding to trade the products offered by us, you should carefully consider your objectives, financial situation, needs and level of experience. You should also be aware of all the risks associated with trading on margin.
