Russell 2000 is bouncing on Friday 13th's session after the worst trade session since the "Black Monday" crash of October 1987.
During this year, the U.S. index Russell 2000 has underperformed over 30% (YTD), entering in the bear market territory, and over more than 20% from its 52-weeks high.
In our technical analysis released on February 21st, we commented that the Russell 2000 index was developing an incomplete corrective structure, which could have completed a wave (B) of Intermediate degree that ended in January 2020 high at 1,713.61 pts.
The piercing of the (iv) wave of the Minuette degree revealed an expanding diagonal pattern, which gave us a clue that Russell 2000 could be starting a new bearish leg corresponding to a wave (C) of Intermediate degree identified in blue.
According to the Elliott wave theory, the expanding diagonal pattern (introduced by Prechter and Frost in 1979) in a similar way as an ending diagonal pattern tends to appear in a wave "5" or "C."
In our Russell 2000 technical update released on March 05th, we observed in a 12-hour chart how the U.S. low-cap index advanced in an incomplete bearish sequence which belonged to a wave 1 or A of Minor degree in green inside of a wave (C) of Intermediate degree in blue.
For Russell 2000, both waves A or 1 of Minor degree has two different implications on the long-term structure. If the wave (C) is completed in three waves, then the wave (C) could be a triangle pattern, and the next path should be another three-wave sequence.
However, if wave (C) finishes in a five-wave sequence, then the corrective process will give way a new upward formation that should drive to Russell 200 towards fresh record highs.
Currently, Russell 2000, in its 12-hour chart, shows the massive sell-off developed by the U.S. index during the latest couple weeks.
The bearish sentiment was boosted by COVID-19 worries, its global economic impact, and the price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia, which was commented on the different news media.
However, the Russell 2000 index seems to be finding support at the same time that news media talks about the worst stock market performance since the financial crisis of 2008 and "Black Monday" of 1987.
The Russell 2000 index developed a massive sell-off, which, from the Elliott wave point of view, belongs to the fifth internal segment of the first bearish leg, in an extended fifth wave.
In consequence, considering that the wave (C) of Intermediate degree remains incomplete, The Russell 2000 index must develop a three-wave movement. In the same way, taking into consideration the alternation rule, the next move should be produced at a slower speed than the current bearish leg.
Try Secure Leveraged Trading with EagleFX!
Risk Warning: CFD and Spot Forex trading both come with a high degree of risk. You must be prepared to sustain a total loss of any funds deposited with us, as well as any additional losses, charges, or other costs we incur in recovering any payment from you. Given the possibility of losing more than your entire investment, speculation in certain investments should only be conducted with risk capital funds that if lost will not significantly affect your personal or institution’s financial well-being. Before deciding to trade the products offered by us, you should carefully consider your objectives, financial situation, needs and level of experience. You should also be aware of all the risks associated with trading on margin.
