Updated June 14, 2020 / Original June 12, 2020
The rising tide of liquidity from the Federal Reserve has lifted many ships, including some rust buckets.
If Mr. Market is always right, why do we have corrections? This past week got me thinking about such things.
Thursday’s Wile E. Coyote-style step off the cliff, in which the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell around 7% and the other major averages also plummeted, appears to have disabused some investors of one comforting idea: that a smooth reopening rebound would form the right side of the V in the recovery they anticipated. None of the major gauges slid as much as 10% Thursday, the conventional standard for a correction. (But who says that is the correct definition?) However, the Russell 2000 index of small stocks’ 7.6% plunge brought its three-day decline to 11.8%, satisfying the correction criterion.
But what Mr. Market seems to have gotten wrong was to bid up apparently worthless stocks, on the assumption that what goes down must bounce up. There was the spectacle of Hertz Global Holdings (ticker: HTZ) soaring more than 100% at the beginning of the week, even though the automobile rental company had filed for bankruptcy.
The value of a bankrupt company’s equity ought to be zero, and Mr. Market seemed to agree implicitly as he put the value of Hertz’s debt somewhere in the range of 30-40 cents on the dollar. If the stock actually were worth something, the debt ought to fetch something close to par.
Rather than quibble over that incongruity, Hertz asked the bankruptcy court on Friday for permission to sell $1 billion worth of stock. The shares actually rose on the news, also contrary to the usual impact of an equity sale that would dilute present holders’ stake in the company. (Although the stock gave back some gains in after-hours trading when the court approved the share plan.)
Get a summary of the latest online exclusive coverage from Barron's including daily columns, features on investing ideas and more.
Maybe that’s why it is often said that the smart money resides in the bond market.
There was a similar situation with Chesapeake Energy (CHK), which went on a round trip from the teens to $60 and back, again, while its debt also traded at deep discounts. As our colleague Avi Salzman reported earlier in the week on Barrons.com , the stock swings might have triggered moves by algorithmic traders, whose job is not to question why, but just to sell and buy, based on price action alone.
The rising tide of liquidity from the Federal Reserve has lifted many ships, including obviously some rust buckets, in the equity and credit markets.
Even before the Covid-19 crisis, ultralow interest rates produced a proliferation of corporate zombies, according to Torsten Sløk, chief economist at Deutsche Bank Securities. He defines these as companies whose debt service exceeds their profits. The zombies’ share of U.S. companies has roughly tripled since the financial crisis, to over 18%. Keeping them alive has a cost, he argues, as it sends resources flowing to unproductive firms, diverting investment and employment from productive ones, and reducing overall growth.
But abundant and cheap capital has also powered newcomers, such as Nikola (NKLA), a maker of electric-powered long-haul trucks, to a market capitalization of $23 billion. Its fans obviously see it as the next Tesla (TSLA), whose shares this past week touched $1,000, even though Nikola lacks orders or manufacturing facilities, let alone profits.
Yet this exuberance, rational or otherwise, is being tempered for the overall market by worrying signs of a rebound in Covid-19 cases, just after New York City, the epicenter of the pandemic, was finally was able to begin to reopen this past week.
That bounce in cases was blamed for Thursday’s air pocket, which in turn was mainly responsible for the worst week for the major averages since the one ended March 20, with respective drops of 5.55%, 4.78%, and 2.30% for the Dow, S&P 500 ,
Treasury yields also corrected, or rather reversed, their previous uptick in reaction to the surprise rise in May’s payrolls that had been reported the previous week. The benchmark 10-year note, seemingly headed to 1%, dipped back to 0.71%.
The major indexes dominated by megacap tech names tend to overstate the average stock’s strength. More than 50% of NYSE issues have been unable to climb above their 200-day moving average, notes Louise Yamada. She heads Louise Yamada Technical Research Advisors and scrutinizes individual stocks and groups, along with the big indexes whose movements are flashed on TV screens.
Stocks also haven’t shown the kind of resilience seen after their late 2018 drop, she adds in a phone interview. Instead, many individual equities are getting “kickback rallies in a bear market.” Overall, she counsels caution as the market goes through a consolidation phase, using “mental stop-loss orders” to control risk.
Second waves of Covid-19 pose the biggest risk to shares now, according to John Higgins of Capital Economics. The coronavirus is unlikely to be contained for a long time, even with the highly optimistic expectation of a vaccine by year-end. Keeping the disease under reasonable control will be necessary for stocks to rally further, he concludes.
Wearing a mask may help to protect your portfolio, as well as public health.
