* The Caps above are shown gross and net of the Nasdaq 100 and Russell 2000 Buffer ETFs’ 0.79% management fee. “Cap” refers to the maximum potential return, before fees and expenses and any shareholder transaction fees and any extraordinary expenses, if held over the full Outcome Period. “Buffer” refers to the amount of downside protection the fund seeks to provide, before fees and expenses, over the full Outcome Period. Outcome Period is the intended length of time over which the defined outcomes are sought. Upon fund launch, the Caps can be found on a daily basis via www.innovatoretfs.com .
Innovator Nasdaq-100 Power Buffer ETF™ (Cboe: NOCT ): Designed to track the price return of the Nasdaq 100 Index (up to a predetermined Cap) while buffering investors against the first 15% of losses over the Outcome Period, before fees and expenses.
Innovator Russell 2000 Power Buffer ETF™ (Cboe: KOCT ): Designed to track the price return of the Russell 2000 Index (up to a predetermined Cap) while buffering investors against the first 15% of losses over the Outcome Period, before fees and expenses.
Innovator S&P 500 Buffer ETFs™ (Cboe: BAPR , BJUN , BJUL , BAUG , BSEP , BOCT , BJAN ): Designed to track the price return of the S&P 500 (up to a predetermined Cap) while buffering investors against the first 9% of losses over the Outcome Period, before fees and expenses.
Innovator S&P 500 Power Buffer ETFs™ (Cboe: PAPR , PJUN , PJUL , PAUG , PSEP , POCT , PJAN ): Designed to track the price return of the S&P 500 (up to a predetermined Cap) while buffering investors against the first 15% of losses over the Outcome Period, before fees and expenses.
Innovator S&P 500 Ultra Buffer ETFs™ (Cboe: UAPR , UJUN , UJUL , UAUG , USEP , UOCT , UJAN ): Designed to track the price return of the S&P 500 (up to a predetermined Cap) while buffering investors against a decline of 30% of losses over the Outcome Period, from -5% to -35%, before fees and expenses. Investors are exposed to loss between 0% and 5% and over 35% over the Outcome Period, before fees and expenses.
Innovator MSCI Emerging Markets Power Buffer ETF™ (NYSE: EJUL ): Designed to track the price return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index (up to a predetermined Cap) while buffering investors against the first 15% of losses over the Outcome Period, before fees and expenses.
Innovator MSCI EAFE Power Buffer ETF™ (NYSE: IJUL ): Designed to track the price return of the MSCI EAFE Index (up to a predetermined Cap) while buffering investors against the first 15% of losses over the Outcome Period, before fees and expenses.
