Here’s the weekly price chart of the S&P 500:
Standard & Poor's 500 weekly price chart, 11 4 19.
You can see how this index is higher than its mid-summer, 2018 peak and higher than previous highs from this year.
And here’s the weekly price chart of the Russell 2000:
Russell 2000 weekly price chart, 11 4 19.
The small cap index is unable to move above the 2018 peak and has only just now matched the earlier 2019 high. I’ve red circled the distance it must travel to match the new highs seen in the other measures.
You can see how the S&P is higher than ever and how the Russell is unable to get there – at least, so far. In the world of price chart analysts, this is known as a divergence. A negative divergence. It may be a sign of a problem with the extent of bullish sentiment now being expressed about “the stock market.”
Maybe it’s some kind of aberration, right? Well, here’s the problem: a key indicator seems to confirm that “divergent” is the right term. If you track the weekly number of stocks advancing in price versus number of stocks in declines, you get a chart that looks like this:
The NYSE advance/decline line peaked at the beginning of the year as stocks rallied off the Christmas Eve lows of 2018. So, even though the S&P 500 and the NASDAQ Composite have continued onward to higher highs through the year, it’s been on steadily fewer number of stocks coming along for the ride.
None of this means that stocks can’t continue to rally. The tone here is that maybe investors might want to at least begin to curb the bullish enthusiasm. It may be that the Russell 2000 small caps want to catch up at some point – or it may be that the major indices will first take a pause and back off for some period of time.
I do not hold positions in these investments. No recommendations are made one way or the other.  If you're an investor, you'd want to look much deeper into each of these situations. You can lose money trading or investing in stocks and other instruments. Always do your own independent research, due diligence and seek professional advice from a licensed investment advisor.
