Russell 2000 has been in a sideways consolidation between its 50-day and 200-day moving average.
Long-term technical picture remains supportive of another leg higher in IWM.
Elevated AAII bearish sentiment and net short positioning by leveraged funds are both historically bullish contrarian signals.
Both technicals and sentiment suggest reward-to-risk now favors longing IWM via the Direxion Daily Small Cap Bull 3x Shares ETF.
After crumbling 12% in a matter of 3 days post-FOMC, broader stock markets held key technical support with small-cap index Russell 2000 ( IWM ) rebounding sharply off a 50-day moving average by 9+%. Though the bounce ran out of steam on quadruple witching (i.e. expiration of stock index futures, stock index options, stock options, and single stock futures which takes place once a quarter) last Friday amid heavy intraday sell-off. On the week, IWM closed right between 50-day and 200-day moving averages:
As suggested in the previous article on TZA , the current recovery rally in the Russell 2000 has continued to resemble the one off the 2019 lows during which:
Should the technical pattern continue to play out, we would expect IWM to climb above the previous high and complete step 3. With broader markets once again shaking off negative COVID-19 headlines over the weekend to close higher on Monday, the next leg up may have commenced.
Over the past few weeks, investor sentiment based on the AAII survey had swung from overly bearish to the neutral territory during the breakout rally in S&P 500 and other flagship indices. Though that did not last long, as bearish sentiment spiked back towards 50% on the heels of the swift decline post-FOMC:
As illustrated in the above chart, knee-jerk reaction in investor sentiment during the brief market scares has tended to be a reliable contrarian buy signal. Indeed, spikes above 45% in bearish sentiment have coincided with intermediate bottoms in the IWM over the past 5 years. Likewise, after the bear market ended in 2009, intermittent jumps in bearish sentiment had proved to be great dip buying opportunities:
Using a statistical approach yields a similarly bullish outlook. Specifically, when IWM gained in the past 2 months while AAII bearish sentiment moved above 45%, more than 70% of the time IWM would continue to rally in the ensuing 2 months averaging 3+%:
