Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
We’ll have to keep an eye on the 10-year, because Financials have come out to play lately and the Russell 2000 Index (RUT) has also done well thanks in part to strength in mid-sized banks. We’ll see if that lasts. It’s worth noting that caution began to show up even yesterday, as gold and volatility rose even amid the strength in equities. Gold surged above technical resistance at $1,700 an ounce.
The Fed meeting that starts today and ends tomorrow could possibly mean lighter-volume trading, though volume was pretty strong in recent days as the market rallied. Typically, volume and market moves tend to be lighter as a Fed meeting begins, and until very recently, the futures market predicted almost no chance of a rate move tomorrow.
You can never say never, but there’s almost no chance the Fed would surprise anyone and conduct a stealth rate hike. The futures market at CME
Group (CME) does show chances of a hike at around 16%, which is probably just noise.
A couple earnings might be worth watching after the close, including Chewy (CHWY) and GameStop (GME). These two are ones a lot of analysts see benefitting from the shutdown.
Many analysts were expecting this to be a very rough recovery following the SPX’s 35% plunge from all-time highs in February and March, but the move we’ve had from three-year lows posted in March is absolutely stunning.
What’s also stunning is how the market continues to just climb and climb despite the economy still being in pretty messy shape. Last Friday’s jobs report came in far better than almost anyone probably expected, though no one would call a 13% reading on unemployment good. There’s definitely a dichotomy taking place between the market and the rest of the economy. A lot of Americans continue to suffer, and that’s not necessarily ending soon.
That said, stocks often provide a forward view. Arguably, the rally into the jobs report reflected investor belief that the jobs situation wasn’t as bad as everyone said. Turns out stocks were right, and most (if not all) the analysts were wrong.
(BA), all soaring. So maybe that’s the market telling us there’s a real recovery going on in the travel industry that just hasn’t shown up in the data yet. You can be skeptical about that and say this is all speculation—and you might end up being right. However, if you write it off that way, you risk being as wrong as all of those analysts were about the jobs report.
One thing that might keep some investors cautious is the way this rally is being driven without any earnings yet to support it. Earnings season is still more than a month away, and Q2 could be a disaster for bottom lines, for want of a better word.
The argument some make is that Fed policy matters more right now than earnings (see more below), and that most people have already worked in the likelihood of 2020 being a dumpster fire for company results and things potentially getting better in 2021.
It’s important to monitor what the Fed says tomorrow about the economic picture, and also to take a look at the so-called “dot-plot” of where Fed officials see rates headed in the future. This will be the first dot-plot since the pandemic really shut things down. We’ll talk more about all this in tomorrow morning’s report.
In the meantime, it’s incredible to see the turnaround in “outdoor” stocks, meaning stocks of companies that do best when people get back outside from the shutdown. The leading sub-sectors of the S&P 500 last week were oil and gas drilling, department stores, and airlines. These are the same sub-sectors that got taken to the woodshed back in March. As we noted, BA has been absolutely astonishing in its comeback lately, raising hopes that there might be some good news soon on the regulatory front related to the grounded 737 MAX. That remains to be seen.
It’s never “safe” to say anything about the markets. With that caveat out of the way, it does seem somewhat safe (for now, anyway), to say that if airlines and department store stocks are doing well, the rest of the market is likely to also be in good shape. Health in these sectors reflects a re-emerging economy.
It’s also a safe thing to say that when more sectors go up together, it’s a healthier market than when one or two highly-capitalized sectors do great and the rest of the market slogs along or falls. That was the situation early in this rally when tech led everyone. Now, Information Technology is taking more of a back seat while others lead. Look at Monday’s results as a good example. While Energy led with better than 4% gains, every sector rose, and many gained 1% or more. Materials and Tech brought up the rear.
This widespread advance may not last for long, so it’s important to monitor the situation and see if the wealth continues to be shared. Any sign of tech once again running ahead while everyone else dawdles would possibly be a warning.
Investor Movement Index® (IMXSM). It increased to 4.35 in May, up 11.54% from its April score of 3.90. The IMX is TD Ameritrade’s proprietary, behavior-based index, aggregating Main Street investor positions and activity to measure what investors actually were doing and how they were positioned in the markets.
In May, we started to see optimism really take hold of the markets. Clients were future-focused in their equity buys—as we saw the ‘optimism trade’ take hold in terms of the actual or soon-to-be reopening of state economies—feeding hope of a quick recovery. Combine this with news around potential coronavirus vaccine developments, along with a slowing of cases, and it looks like TD Ameritrade’s clients used this news to step up their exposure to the market for the first time in four months.
Some of the popular names retail traders bought during the period, according to IMX, included Southwest Airlines
