The short-term range is 103.960 to 98.345. Its retracement zone at 101.155 to 101.815 is the first upside target. This zone surrounds a long-term 50% retracement level at 101.495.
The U.S. Dollar is marginally higher against a basket of major currencies at the mid-session in a mostly lackluster trade. Of the major components, the Euro is trading slightly lower, but this is being offset by a slight rise in the British Pound. The Canadian Dollar is trading better as traders await more news regarding the possible crude oil production cut deal between Russia and Saudi Arabia.
The safe-haven Swiss Franc and Japanese Yen are also under pressure. The Japanese Yen is trading lower after the country reported an increase in coronavirus cases. The government also announced a state of emergency in Tokyo and six other prefectures as early as Tuesday to contain the coronavirus. Meanwhile, the government is preparing a $990 billion stimulus package to soften the economic blow.
At 13:12 GMT, June U.S. Dollar Index futures are trading 100.720, up 0.043 or +0.04%.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. A trade through 98.345 will change the main trend to down. A move through 103.960 will signal a resumption of the uptrend.
The short-term range is 103.960 to 98.345. Its retracement zone at 101.155 to 101.815 is the first upside target. This zone surrounds a long-term 50% retracement level at 101.495.
The main range is 94.530 to 103.960. Its retracement zone at 99.245 to 98.130 is major support. This zone stopped the selling at 98.345 on March 27.
The nearest upside target on Monday is a resistance cluster at 101.460 to 101.495. Sellers could come in on the first test of this area. Overtaking 101.495 could trigger an acceleration to the upside.
On the downside, the first target is an uptrending Gann angle at 99.845. This is followed by another uptrending Gann angle at 99.530.
The market is only up six sessions from its last main bottom. So a higher-high, lower-close will only produce a minor closing price reversal top. Nonetheless, it will still indicate that the selling is greater than the buying at current price levels.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
