Traders work on the floor at the closing bell of the Dow Industrial Average at the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday. Bryan R. Smith/AFP via Getty Images
This post was updated on March 16 at 10:34 a.m. ET
For the third time in a week, a stock market plunge triggered circuit breakers that temporarily halted trading at the New York Stock Exchange.
Trading stopped for 15 minutes when the S&P 500 fell more than 8% after Monday’s opening bell . At one point, the Dow plunged more than 2,600 points and the Nasdaq Composite Index dropped more than 910 points.
The declines come after the Federal Reserve slashed its benchmark interest rate to zero on Sunday — a move it hasn’t made since the 2008 financial crisis —   in response to the coronavirus and announced it would buy $700 billion in Treasury and mortgage bonds.
Here’s a look at how these circuit breakers function and why they were implemented in the first place:
“Marketplace’s” Kai Ryssdal explains that these breakers are supposed to let investors figure out what’s actually happening and stop the market free fall.
Trading is halted for 15 minutes, unless it’s after 3:25 p.m. Eastern time.
Trading is halted for 15 minutes, unless it’s after 3:25 p.m. Eastern time.
Marketwide trading is halted for the rest of the day.
Trading stopped last Monday and Thursday after the S&P 500 dropped 7%. But before that, the first — and only other time — the New York Stock Exchange halted trading because of circuit breakers was on Oct. 27, 1997 , during the Asian financial crisis.
Under different rules at the time, the NYSE hit pause after the Dow Jones declined by about 550 points.
Investors began panic selling after Hong Kong’s benchmark Hang Seng index lost almost 6% overnight, according to CNN.
Circuit breakers were first put into place after Black Monday , when the Dow plunged 22.6% — its biggest one-day loss in history.
Diana Henriques, author of the book “A First-Class Catastrophe,” told Marketplace that investors were selling because computer-driven strategies told them to sell instead of using economic and political assessments.
So basically, these circuit breakers were put into place to stop panic selling. But they might not be as effective they aim to be.
Henriques said that might actually speed up the panic, because everyone will try to exit the market before the circuit breakers officially kick in.
There are also now dozens of major stock exchanges around the world.
“Trading now observes no borders,” Henriques said. “So, you know, a circuit breaker on a global 24-hour-nanosecond-driven stock market — it’s kind of like a handbrake on a bullet train. Good luck with that.”
Will the federal government extend the extra COVID-19 unemployment benefits?
It’s still unclear. Congress and President Donald Trump are deciding whether to extend the extra $600 a week in unemployment benefits workers are getting because of the pandemic. Labor Secretary Eugene Scalia believes the program should not be extended, and White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow said the additional money is disincentivizing some workers from returning to their jobs . Democrats want to keep providing the money until January.
As states lift restrictions, are people going back to stores and restaurants?
States have relaxed their restrictions, and many of us have relaxed, too. Some people have started to make exceptions for visiting restaurants , if only for outdoor dining. Some are only going to places they trust are being extra cautious. But no one we’ve talked to has really gone back to normal. People just aren’t quite there yet.
Will surges in COVID-19 cases mean a return to lockdowns?
In many areas where businesses are reopening, cases of COVID-19 are trending upwards, causing some to ask if the lockdowns were lifted too soon, and if residents and businesses might have to go through it all again. So, how likely is another lockdown, of some sort? The answer depends on who you ask . Many local officials are now bullish about keeping businesses open to salvage their economies. Health experts, though, are concerned.
As a nonprofit news organization, our future depends on listeners like you who believe in the power of public service journalism.
Your investment in Marketplace helps us remain paywall-free and ensures everyone has access to trustworthy, unbiased news and information, regardless of their ability to pay.
Donate today — in any amount — to become a Marketplace Investor. Now more than ever, your commitment makes a difference.
