SmallCapPower | May 19, 2020: Bitcoin has seen renewed investor interest recently given the record amount of global money printing related to COVID-19. Blockchain itself, although no longer on the top of most investors’ minds, is a technology that it here to stay as Visa, for example, filed a patent application late last year to create digital currency on a centralized computer using blockchain technology. That being said, today we have identified three Canadian blockchain stocks that we believe have superior growth prospects for 2020.
*Returns are based on closing stock prices as of May 15, 2020
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Voyager is a crypto-asset broker that provides retail and institutional investors with a turnkey solution to trade crypto assets. Voyager offers customers best execution and safe custody on a wide choice of popular crypto-assets. On March 2, 2020, Voyager Digital announced its fiscal 2020 second-quarter financial results and provided a business update, saying it has grown its customer base to more than 200,000 global users across Voyager platforms and has increased its trading volume by over 900% since year end.
Hut 8 Mining is a Canada-based cryptocurrency miner. Hut 8 wants to become the biggest cryptocurrency miner, by using its BlockBox AC manufactured in partnership with Bitfury to mine Bitcoins using conventional datacenter infrastructure. Hut 8 currently operates a total of 73 BlockBox Data Centers, including 56 BlockBoxes at its facility in CMH, Alberta, with each BlockBox having 1.2 MW of capacity, representing an aggregate of 67.2 MW of maximum operating power capacity. Hut 8 has a total maximum operating power capacity of 85.9 MW and an average actual operating hash rate of over 640 Petahashes per second. On May 11, 2020, Hut 8 Mining reported first-quarter 2020 revenue of $12.7 million.
HIVE Blockchain is a growth-oriented company building a bridge from the blockchain sector to traditional capital markets. HIVE owns state-of-the-art GPU-based digital currency mining facilities in Iceland and Sweden, which produce newly-minted digital currencies such as Ethereum continuously, as well as cloud-based ASIC-based capacity, which produces newly-minted digital currencies such as Bitcoin. HIVE aims to provide shareholders with exposure to the operating margins of digital currency mining as well as a growing portfolio of cryptocurrency. HIVE Blockchain generated net income of US$3.4 million during its most recently reported quarter (Q3 2020).
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
