The 10 biggest mistakes to avoid when buying gold should be considered by investors before they make any purchases of the precious metal.
Gold is in the early stages of a bull market, after breaking out in May 2019 following a decade of equity portfolio dominance. As a result, investors are once again drawn to the yellow metal but should keep in mind the 10 biggest mistakes to avoid when buying gold.
To ensure your hard-earned money is safely and efficiently allocated to gold, you should take into consideration the following 10 mistakes and misconceptions that I have seen in my 25 years in the industry.
#1 of 10 Biggest Mistakes When Buying Gold: Not Asking This Question
Before you buy gold or any other precious metals, ask the dealer, “When I am ready to sell, will you buy this back from me?”
If the answer is no, DO NOT buy from them… period.
If a dealer does not buy back, it means one of two things.  Either, they do not value the metals, or they are embarrassed by the spreads between the sale and purchase prices.
Although not likely, if they don’t value the merchandise, they should just give it to you.  Most likely, they are charging you way too much for the precious metals, and they don’t want you to know how much they are charging you.
No matter what lame excuse they give for not buying back – and they can be quite creative – it all comes down to the fact that they are embarrassed they are overcharging you.
Don’t be fooled into thinking otherwise.
#2 of 10 Biggest Mistakes to Avoid When Buying Gold: No Clear Goal
There are many ways to buy gold and other precious metals. There also are many different reasons to do so as well.
Some investors look to gold as wealth insurance . Others are motivated by profit. Still others trade precious metals based on certain indicators in the market.
Knowing why you are buying precious metals should be understood upfront. Your dealer should always ask you about your goal in owning precious metals. Otherwise, a dealer cannot really guide you to the right metal (gold, silver , platinum or palladium), the proper form (bullion bars and coins, certificates, rare coins), or the proper storage (your direct control, domestic or international).
Make your purpose in buying precious metals clear to the dealer. If a dealer is worth his weight in gold, he will guide you to the best option to meet your objectives.
#3 of 10 Biggest Mistakes to Avoid When Buying Gold: Wrong Dealer and Product
It follows that once you know your goal, it should be easy to identify the right product and the right storage option… if you are working with the right dealer.
To ensure you are working with a reputable dealer who has your best interests in mind, there are a few things you can do to protect yourself.
Work with a dealer who has been referred to you by a trusted source.
Do a little research to make sure the dealer has a positive reputation, for many years, of taking care of customers.
Compare at least three dealers with regard to price AND guidance. Remember, just like any other product, you often get what you pay for.
Avoid high pressure dealers. They work on your time schedule… not the other way around.
Again, I cannot emphasize Rule #1 enough. If they do not buy back, run, don’t walk away.
#4 of 10 Biggest Mistakes to Avoid When Buying Gold: Mining Stocks?
It is one of the most common misconceptions I have encountered over the past 25 years.
When asked if a new client owns any gold, I often hear, “Yes.” Then, I ask what specifically they own. More often than I can count, I’m told about a portfolio of mining stocks or gold funds.
Please know, these mining stocks can be wonderful investments, but, by owning them, you own absolutely no gold.
These investments should come from an equities allocation … not from your allocation to physical precious metals. While both offer you exposure to gold, the key difference is this…
When you buy gold, you own gold. It is a commodity, and it is yours. If the price goes up or down for gold, the value of your gold is directly and immediately impacted.
When you own shares of a gold mining company, you own stock in a company whose business it is to mine gold profitably and pass those profits — to some extent — on to investors. But just because the gold price is moving up doesn’t mean the company will be profitable.
They may need to raise salaries for management and employees. They may have to deal with environmental permitting issues or mend/build relations with indigenous personnel.  They may need to expend capital for equipment.
There are so many other variables introduced into the equation when buying a gold mining stock versus an ounce of gold. Both are worthy of inclusion in your portfolio, but they are NOT the same thing… not even close.
#5 of 10 Biggest Mistakes to Avoid When Buying Gold: ETFs vs. Precious Metal
Like physical gold versus a gold mining stock, physical gold versus a gold exchange traded fund (ETF) is not the same thing.
Based on the widespread misconceptions out there, this is a topic that may require extra time and attention to discuss fully. But, for the purposes of this article, here are some of the key differences.
As mentioned above, owning gold as a physical commodity is direct and price movements are translated into your bottom line. However, this is not the same with ETFs.
Consider that each share of GLD is supposed to be one-tenth of an ounce of gold. But, did you also notice that a share of GLD is virtually never one-tenth of the price of an ounce of gold?
Similarly, a share of SLV is supposed to be 10 times the price of an ounce of silver. Why is it virtually never that price?
Exchange-traded funds are just that… funds. There is a fund manager because there is something to manage. The managers need to marry investor demand with the product the fund holds. And, they are constrained by physical restrictions and logistical concerns as they attempt to meet investor demand.
Further, they can use leverage in making their precious metals purchases, so not every ounce of gold represented in the shares of the ETF actually have gold backing them.
As with anything, there’s a place for precious metals ETFs in a portfolio, but when I want to buy gold, silver, platinum or palladium, I believe direct ownership is the purest and safest form of ownership.
#6 of 10 Biggest Mistakes to Avoid When Buying Gold: Fear of Confiscation
In 1933, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt made it illegal to own gold. By Executive Order, the government confiscated gold from U.S. citizens, and it remained illegal to own it until 1975.
One loophole in the Executive Order allowed citizens to keep limited numismatic or collectible rare coins. As a result, for many years since gold was once again legal for citizens to own, many rare coin dealers (not all) have tried to sell rare coins based on the fear of gold being confiscated again.
After all, it happened once… why can’t it happen again?
Don’t fall for this. In most cases, it is an attempt by rare coin dealers to extract much higher premiums from you based upon a fear of something happening that most assuredly never will.
Gold was confiscated back in 1933, so the U.S. government could devalue the dollar.
Back then, gold and the U.S. dollar were convertible. You could hand a $20 note to a banker and receive a $20 gold piece – nearly an ounce of gold – on demand. And, gold traded at an official price.
So, the government confiscated gold and subsequently revalued gold’s official price higher. Thus, they devalued the U.S. dollar.
Today, gold and dollars are no longer convertible. That “gold window” was closed in 1971. So, there is no longer a reason for the government to confiscate, and you should not be scared into buying high premium rare coins to protect against that possibility.
Rare coins have a place in a portfolio , but NOT to protect against confiscation.
#7 of 10 Biggest Mistakes to Avoid When Buying Gold: Letting Emotions Rule
This is an easy one. Don’t ever do it.
Buy or sell because allocations change. Buy or sell because your goals change. Buy or sell because you need the money for a financial crisis.
Do not buy or sell because you are scared or overly confident. That’s not investing.  That’s gambling.
Emotion loses untold sums of money for investors. Don’t fall victim to fear or greed based investment decisions.
#8 of 10 Biggest Mistakes to Avoid When Buying Gold: Falling for Scams
Here’s another easy one to understand and avoid.
Scams exist because greedy people exist. Rather than provide valuable services and high-quality products to meet legitimate investor needs, they would rather cheat or trick you out of your hard-earned money.
If it seems too good to be true… it is. Avoid it.
#9 of 10 Biggest Mistakes to Avoid When Buying Gold: Don’t Store Where You Buy
In 1979, four years after gold ownership was legal again in the United States, the Alderice bothers formed a company, International Bullion Exchange, in Florida. It grew quickly to become the largest retail precious metals dealer in the country.
Unfortunately, the brothers were crooks. They bilked their customers out of hundreds of millions of dollars by selling precious metals and by promising to store the precious metals for them. The only problem is they never bought the metal to cover their customers’ trades.
Instead, they used client funds to live the high life. Some people are greedy and unethical.  For them, the lure of easy money when holding client funds and precious metals is too great for their weak character to withstand.
Suffice it to say, when buying from a retail precious metals dealer, either take delivery directly, or have the precious metals stored with a third-party depository with a strong reputation and all the proper safeguards in place.
#10 of 10 Biggest Mistakes to Avoid When Buying Gold: Not Understanding
I solemnly believe, if you buy gold for the right reasons, there is no such thing as the wrong price or the wrong time.
But, you should always understand what you are doing and why you are doing it, before you do it.
Not every precious metal dealer will take the time to help you identify your goals and objectives or how gold and other precious metals can help you accomplish them. But, in my opinion, they absolutely should.
Take the time to understand your investment. Align yourself with professionals that care enough to make sure you are comfortable with the steps you are taking.
DO NOT move forward if you have questions or doubts.
Gold has a proven history of providing unique value to portfolios. It is an asset that is 100% worthwhile to own, and it is once again on the rise.
By keeping these 10 points in mind, gold (and other precious metals) can have a positive impact on your portfolio.
Be careful, but, by all means, take advantage of gold to make sure you Keep What’s Yours!
Now Get Mark's FREE Special Report:
This newly-released report by a top-20 living economist details three investments that are your best bets for income and appreciation for the rest of the year and beyond.
Get Access to the Report, 100% FREE
Dr. Mark Skousen discusses if the dollar is going to crash as a result of the titanic amount of national debt the United States is piling on.
