A National Mask Mandate Could Save The U.S. Economy $1 Trillion, Goldman Sachs Says
Stashing the cash in firms with exposure to precious metal is also a good idea. These most traditional of currencies continue to attract strong interest from the investment community as a ramping-up of money printing by central banks fuels fears over the worth of paper currencies. And the printers are likely to remains switched on as the global economy suffers a painful (and possibly prolonged) economic winter following the Covid-19 outbreak.
Rising economic and political-related stress, allied with fears over fresh monetary easing, are themes that are likely to run and run. But you don’t need to just buy gold-linked assets to ride this trend. Other precious metals also stand to gain in this difficult environment.
Take the platinum group metals (PGMs), for example. The likes of platinum, palladium and rhodium have already gained significantly in value in recent times. And there are plenty who reckon more meaty gains are in store.
are particularly enthusiastic over the metals’ price prospects. They expect average annual platinum prices, for instance, to grow each year through to the middle of the decade. The commodity, which was last dealing around $760 per ounce, is expected to average $824 in 2020 and $962 next year. It will burst through $1,000 in 2022, $1,100 in 2023 and $1,200 the following year, they estimate.
A great way to play this theme is by buying shares in Sylvania Platinum. This AIM company trades on a meagre P/E ratio of 3.5 times for the current fiscal year (to June 2020) and carries a monster forward yield north of 10%, too. Current valuations make it too good to ignore.
I am a seasoned freelance financial journalist reporting for a variety of publications across the globe. I was formerly a stocks and commodities reporter - and editor of
I am a seasoned freelance financial journalist reporting for a variety of publications across the globe. I was formerly a stocks and commodities reporter - and editor of print and online foreign currency coverage - at Shares Magazine, providing information and analysis for readers to make sound investment decisions in the UK and overseas. I was also a regular contributor to the magazine's extensive catalogue of bookazines and trading guides. Prior to this I was a reporter with the BaseMetals.com and TheBullionDesk.com newswires, breaking the latest news and providing in-depth analyses of the base and precious metals markets.
