York Regional Police have announced the arrests of three people, including two Vaughan residents, in an ongoing crackdown of violence in the tow truck industry.
In a series of 21 search warrants executed May 20 across the GTA, a joint-forces police effort seized 11 tow trucks and more than 40 illegal firearms, including a machine-gun, 16 handguns and 13 shotguns, among other weapons and ammunition.
In addition, more than $500,000 in currency and large quantities of fentanyl, cocaine, methamphetamine and cannabis was seized.
The warrants were executed in Aurora, East Gwillimbury, Markham, Richmond Hill and Vaughan, Toronto, Hamilton and Oakville.
Police announced May 26 that Alexander Vinogradsky, 35, and Omer Zahawi, 36, both of Vaughan, and Filippo Genova, 22, of Toronto, each face several charges related to arson, fraud and committing crimes on behalf of a criminal organization.
The arrests follow a series of arrests in recent weeks, including four people in connection to the Christmas Eve 2018 murder of 33-year-old Toronto resident Soheil Rafipour outside a residence in Richmond Hill.
In that case, Mohamad El-Zahawi, 38, of Toronto, was charged in mid-March with first-degree murder. Three others are also charged in connection to that murder.
In total, 19 arrests have been made as part Project Platinum launched in February that has been able to identify multiple organized crime groups in the GTA working within the towing industry. The months-long spree has included murder, attempted murder, arson and property damage as a means to gain control and territory within the industry.
Among those arrested is a Newmarket man. Barrington Grant, 42, who faces weapons-related charges, including weapons trafficking and weapons possession.
Most recently, five people were arrested in Hamilton and Brantford during April 30 and May 1, said police.
The spree of violence has lasted several months and includes property damage, fraud, drug trafficking and several acts of violence as rival companies compete for control of the tow truck industry, including related businesses.
Several shootings and tow truck fires in the GTA are believed to be part of the conflict between groups.
Through investigation, police allege Paramount Towing, which is owned and operated by Vinogradsky, along with other rival towing groups, have been involved in defrauding insurance companies with vehicles involved in collisions and staged collisions.
Police allege the towing companies partnered with auto repair shops, and car and truck rental companies to carry out their frauds.
Insurance companies worked to mitigate the fraud and additional costs to the consumer and actively pursued legal action against various towing companies.
Police dubbed the investigation Project Platinum due to the incidence of high-end vehicles often involved in staged collisions.
"Fraudulent claims have earned them millions of dollars," said YRP Superintendent Mike Slack. "Their actions have victimized innocent drivers, insurance companies and ultimately all of us are victims of increased insurance rates."
One law firm, Carr Law, which had been located in Vaughan and was hired by the insurance companies, became the target of violence, threats and extortion.
"As profits increase so has the need to control territory  and the need to control territory through violence," said Slack.
The multi-jursidictional investigation includes OPP, Toronto and the Canada Revenue Agency.
Anyone with information is asked to contact the York Regional Police Organized Crime and Intelligence Services at 1-866-876-5423, ext. 7818.
York Regional Police have announced the arrests of three people, including two Vaughan residents, in an ongoing crackdown of violence in the tow truck industry.
In a series of 21 search warrants executed May 20 across the GTA, a joint-forces police effort seized 11 tow trucks and more than 40 illegal firearms, including a machine-gun, 16 handguns and 13 shotguns, among other weapons and ammunition.
In addition, more than $500,000 in currency and large quantities of fentanyl, cocaine, methamphetamine and cannabis was seized.
