2020 Toyota Highlander: Should You Go Limited or Platinum?
Where’s the value sweet spot?
So you've read our nine-vehicle Big Test of proper three-row SUVs along with our various other pairings of the 2020 Toyota Highlander against several of its rivals , and you've decided that the Toyota best meets your needs. But the test car in most of those comparisons was a penurious XLE, and you're looking to roll a whole lot phatter than that. The leap from an XLE to a Limited is a pricier one than separates any other two adjacent trim levels ($4,050 to $4,400), but the added equipment and technology pretty well justifies the cost. Once you've made that leap, which of the top two trim levels makes the most sense, Limited or Platinum?
The leap from Limited to Platinum adds $3,200. Highlander pricing starts with the L ($35,720), followed by the LE ($37,920), and XLE ($40,720). Note that adding all-wheel drive to these lower three models adds $1,600. The Limited grade starts at $44,770, and the Platinum rings in at $47,970 in front-drive form. Adding the more sophisticated Dynamic Torque Vectoring AWD with Drive Mode Select and Driveline Disconnect to the top two grades adds $1,950. It's worth noting that the simpler AWD system on the lower trim lines can only send up to 50 percent of available torque to the rear axle after the front tires experience some slip. By contrast, the fancier Dynamic system is predictive in its rear-torque application. It also adds capabilities like shifting torque from left to right at the rear to improve cornering, tailoring traction to suit various different terrain conditions, and idling the propeller shaft when no rear torque is needed to save fuel (although the EPA ratings are identical for all gasoline-powered AWD Highlanders). This system does much to justify the more sizeable $4,400-$7,600 price leap from the XLE AWD to either of these top two trim grades. Swapping the V-6 and eight-speed automatic for a 2.5-liter four-cylinder hybrid/CVT powertrain adds $1,400 to all trim grades. Note that this includes the Limited and Platinum AWD trims, which, in Hybrid guise, share an identical electric rear axle. It could therefore be argued that the extra $350 charged for AWD on the top two Hybrid models represents reduced value for the Hybrids.
What Does the Platinum Get That the Limited Doesn't?
The glass sunroof over the front seat, standard on XLE and Limited, becomes a panoramic glass roof on Platinum models, the rear-view mirror can provide a panoramic digital camera rear-view for when people or cargo block the view, and there's heating for the rear seats. The driver gets a 10-inch color head-up display (HUD), rain-sensing wipers, and adaptive headlamps that level themselves automatically and steer their light beams into turns. Appearance-wise, the 20-inch wheels trade chrome cladding for a "platinum" finish; the front lower bumper goes from body-color to a silver finish while the rear lower bumper trades a "dark gray metallic" finish for simply "gray metallic"; the front doorsill plates are illuminated; and there's a chrome scuff plate to protect the rear bumper fascia from luggage dragged carelessly out of the hatch. Oh, and there's one interior color scheme that's exclusive to Platinum: Glazed Caramel leather.
Are Any Platinum Features Optional on Limited?
There is one: For $1,050, the Premium Audio, Dynamic Navigation and JBL Package can be upgraded from an 8.0-inch touchscreen to a bigger 12.3-inch one that also brings with it Panoramic Bird's Eye camera views, including perimeter scan, 360-degree overhead view in low-speed drive and reverse, and curb view. The system also adds dynamic lines to the reverse-camera view to tell you what the tires are poised to run over when backing up. This pricing suggests that of the $3,200 premium one pays for the Platinum model over the Limited, the items in the above paragraph account for $2,150 in value.
Is There Anything Limited Gets That Platinum Doesn't?
There is one biggie. Captain's chairs are standard on XLE trims and above, but only XLE and Limited buyers can opt for eight-passenger seating with a middle-row bench at no extra charge. That's a big consideration if you sometimes need that eighth seatbelt or if (like mine) your dog much prefers to stretch out on a bench than to curl up on a captain's chair. Extra headroom is another. That pano roof in Platinum grade vehicles consumes 1.2 inches of front head space, 2.3 inches in back. That could be another consideration for tall families.
Which Trim Makes the Most Sense?
While I love the Caramel Glaze leather color and prefer the platinum wheel finish to the chrome look, I don't appreciate the added weight and solar load of giant sunroofs, my dog wants a bench seat, and I wear polarized sunglasses that tend to dim my view of any HUD. Having seen and used the 12.3-inch center touchscreen, however, I'd have trouble getting along with the wee 8.0-incher, so a bench-seat Limited with the optional infotainment system upgrade is how I'd spec a fancy Highlander.
Editor-Curated Stories Directly to Your Inbox!
