In corners, the Pilot rolls a bit more. It doesn't necessarily affect stability but gives you pause when rounding an entrance ramp. The Highlander also outgripped the Pilot, giving a slightly larger measure of security for evasive maneuvers. The Toyota also enjoyed an advantage in braking tests, where it stopped from 70 mph in 167 feet to the Pilot's 172. We also preferred the Highlander's firmer brake pedal. The Pilot also suffered from moderate fade during our six successive stops from 70 mph.
Considering how similar the Pilot and the Highlander are, it's not a surprise that the EPA fuel-economy estimates for the all-wheel-drive Highlander and Pilot are very close. The Toyota is rated at 20 mpg city, 27 highway, and 23 combined. The Honda gives up 1 mpg in all three categories. However, we were impressed with how much Honda has improved the Pilot's automatic stop-start feature, which can now unobtrusively and quickly restart the engine. In our steady 75-mph highway test, the Pilot returned 25 mpg to the Highlander's 28 mpg.
Perhaps it's familiarity, but the Pilot's interior strikes us as functional rather than exciting. As in the best Hondas, there's plenty of passenger space and no shortage of interior cubby storage. Its front seats are comfortable for all body sizes, and the driver enjoys a commanding view of the road ahead. Honda's infotainment system includes an 8.0-inch touchscreen with Apple CarPlay, Android Auto, and a Wi-Fi hotspot. We appreciate the physical volume knob and large onscreen icons, but changing the radio station and navigating menus is harder than it should be.
Our Black Edition also boasts features that make parenting easier, including a rear-seat entertainment system and an intercom called CabinTalk that lets front-seat passengers talk to (or reprimand) the back two rows. Getting into the third row is easy because the second-row captain's chairs move well out of the way. Once you're in the third row, there's more room than in the Highlander. In our suitcase test, the Pilot held just as many roller-bag carry-ons as the Toyota behind its third row (four), and it held eight more with all the rear seats folded (38 total).
The Highlander's interior looks and feels considerably richer than its Honda rival. Our Platinum model had the handsome Harvest Beige leather upholstery and one of the best examples of fake-wood trim that we've seen. The instrument panel is dominated by a massive touchscreen that supports Apple CarPlay, Android Auto, and a Wi-Fi hotspot. Below it is a set of HVAC controls and heated seat controls as well as a built-in shelf that's perfect for storing small items. The center-console bin offers additional storage, but its small opening and wireless charging pad impose size restrictions. While we found the Highlander's driving position to be more accommodating than the Pilot's, its cramped third row left us sitting with our knees in our chest.
Both the Pilot and the Highlander nail the practicality and people hauling part of the brief—although the Highlander's third-row seats don't measure up to the Pilot's. Next to the Highlander, and despite the refresh, the Pilot feels like the older vehicle. It lacks the upmarket appeal of the Highlander's interior. If we were shopping for a loaded Pilot, we'd steer clear from the Black Edition and go for the $49,340 Elite trim level instead. The Pilot doesn't do much wrong, but despite its higher price, the Highlander Platinum seems worth it. It has Lexus-worthy interior design and materials, it's more refined and quieter as it goes about its business, and we liked driving the Highlander more than the Pilot.
So, there you have the answer to the question: Would you rather buy the priciest Honda Pilot or the fanciest Toyota Highlander? Based on our testing, we'd choose the Toyota. To answer the earlier question, we'd probably go llama.
