The 2021 Cadillac Escalade improves GM’s luxury flagship in every conceivable way. It’s bold exterior design is complemented by a gorgeous interior, covered in leather, up to 36 speakers, and 38 inches of OLED display. Now, Cadillac has finally launched the Escalade online configurator , complete with pricing, and speccing out the new SUV is a great way to procrastinate this holiday weekend. Here’s everything you need to know before you go design your ideal 2021 Cadillac Escalade.
While the five trim levels may seem complicated, they actually break down into three rather simple tiers. All trims are also available with rear or four wheel drive (which adds $3,000), and the 6.2 liter V8 or 3.0 liter Duramax turbo diesel engine. The extended ESV model also adds $3,000 across the range. All models get a 10 speed auto. At the base is the Luxury trim, which starts at $77,490. Next, Premium Luxury starts at $84,290 and Sport starts at $86,890. Both Premium Luxury and Sport get virtually identical options, with Sport mainly having a more blacked out appearance. At the top are Premium Luxury Platinum and Sport Platinum, which both start at $101,290 and have identical options and are separated only by appearance. All trims are offered in 9 exterior colors.
At base level Luxury, options are limited to keep price down on your $80,000 SUV. All you get are interior floor mats, and a variety of exterior wheel and design touches. Still, the OLED infotainment system is standard, and it’s by far the standout feature of the Escalade. It also gets a 19 speaker AKG sound system.
Stepping up to the Premium Luxury and Sport Luxury brings more standard features compared to Luxury, and opens up the door for a number of optional accessories. Opting for one of these trims gives you three interior leather color choices versus the Luxury models’ single black color. Optional is a $3,650 Driver Assist Tech package with active safety systems, adaptive air suspension, and soft close doors. Curiously, the $2,700 Performance Package only has a limited slip diff as a performance part, the rest of the pack just gives trailering parts. A heavy duty trailering package is also available. Interior protection is also on offer, as is the $4,300 36 speaker AKG sound system.
Sport models can then choose the Onyx Package for $2,495 which gives blacked out badging and monochrome black and white Caddy badges. It’s worth noting, however, non sport models can get these same options as standalone accessories. Sport also gets that limited slip diff as standard, hence the slight price jump over Premium Luxury.
Premium Luxury and above trims can option $2,500 semi-self driving Super Cruise and $2,000 night vision functionality.
Top of the range Premium Luxury Platinum and Sport Platinum. They gain the full AKG system and air ride suspension as standard. Fully loaded in ESV with all-wheel drive, and these models can push $115,000. Such is the price of luxury.
