Not that I’ve saved the best for last, but ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM ) is our final oversold stock to buy and for more than a few good reasons. With this week’s slamming of shares on continued and heightened fears of a corona-driven global economic slowdown, this blue-chip’s dividend is now literally the ‘toast’ of the town at more than 6.5%. In fact, shares just surpassed Dow Inc (NYSE: DOW ) as the Dow Industrial’s top paying dog.
As a fundamentally well-supported annual income stream, XOM stock investors can expect to get paid for simply parking shares in their account. That’s roughly five-fold what you’ll find in a safe-haven such as 10-year treasuries. But what’s really caught my attention in this oversold stock is that the panic selling has become so extreme, it makes ExxonMobil a knife worth catching.
Technically, this week’s selling pressure has taken ExxonMobil swiftly through key longer-term support as illustrated on the provided monthly chart. It has become so ugly, shares are piercing the 76% retracement level dating back to the financial crisis, while February’s monthly candlestick is almost entirely outside the lower Bollinger Band! That’s right, XOM is hated that much right now.
Bottom-line and to take a cue from Warren Buffett on how to invest, this bloodied and oversold stock is one to buy while other investors are obviously more than a bit fearful.
Investment accounts under Christopher Tyler’s management do not currently own positions in any securities mentioned in this article. The information offered is based upon Christopher Tyler’s observations and strictly intended for educational purposes only; the use of which is the responsibility of the individual. For additional market insights and related musings, follow Chris on Twitter @Options_CAT and StockTwits
Imagine folding your smartphone around your wrist into a “watch.” And then folding your “watch” into a tablet. And then back into a phone.
That’s what this radical new device holds the promise of… and the technology behind it is making early investors a fortune.
Article printed from InvestorPlace Media, https://investorplace.com/2020/02/3-extremely-oversold-coronavirus-stocks-to-buy/.
