If you run a business , you likely need to ship something every so often. Amex is offering a $20, per month, credit when you pay for shipping with your American Express Platinum Business card. For businesses that do a fair amount of shipping, this will be easy to hit with spending between UPS, Federal Express, DHL, and USPS.
As a financial planner , I do more mailing than shipping. With that in mind, I tend to go through a large number of stamps. If this sounds more like your business, you can buy stamps at the post office or even order stamp on USPS.com. If you order online, you will have to pay for shipping, but you are still getting $20 in free stamps, so it’s worth the extra cost.
If you didn't know, as a premium credit card, the American Express Platinum Business card charges a $595 annual fee. With many businesses struggling due to COVID-19, I'm guessing Amex executives were concerned many business owners wouldn't pony up when it came time to renew their cards. As a result, the credit card company is offering a $200 Amex appreciation credit at the time of renewal. I will say from my frugal point of view, the $395 annual fee is more palatable than the $595 fee.
While not a new benefit, Amex has expanded its Dell shopping benefit. For this one, you will need to enroll, and of course, purchase with Dell. After you enroll, you’ll get up to $100 in additional statement credits from May 1 through June 30, 2020, and up to $100 in other statement credits between July 1 and December 31, 2020, for U.S. purchases with Dell. That's up to $400 in statement credits for 2020.
As you can imagine, terms apply for all of these benefits. Be sure to check the terms before you make a purchase you wouldn't otherwise be making. I love these benefits and Amex offers, especially when I can save money on spending, I was going to make anyway. A $20 credit won't cause me to change my cell phone plan, but it will change which credit card I use to pay that monthly bill. Getting more bang for your bucks, especially during the coronavirus recession, is an excellent way to be more fiscally fabulous.
David Rae a Certified Financial Planner™ has been helping people make smarter financial decisions since 2003. 3x Investopedia  "Most Influential Financial Advisors" Award
David Rae a Certified Financial Planner™ has been helping people make smarter financial decisions since 2003. 3x Investopedia  "Most Influential Financial Advisors" Award Winner. He is the founder of the FinancialPlannerLA.com Blog. Rae is no stranger in front of the camera either, having been interviewed as financial expert for numerous segments from the Today Show, NBC Nightly News, ABC, KTLA, CBS News, Nightline, Fox and Friends, Bravo TV  E! News and Comedy Central to name a few. www.davidraefp.com
