Earlier this year, we received the sad news that the twin-turbocharged, dual-overhead cam 4.2L Blackwing V8 engine would not appear in any other Cadillac or General Motors products going forward. This was disappointing for Cadillac fans who hoped the powerful and technologically advanced engine would power the brand’s products for years to come, but it simply wasn’t meant to be.
Now GM is sending out a little gift to owners of the Cadillac CT6-V and Cadillac CT6 Platinum with the Blackwing V8 to remember the engine by. That gift is a 3D printed scale model of the twin-turbo 4.2L V8 engine, allowing them to keep a memento of the short-lived motor on their mantle at home, their desk at work or in their garage.
A card that was included in the customers’ packages reads: “We have worked extensively with Blackwing engineers to create a model that’s based on the original CAD drawings. Note the remarkable attention to detail in this model, which reflects the high level of craftsmanship of your hand-built Blackwing engine. Thank you for being a Cadillac CT6-V customer.”
The 4.2L Blackwing V8 was available in the Cadillac CT6-V and Cadillac CT6 Platinum for the 2019 and 2020 model years. In the CT6 Platinum, the boosted V8 makes 500 horsepower and 553 pound-feet of torque. In the performance-focused CT6-V, however, the engine doles out a significant 550 horsepower and 627 pound-feet. The engine was the first dual-overhead-camshaft V8 produced by GM since the Northstar V8 and was thus met with significant fanfare upon its arrival, but alas, the Blackwing was not long for this world.
In addition to the pair of twin-scroll turbochargers, which were arranged in a “hot v” formation within the valley of the cylinder heads, the Blackwing V8 also benefited from a twin water-to-air-charge intercooler setup, direct fuel injection, dual independent camshaft phasing, Active Fuel Management / Cylinder Deactivation , variable-pressure oiling system and engine stop-start.
As of this writing, the Blackwing V8 is still without a future, though an Italian performance engineering company, Manufatturia Automobili Torino, has expressed interested in buying the rights to the design for use in its future products.
Want to see your GM ride featured on GM Authority? We welcome your submissions. See here for details.
Sam loves to write and has a passion for auto racing, karting and performance driving of all types.
