Shifting now to the biopharma sector, we have GW Pharmaceuticals (NASDAQ: GWPH ). The company has become a market leader in plant-derived cannabinoid therapeutics, with its Epidiolex therapy already having been approved for use in patients with seizures associated with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome or Dravet Syndrome, two rare childhood-onset forms of epilepsy. This approval was monumental as it was the first cannabis-based treatment to receive FDA approval.
While its Q4 earnings release was somewhat uneventful as it announced preliminary results a month before, Needham’s Serge Belanger notes that there was one major takeaway. Management stated that in 2020, OpEx is expected to be within the range of $530 million to $560 million, which would be higher than its $403 million result in 2019 as well as most investors’ estimates.
“The OpEx increase reflects GWPH‘s extensive pipeline activities and the investments behind Epidiolex’s EU launch and tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) label expansion,” Belanger commented. The analyst added, “GWPH’s main value driver will be Epidiolex’s sales growth trajectory, and while current Street expectations (~$536 million in total sales) are not unrealistic, expectations for a flat 1Q20 imply a significantly back-loaded sales progression driven by the TSC label expansion.”
Bearing this in mind, Belanger kept the “buy” rating as is. However, the four-star analyst did cut the price target from $200 to $190, but this still leaves room for a possible twelve-month gain of 78%.
Like Belanger, the rest of the Street likes what it’s seeing. 100% Street support, or 11 “buy” ratings to be precise, makes the analyst consensus a “strong buy.” Not to mention the upside potential lands at 80% thanks to the $192.40 average price target. See the GWPH stock-price forecast .
TipRanks offers investors the latest insight into eight different sectors by tracking the activity of over 5,000 Wall Street analysts. As of this writing, Maya Sasson did not hold a position in any of the aforementioned securities.
Imagine folding your smartphone around your wrist into a “watch.” And then folding your “watch” into a tablet. And then back into a phone.
That’s what this radical new device holds the promise of… and the technology behind it is making early investors a fortune.
Article printed from InvestorPlace Media, https://investorplace.com/2020/02/5-hot-cannabis-stocks-to-snap-up/.
