*- as of 4:15 p.m.
Peloton Interactive Inc. (Nasdaq: PTON) suffered a fairly large sell-off as the stock market opened, but then recovered to close 1.2% higher.
VMware Inc. (NYSE: VMW) managed to stay positive throughout the day following a morning sell-off. The stock rose 2.3%.
Gold followed stocks lower after hitting an almost eight-year high Tuesday — but the move down was slight.
U.S. spot gold was trading 0.15% lower at $1,764.80 per ounce.
“People are just going toward cash. They’re lightening up the investments in their portfolios,” said Michael Matousek, head trader at U.S. Global Investors. “When it’s risk-off for pretty much everything, you have people selling gold. They’re selling a little bit of everything across the board.”
Other precious metal futures also slumped. Silver traded 2.59% lower while palladium was down 3.64%. Platinum futures took the biggest hit, trading 5.43% lower.
A nonpartisan official from Justice Department has accused U.S. Attorney General William Barr of leveling antitrust investigations into 10 cannabis companies based solely on his opposition to cannabis legalization.
In a statement released Wednesday, John W. Elias, former Chief of Staff within the Justice Department’s Antitrust Division, said the investigations did not meet antitrust criteria.
“These mergers involve companies with low market shares in a fragmented industry; they do not meet established criteria for antitrust investigations,” Elias wrote.
Elias was expected to testify to the House Judiciary Committee on Wednesday.
Chicago Federal Reserve Bank President Charles Evans on Wednesday said he expects the U.S. economy to take until late in 2022 to recover to its pre-COVID level of output, with some economic growth permanently lost in the aftermath of the pandemic.
“Even after three years, my projected recovery places us below where the economy would have been had the virus not occurred,” he told a Corridor Business Journal conference in Iowa. “The economic impact has been catastrophic for an extraordinarily large number of people and businesses, (and) sadly, the cost has fallen most heavily on some of our most vulnerable populations.”
S&P 500: Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd. (NYSE: NCLH) -12.4%
Check back for the most important news and numbers each day after the Closing Bell, only on Money & Markets .
