Technically, you can’t purchase tickets or use the credit for award taxes/fees; however, depending on how the airline codes your purchase, you may get reimbursed. Note that while you’re technically limited to the airline you select for the entire calendar year, reports indicate that you might be able to change your selection by contacting customer service. You can choose your airline on the Amex website .
With the Business Platinum card, you also get 35% of all points back when you redeem points for a flight through the Amex travel portal . You’re limited to a maximum rebate of 500,000 points per year, and you only get points back for your selected airline on economy tickets, though you’ll receive 35% of points back for any business or first-class flight you book on any airline.
I absolutely love this benefit not only because you’re not constrained by award space, but also because flights booked with points are treated as revenue flights by the airlines and therefore earn elite status qualification and redeemable miles.
Every time I fly, the plane is full. That, in turn, means airports are full, which means now’s a better time than ever to sign up for Global Entry and TSA PreCheck. Once you have Global Entry , you automatically get TSA PreCheck for expedited security, so that’s your best option. When you sign up for Global Entry with your new Business Platinum card, you’ll get a credit to your account to cover the cost once every four years (up to $100). This is a perk you’ll definitely want to take advantage of as soon as possible, especially given the long wait times that many people encounter in waiting for their applications to be processed.
Business Platinum cardholders receive Avis Preferred, Hertz Gold Plus Rewards and National Emerald Club Executive rental car privileges, all of which require enrollment from the benefits tab of your online account. While Avis and Hertz privileges are nice, having access to National’s Emerald Club row is wonderful. Skip all the lines at a busy airport location and select the car you want from the row, with keys already in it, and drive off the lot.
Enjoy benefits like late checkout and a welcome gift with Marriott Gold status.
Image courtesy of the St. Regis, Florence.
Enjoy benefits like late checkout and a welcome gift with Marriott Gold status. Image courtesy of the St. Regis, Florence.
You have to manually enroll with each chain in order to get the benefits of Gold status from Marriott and Hilton Honors. That being said, it’s not that difficult to do. You can get your Marriott Bonvoy Gold Elite status by enrolling on the Amex site and you can get Hilton Honors Gold by doing the same . You’ll get some solid perks from each — we value Marriott Gold status at $845 and Hilton Honors Gold status at $1,260, assuming you spend a certain number of nights at each chain’s hotels.
The Priority Pass membership that comes with the Business Platinum Amex allows you and two guests free of charge access to more than 1,200 airport lounges around the world. You should receive your Priority Pass card and membership package in the mail within 10-14 days of receiving your card. If not, call the customer service number on the back of your card and request the card be sent to you. Additional guests beyond the two allowed will cost you $32 each and will be automatically billed to your Amex account. Make sure you keep the letter that came with your Priority Pass card long enough to use the security PIN in the letter to register for an online account, which will enable a mobile membership card.
As mentioned earlier, flights booked through the Amex Travel portal and paid for with points will be treated (the vast majority of the time) as paid airfares and will earn elitequalifying miles and dollars. This means you can earn airline elite status while flying “free” flights. I took advantage of a targeted shortcut to American Airlines Executive Platinum status last year and booked mileage run tickets through Amex Travel paid with points , giving me American Airlines AAdvantage Executive Platinum status for only the cost of my time flying.
For hotel status, beyond the included Marriott and Hilton Gold, you can book hotels through the Fine Hotels & Resorts program . In addition to the great added benefits you’ll get during hotel stays, like free nights at select properties and complimentary breakfast, you’ll earn redeemable hotel points and elite nights toward status. FHR rates are often in line with publicly available rates on a property’s own website, so you might as well book with Amex, receive the tremendous added benefits and earn your points and elite credit in the process. While you can earn 5x Amex points on prepaid hotel stays booked through Amex’s regular travel portal, you won’t earn elite stay credit or hotel points on those bookings.
Business Platinum cardholders receive up to $200 in annual statement credits for US purchases with Dell. Like the Saks Fifth Avenue credit on the personal version of the Platinum Card® from American Express, this breaks down to $100 for purchases made between January and June and another $100 for purchases made between July and December. Only US purchases are eligible for this credit (and Dell has cancelled every order I’ve tried to place from abroad), and you do need to enroll on the Amex website before you can start shopping. TPG’s JT Genter walked through how to use this credit, and even found a few great items you can get for free thanks to this new benefit.
There are four main reasons I always keep the Business Platinum card in my wallet:
I never remember to check my wallet before heading to the airport, and I really don’t want to miss out on both/either Centurion Lounge access or Delta Sky Club access (only when flying same-day Delta-operated flights).
The card earns 1.5x Amex Membership Rewards on purchases of more than $5,000 (up to 1 million additional points per year). While I don’t have these kinds of expenses often, the few times I have paid taxes or paid security deposit plus first three months rent, I didn’t want to be left without the ability to earn more than 1x points.
I’ve begun using the American Express Platinum concierge more and more as I have small tasks to complete or don’t have time to go Google hunting for a restaurant or business. You need your 15-digit card number when calling the concierge line, so I just keep the card in my wallet to easily access the services.
When I’m headed to the cash register with an important purchase and need extra protection, I always want the Business Platinum card in my wallet for purchase protection and extended warranty . In 2010 I bought a $1,200 HD TV from Costco with my Platinum Card from American Express, which offers the same protection. In 2013, the TV made a popping sound and died on my wall. I submitted the required documentation to American Express and got a check for the original purchase price of the three-year-old TV, including sales tax. Ever since, I’ve been sold on the service and will only make important purchases with an Amex Platinum card.
Redeeming Amex points to cover revenue flights while still earning elite and redeemable miles is fantastic. In addition, there’s so much value with the lounge access, hotel status, car rental status (which really saves significant time), and important purchase protection.
Additional reporting by Ethan Steinberg.
Editorial Disclaimer: Opinions expressed here are the author's alone, not those of any bank, credit card issuer, airlines or hotel chain, and have not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities.
Brian Kelly is the founder and CEO of The Points Guy (TPG), the preeminent voice in the industry of points, miles and everything travel-related. Kelly launched TPG in
Brian Kelly is the founder and CEO of The Points Guy (TPG), the preeminent voice in the industry of points, miles and everything travel-related. Kelly launched TPG in 2010 during his time as a Wall Street road warrior, where he developed his keen sense for maximizing travel experiences while minimizing spending. Since then, Kelly has grown the company into a powerhouse travel and lifestyle media platform, and through a team of distinguished editors and freelancers that span the globe, has expanded its editorial content to include flight and hotel reviews, curated travel guides, immersive video reviews, as well as global event activations. Voted Forbes #1 travel influencer in 2017, Kelly is the industry leader, shaping the way consumers and brands approach travel. Today, TPG has a dedicated fan base, receiving 10 million unique monthly visitors and more than 3 million followers on social media.
