Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an interaction, or dismiss a notification.
This article is brought to you by the Personal Finance Insider team. It has not been reviewed, approved, or otherwise endorsed by any of the issuers listed. Some of the offers you see on this page are from our partners, like Citi and American Express, but our coverage is always independent.
A consultant who travels every week for his job says he uses rewards cards to earn points so he can travel in his free time.
He uses a combination of the The Platinum Card® from American Express and the Chase Sapphire Reserve® to maximize his rewards and get luxury benefits.
While the Sapphire Reserve is great for earning points, he likes the Amex Platinum for its many benefits, including hotel status and airport lounge access.
Are you a consultant who wants to share your credit-card strategy? Email yourmoney@businessinsider.com.
Traveling for work doesn't make this consultant (who preferred not to share his name or company to protect his privacy) any less excited about doing it for fun in his free time. He uses two premium cards to book work travel when he can, and for his everyday spending to maximize his rewards.
"I use the cards to make my business travel less of a hassle and earn rewards so that I can enjoy aspirational travel in my personal time with my wife and my family," he tells Business Insider.
This consultant, who works for a top consulting firm, travels weekly for work. His favorite cards are two high-end travel rewards cards: the Chase Sapphire Reserve® and the The Platinum Card® from American Express . While both have high annual fees, he finds that the combination of fast rewards and luxury perks make them well worth the cost, using them to earn free travel, achieve status with hotel chains, and more.
We're focused here on the rewards and perks that come with each card. These cards won't be worth it if you're paying interest or late fees. When using a credit card, it's important to pay your balance in full each month, make payments on time, and only spend what you can afford to pay.
This consultant loves his Chase Sapphire Reserve® because he finds it easy to rack up rewards. "I really enjoy that card because it offers more points on the categories that I use the most: travel and restaurants or dining," he says. "On the weekends, I'm usually going out with my wife to dinners and to bars. A large portion of our expenditures on the weekend are for restaurants and dining."
The Chase Sapphire Reserve® might come with a hefty fee — the annual fee recently increased to $550 — but it racks up 3 points per dollar on travel spending and dining. Travel spending includes both vacationing and everyday expenses, ranging from airfare and cruises to subway fare, and dining points can be earned on anything from DoorDash orders to high-end restaurants. The card also offers up to $300 in annual statement credits that are automatically applied whenever you use the card to make eligible travel purchases.
