I recently explained why Sylvania Platinum could be a terrific stock to buy for March. With coronavirus fears spreading and Brexit-related tension also returning, having exposure to safe-haven assets is a great way of protecting your wealth.
Buying up producers of precious metals is a great way to do this, though I understand why some investors might be minded to stay away from Sylvania, given its recent production problems.
These investors might be happy to wave goodbye to the mining giant’s bulky dividend (close to 8%) and just benefit from rising platinum group metal (PGM) prices instead. And a great way to do this is by buying exchange-traded products (ETFs) that are backed by the physical metal.
Buying Sprott Physical Platinum & Palladium Trust, or the Xtrackers Physical Rhodium ETC are a couple of ways to do this.
It’d be a mistake to think PGM-backed investment vehicles are the only great ways to protect yourself in tough times like these. These metals have risen between 100% and 500% in value during the past year, not only on a range of geopolitical and macroeconomic concerns (Brexit, US-Chinese trade wars, flagging eurozone economies). They’ve also boomed because of soaring demand from industrial clients.
More specifically, demand from the automotive sector is ballooning owing to their critical role in catalyst converters. PGMs are built in to reduce emissions and, thanks to growing green legislation (laws that demand more and more loadings of the metals in such components), consumption from the carmakers is growing.
Those aforementioned ETFs (like Sylvania) aren’t just great buys on strong investment and industrial demand though. Supply shortages in the production heartland of South Africa — issues that have certainly bashed Sylvania Platinum of late — threaten to keep PGM prices well supported too. According to Johnson Matthey, platinum supply could fall below 6m ounces for the first time since 2014 this year. It also expects deficits in the rhodium and palladium markets to worsen.
I’d certainly rather buy shares in Sylvania Platinum, or indeed one of those ETFs, than buy into Ferrexpo (LSE: FXPO) .
Like the aforementioned PGM producer, this FTSE 250 commodities giant carries a forward yield of around 8%. In fact its 8.3% yield beats Sylvania’s by around half a percentage point. I wouldn’t buy it today though, on long-running fears concerning growing supply in the iron ore market.
The Ukranian miner’s share price has tracked values of the steelmaking ingredient lower in recent sessions. Iron ore has dropped on concerns over how the coronavirus outbreak will smack demand in the immediate term. But I’m also worried about the swathes of new supply scheduled to hit the market in the new decade. A number of new mega-mines are set to start up, and project expansions due for completion all over the globe.
Reflecting these pressures, City analysts expect Ferrexpo’s earnings to drop 44% in 2020 and 25% next year. So forget about that big yield and the company’s low forward P/E multiple of 4.2 times, I think this is a share to avoid at all costs.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Royston Wild has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
