Jordan Roy-Byrne Friday May 08, 2020 12:35
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
In February, we wrote about the impending  breakout in gold mining stocks and how it might compare to the history of  breakouts in gold mining stocks.
GDX closed last week at a fresh 7-year high  and in both daily, and weekly terms closed +9% above the previous high.
It now has a measured upside target of $50.
While the breakout is significant for many  reasons, we note that it is likely to hold because GDX also broke out relative  to the S&P 500. Although precious metals bottomed in January 2016, they have  not outperformed the stock market consistently until recently.
The GDX to S&P 500 ratio broke out to a  3.5 year high. This signals that capital is now moving away from the stock  market and into gold stocks.
Only time will reveal the significance of this  breakout. But we have a few ideas.
First, we can take a look at the history of  gold mining stock breakouts.
Regardless of the historical index we use  (Barron's Gold Mining is below), each one generates the same conclusions. There  is one massive and epic breakout (the early 1960s), one that had a chance but  ultimately failed to duplicate that historic breakout due to post-crisis  disinflation (2005) and several smaller breakouts that were followed by strong  performance (1972, early 2000s).
In February, I noted the 2005 breakout in the  gold stocks (GDM, the GDX parent index) was most similar to the impending  breakout in GDX. However, I neglected to mention that before that breakout, GDM  had already gained 330%, and the HUI had already gained 600%!
That breakout was past the midpoint of a move  that began almost five years earlier. Yet, after the breakout, GDM and the HUI  nearly doubled over the next two years, while GDXJ's parent index gained  another 150%.
Furthermore, let’s not forget where we are now  from a bird’s eye view.
The gold stocks have just broken out relative  to the stock market, but look at how cheap they are and how much further they  could run in relative terms.
The history of breakouts in gold mining stocks  argues that the current breakout should, at a minimum, lead to at least a few  years of strong returns. Factor in the current fundamentals and historically  low valuations, and there is potential for a repeat of the strong performance  seen in the 1930s, 1960s, and 2000s.
At present, GDX, which closed at $33.79, could  snapback and quickly retest $30-$31. As of Monday, 93% of HUI and GDXJ stocks  closed above their 20-day moving average, and 91% closed above their 50-day  moving average.
Overbought is good, but too overbought for too  long can lead to a short-term pause or correction. It is also possible that GDX  could reach the next resistance at $36-$37 before correcting down to $32 (as a  retest).
We continue to focus on identifying and  accumulating the juniors (on weakness) with significant upside potential over  the next 12 months. To learn the stocks we own and intend to buy that have 3x  to 5x potential, consider learning more about our premium service.
