Last year, American Express unveiled a new design for its Platinum Charge Card and Platinum Business Charge Cards, offered to Australians for the very first time in metal!
Previously, Australians could only wield the steel via the Centurion Card aka the ‘Black Card’ (which is invitation only) but listened to the call of their customers after introducing a steel option to existing American Express cardholders.
The American Express Platinum charge card returns in 2020 with a welcome bonus of 80,000 Membership Rewards Points when you apply, are approved, and meet the minimum spend criteria of $3,000 in the first 3 months. Available to new Card Members only.
It’s also worth noting that this particular card, which earns Ascent Premium points, allows holders to transfer points to ten excellent frequent flyer programs, including Qantas Frequent Flyer, KrisFlyer, Asia Miles, Etihad Guest and more on a 2:1 basis.
The American Express Platinum card arrives with a host of incredible perks and a $1450 annual fee for personal cardholders. While this fee might put hairs on the back of your neck, the Amex Platinum metal card is the king of earn. You’ll earn 2.25 points per $1 spent on all purchases, and 1 point per $1 spent with government bodies – a no brainer at tax time.
Sprinkle on travel insurance and unlimited access for primary and additional cardholders to The American Express Global Lounge Collection, which includes the Amex Lounges at Sydney and Melbourne as well as the Centurion Lounges at hubs HKG, SFO and the soon-to-open LAX, you’ve already got a tasty offering.
Of course, there’s a host of additional perks to help you justify the yearly spend on the American Express Platinum metal card including:
Complimentary access to over 1,200 lounges around the world – including American Express lounges worldwide, Virgin Australia domestic, Priority Pass, and Plaza Premium lounges.
American Express claims the benefits of the Card including the Travel Credit, Accor Plus Membership and AFR subscription cover the $1450 fee, however, we’d happily do without the AFR subscription for a reduction.
At the end of the day, this card is about maximising and utilising points and the opportunity to earn 80,000 Membership Rewards points when you apply, are approved, and meet the minimum spend criteria. Available to new Card Members only.
Here is a list of great uses for Amex Membership Rewards points to get the creative juices following:
East Coast Australia to Perth in Business Class Return on the new Qantas A330 for 72,000 Qantas points.
East Coast Australia to Hong Kong in Premium Economy Return with Qantas for 90,000 points.
East Coast to Singapore in Singapore airline’s New A380 Business for 58,000 or First Class for 80,000 Kris Flyer miles.
*To be eligible for this card you must:
For more information on the American Express Platinum Metal card, and to receive 80,000 Membership Rewards Bonus Points head to American Express . Available to new Card Members only.
If you don’t quite fit the $100,000 salary requirement for the Amex Platinum Card check out the following cards with great sign-on bonuses.
American Express Qantas Ultimate Card – 55k Sign On Bonus when you apply online, are approved and spend $3,000 on your new Card within the first 3 months. (T&Cs apply)
Check out our sneak peek of the new American Express lounge at Sydney Airport below.
Boss Hunting earns a referral bonus from American Express for anyone that’s approved through the links in this article. This commission helps keep Boss Hunting running, and we thank you for your support.
