This post contains references to products from one or more of our advertisers. We may receive compensation when you click on links to those products. For an explanation of our Advertising Policy, visit this page .
American Express is targeting cardholders of the Platinum Card from American Express with an enticing offer. Platinum cardholders will receive a statement credit of up to £100 when you spend with M&S, Waitrose, Deliveroo, Harvey Nichols or online with the Apple Store.
In other words, you’ll get 100% of your purchases back in the form of a statement credit — up to £100.
All you need to do is save the Offer to your card and spend at the eligible retailers. All purchases will be refunded in the form of a statement credit up to £100 on cumulative purchases. The offer expires 27 August 2020 and can be used as many times as you like up to a limit of £100.
According to the terms and conditions, the offer is valid online and instore at M&S, Waitrose, Deliveroo and Harvey Nichols but online on the Apple Store U.K. The purchase must be in GBP and be paid for on the same American Express card that the offer is registered to. Once the purchase has been made, the statement credit should appear on your account within five days, but may take up to 90 days from 27 August 2020.
There following list of exclusions are not included in the offer: At department stores, all concessions and outlets; At M&S, Bank and Energy services, bureau de change, opticians and petrol stations; At Waitrose, Cellar, Florist, Garden, Pet, Cookery school, foreign currency and the gift section; At Harvey Nichols, International delivery, gift cards, vouchers and in-restaurant dining; And at Apple, iTunes, Apps and Apple Music, Apple Search Ads, Apple Finance and Gift Cards.
This offer is only available for cardholders of the Platinum Card from American Express . Additionally, it appears as though supplementary cardholders can enrol their card. So, primary cardholders of the Amex Platinum can take advantage of up to £600 back when taking into account the savings from potential supplementary cardholders — even if they hold the Gold or Green Amex cards.
To add the offer to your card, log in to your Amex account and scroll to the bottom of the page and click ‘View All’ in the Amex offers section. Once you’ve found the offer you want, click ‘Save to Card’ and be sure to use that card on your eligible purchases.
This £100 offer is the latest measure from American Express amid the coronavirus crisis. Previously, the issuer said that new cardholders would get six months to meet their minimum spending requirement, rather than the typical three months . Additionally, American Express targeted cardholders of the Business Platinum Card with a £250 statement credit for small business owners .
This is the first offer for personal Platinum cardholders. TPG U.K. Director of Content Nicky Kelvin said he was justifying keeping the card , which comes with a £575 annual fee, even though he’s not travelling. This £100 statement credit offer is a good way for cardholders to offset the cost of the annual fee even though they may not be using all of its benefits during the coronavirus crisis.
Featured photo by Josh Gribben/The Points Guy.
I would like to subscribe to The Points Guy UK newsletter and special email promotions. The Points Guy UK will not sell your email.												 See PRIVACY POLICY.
Welcome to The Points Guy!
Daniel Ross Daniel is a Content Producer at TPG UK. He has an MSc in Air Transport Management and speaks French, Spanish and Portuguese.
