Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an interaction, or dismiss a notification.
This article is brought to you by the Personal Finance Insider team. It has not been reviewed, approved, or otherwise endorsed by any of the issuers listed. Some of the offers you see on this page are from our partners, like Citi and American Express, but our coverage is always independent.
If you want to earn travel rewards, American Express cards that earn Membership Rewards points are a great option. You can transfer these points to over two dozen partners to book hotel stays and flights, or book travel directly through Amex.
The Platinum card is best for frequent travelers who want luxury benefits like airport lounge access and statement credits. The Amex Gold card is great if you love to eat out, since it offers bonus rewards and statement credits for dining.
If you're new to travel rewards, the Amex Green card could be the best option because it has the lowest annual fee of the three and offers bonus points on travel and restaurants.
When you're looking for a new credit card, it can be useful to compare similar cards. I know for me, it helps to have the information for similar cards all in one place so it's easy to see the similarities and differences.
If you're researching credit cards that earn travel rewards , you'll come across the lineup of American Express cards that earn the issuer's Membership Rewards points . Amex points, along with Chase points, are some of the most valuable rewards for booking travel, and today we'll look at three cards at three cards at various price points that earn this loyalty currency.
We'll compare the Platinum Card , Amex Gold Card , and Amex Green Card , highlighting their similarities as well as their differences to help you decide which might be right for you.
Keep in mind that we're focusing on the rewards and perks that make these credit cards great options, not things like interest rates and late fees, which will far outweigh the value of any points or miles. It's important to practice financial discipline when using credit cards by paying your balances in full each month, making payments on time, and only spending what you can afford to pay back.
American Express Membership Rewards points can be redeemed for statement credits, used to book travel through the Amex travel portal, or transferred to any of 19 airline or 3 hotel transfer partners.
The current welcome offers on these three American Express cards are:
The bonus points earned with the welcome offers are definitely an important factor, but they're only part of the equation.
Let's start with American Express' flagship card, the Platinum Card . This is an extremely premium card, and comes with a $550 annual fee. That fee is quite hefty, but there's no denying that this card provides plenty of benefits for frequent travelers.
Up to a $200 annual airline fee credit — you do have to choose your airline each year , and your airline credit is only good for that airline. This credit is based on the calendar year, so during your first cardmember year you'll be able to get this $200 credit twice, which helps to offset the $550 annual fee.
