In the interest of full disclosure, OMAAT earns a referral bonus for anyone that’s approved through some of the below links. The information and associated card details on this page for the The Platinum Card from American Express card has been collected independently by OMAAT and has not been reviewed or provided by the card issuer. These are the best publicly available offers (terms apply) that we have found for each product or service. Opinions expressed here are the author's alone, not those of the bank, credit card issuer, airline, hotel chain, or product manufacturer/service provider, and have not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities. Please check out our advertiser policy for further details about our partners, and thanks for your support!
Update: This is a reminder that it’s a new calendar month, so if you’re like me and have to manually make payments to take advantage of these Amex cell phone & streaming benefits across multiple cards, you can now do so for July. Also check out this handy Amex credit & benefit tracker .
In light of the current pandemic we’re seeing card issuers add some more perks on select cards, in particular on cards with a travel focus. It goes without saying that consumer behavior has changed a lot, and this also impacts our credit card spending patterns .
I know a lot of people have the Amex Platinum, so I wanted to look at the best ways to maximize these new perks.
The Amex Platinum Card is offering a $20 monthly credit for cell phone bills:
This is a limited time benefit, valid May through December 2020
This is potentially worth up to $160, though you only get one $20 credit every calendar month
What cell phone purchases qualify?
Eligible purchases include monthly wireless telephone services charges made directly from a wireless telephone service provider in the United States. This would include paying your bill with AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile, and Verizon, among others. While Google Fi didn’t seem to initially qualify, reports suggest that it does now.
This does not include the following types of purchases:
Purchases from electronics stores (e.g. Best Buy, Staples) and superstores (e.g. Wal-Mart, and Target)
Bundled services offered by wireless companies for TV, internet and VoIP
If you’re anything like me, this benefit is pretty easy to maximize. Personally T-Mobile is my cell phone provider, so my strategy is as follows:
Make a $20 monthly payment with my Amex Platinum, a $20 monthly payment with Ford’s Amex Platinum, and a $10 monthly credit with my Amex Green (since that card has a temporary $10 monthly credit)
Continue to pay the remaining balance with a card earning bonus points on cell phone spending, like the Chase Ink Preferred or Chase Ink Cash
I was easily able to go into the T-Mobile app and make a pre-payment, even though my balance at the moment is zero. Note that they’ll only let you make one payment of the same amount each day, so I made a payment of $20 on one Amex Platinum, and a payment of $19.99 on another, and that seemed to work.
Between the three cards, my T-Mobile balance is currently negative $49.99. I’ll just have to remember to do that once every month. Best I can tell this won’t mess with the autopay process I otherwise have set up (though if someone has had a different experience, please let me know).
The Amex Platinum Card is offering a $20 monthly credit for streaming subscriptions:
This is a limited time benefit, valid May through December 2020
This is potentially worth up to $160, though you only get one $20 credit every calendar month
According to Amex, the following US streaming subscriptions as being eligible for this benefit:
For me the cell phone benefit is easy to maximize, while this one isn’t quite as easy. We don’t have cable, so on the surface you’d think this would be ideal for us, since we do watch a fair bit of TV . However:
We pay for season passes of many shows through iTunes, and iTunes isn’t a streaming subscription service, and therefore isn’t included
We use Netflix, but I have a discounted membership through T-Mobile for $5 per month, and that’s billed to my T-Mobile account; so I guess I could unsubscribe and get a more expensive plan directly, but I feel like the process of changing might be a hassle?
We do have a Hulu Plus membership, which costs about $14 per month, so I switched that one of our Amex Plats
We’re using about two thirds of the credit of one card, but nothing for the other one.
The up to $40 in monthly credits being offered by the Amex Platinum Card are fantastic, and frankly more than I was expecting from Amex. At an absolute minimum I’m getting ~$34 of value per month from this on my card ($20 for cell phone and $14 for Hulu), or ~$272 over the eight months. I’m sure there are ways to maximize this better, though.
How are you using your Amex Platinum credits? If you have any creative ideas for using these credits, or any data points on these credits working, please share them in the comments below!
