Without context, the words read like a list of excuses. Add context, and a remarkable tale is revealed. I refer to Sylvania Platinum (LSE: SLP) , its results from a few months back, and comments by its chair, Stuart Murray, at that time.
Murray likened the company’s performance in the 12-months to the end of June last year to the “curate’s egg – good in some parts, not ideal in others.” He lamented water shortages causing downtime at some operations and even described the first six months of that period as having “rocky” production challenges. After reading those words in isolation, a shareholder who didn’t know better might have braced themselves for bad news. In fact the results for last year, published last September, were very impressive.
The results for the company’s second quarter are imminent. I think they are worth watching very carefully because I reckon that Sylvania’s shares are looking extremely tempting. More good news in the forthcoming results and the shares will be hard to resist.
Last year, net profits at Sylvania Platinum increased 66%, The South African company finished the year with $21.8m in the bank with no debt, its sixth consecutive year of record production, and a nice dividend payment for the year of 0.78 pence a share , which meant a yield of around 1.6%.
If the company can grow like that while facing so many challenges, as Murray described, I’m wondering how it might perform under more positive circumstances — when things are good in most parts.
As for the last set of quarterly results, issued three months ago, they showed a 54% increase in revenue and a 106% increase in earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and amortisation (EBITDA).
No wonder shares have been rising so rapidly of late — having doubled over the last year and increased six-fold over the last five years. (Although shares are still below their IPO price from 2011).
All this is very impressive, yet Sylvania’s valuation of £119m compared to group net profit in its last full year of $18.2m, or around £14m, seems remarkably modest for a growing, dividend-paying company with no debts.
Is it too good to be true?
I don’t think it is too good to be true. Instead, I would say that Sylvania Platinum is truly good.
What is especially compelling, about Sylvania Platinum is the minerals it specialises in — platinum, palladium, and rhodium. Both palladium and rhodium have applications in catalytic converters, cutting carbon emissions. In other words, Sylvania specialises in producing minerals that play a key role in the fight against climate change.
I expect a lot of market interest in Sylvania Platinum shares when the next set of quarterly results are out, but whatever the results say, I think that from an investor’s point of view, this company’s underlying story is exciting and it has lots of growth potential, both in dividends and share price.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Michael Baxter has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
