Are gold stocks too overbought?
Jordan Roy-Byrne Thursday May 14, 2020 13:59
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Gold Stocks could be at a tricky juncture.
They have already made significant gains, yet  history, coupled with the current bullish conditions, suggests more gains  coming and probably significant gains.
One doesn't want to risk having to chase  strength, but one doesn't want to risk buying ahead of an imminent sector  correction.
Let's take a look at several charts that can  help us figure out where we are.
First, let's take a general look at where we  are compared to past rebounds from significant market lows.
We plot weekly data and the rebounds from  2000, 2008, 2016, and 2020 in the chart below.
As you can see, history shows that the current  HUI is a bit above the trend but has plenty of upside potential over the next  four to five months. Based on the current time frame, history suggests a real  correction to begin in late June.
Elsewhere, oscillators based on the moving  averages would argue the same. The market is a bit extended but has yet to hit  an overbought level based on its distance from its 100-day and 200-day  exponential moving averages.
The bullish percent index is near an extreme  at 92%, but the percentage of HUI stocks above the 200-day moving average (72%)  is not. The percentage of HUI stocks above the 20-day and 50-day moving  averages (100%) does reflect a short-term overbought extreme.
A correction is certainly possible, and  corrections during these types of sharp rebounds can be swift. The short-term  breadth indicators could argue so.
But gold mining stocks just broke out to a new  7-year high and selling pressure remains muted and even as Gold is $100/oz off  its high.
I hope that GDX, which closed Wednesday at  $33.70, does a quick retest of support at $30-$31, which would allow for a  stronger leg higher. Should GDX trend higher from here, then keep an eye on the  confluence of resistance around $37.
In the meantime, take advantage of the  weakness in quality individual stocks. Two of my top junior holdings have  corrected 20% after ripping higher.
We continue to focus on identifying and  accumulating these types of companies that have significant upside potential  over the next 12 months. To learn the stocks we own and intend to buy that have  3x to 5x potential, consider learning more about our premium service.
