Magellan (ASX:MFG) , Platinum Asset Management Limited (ASX: PTM)
Platinum Asset Management Ltd (ASX: PTM) has released its July Funds Under Management (FUM) update, with the share price closing the day up 1.14%.
Platinum Asset Management is an Australian based fund founded in 1994 that is focused on global equities. Platinum was co-founded by one of Australia’s most respected investors, Kerr Neilson who is still the company’s largest shareholder (owning about 40%).
This compares very favourably with the MSCI AC World Net Index (in Australian Dollars) which generated a return of 7.1% over the same period. However, in recent years it has dramatically under-performed this benchmark. Over the last five years, the Platinum International Fund achieved a return of 9.7% per annum compared to the benchmark return of 13.1%.
Platinum advised the key reason for their recent underperformance within their “Market Update – 19 June 2019” on their website.
Andrew Clifford, Platinum’s current CEO / Chief Investment Officer and Co-founder of Platinum, commented that in his, “30+ years of managing money he can’t remember a time when you could buy so many large cap companies, with solid industry positions on single digit P/Es”.
Although initially I felt sceptical about this statement, I really cannot question the opinion of someone who has such a stellar long-term investing track record!
In July 2019, Platinum experienced net outflows of approximately $108 million. At the end of July, Platinum had FUM of $25.15 Billion.
Platinum’s FUM is dwarfed by rival fund manager Magellan Financial Group Ltd (ASX: MFG) which had $89.73 Billion FUM at the end of July.
Overall, I think the Platinum Asset Management share price is starting to look appetising. At the current share price, Platinum trades on trailing fully-franked dividend yield of 6.64%!
FUM has been in decline on the back of under-performance. However, I believe there will be a time in the next 5-10 years when Platinum’s investment approach again delivers sustained out-performance and FUM will start to lift off.
Online Value Investing Course - FREE!
How do you value an investment? Do you really understand what you’re investing in and why?
We’ve just updated our FREE business valuation course and made it available to investors like you. Complete with models, templates and tools, simply click here to access the course.
Disclaimer and warning: This information is published by The Rask Group Pty Ltd and contains general financial advice and information. That means, the information/advice does not take into account your objectives, financial situation or needs. Because of that, you should consider if the advice is appropriate to you and your needs, before acting on the information. In addition, you should obtain and read the product disclosure statement (PDS) before making a decision to acquire a financial product. If you don’t know what your needs are, you should consult a trusted and licensed financial adviser who can provide you with personal financial product advice. Please read our Terms of Service and Financial Services Guide before using this website.
At the time of publishing, William does not have a financial interest in any of the companies mentioned.
I invest because I enjoy the process of researching companies and their prospects, and the potential of generating healthy financial returns. 
I hold a Master's of Applied Finance (Investment Management), Bachelor of Accounting, Advanced Diploma of Financial Planning and Diploma of Technical Analysis.
