Though the mining of precious metals is vital for producing jewellery, the mining sector is not an especially glamorous one. Us investors shouldn’t care too much though – as long as we’re making money. When searching for bargain stocks, investors often overlook FTSE mining stocks. Here’s why you might want to take consider buying mining stocks:
You may already have a diversified portfolio of well-picked stocks, but if there’s market uncertainty, those shares might lose a lot of value. Gold has – for a long time – been the top pick for inflation hedgers. But I think the miners themselves are likely to benefit even more.
If you’re looking for a source of income, dividend-paying shares can provide an alternative to the pitiful returns of government bonds. Always research the company first though, to be sure the dividend stream won’t dry up.
The Bank of England, alongside many other central banks , is printing massive quantities of money to keep the economy going. Where is all this new money going? Assets. And when there’s more cash but the same amount of metal, that metal is going to be worth more . Good news for the FTSE mining stocks – and it could be good news for you too.
Which FTSE mining stocks are looking good?
Centamin is trading at 149p. Its price has fallen since the US released rosy-looking jobs data – suggesting more people were back in work than had been let go. But that doesn’t change the fundamentals. In fact, at this lower price, the dividend yield is even more appetising. Even better, Centamin announced last month that operations in the Egyptian Sukari mine was unaffected by coronavirus. We’ve already seen the shares go past 190p, so there’s great upside potential.
Other great FTSE mining stocks include Anglo American, which produces platinum and other metals and minerals needed for industry. It is currently selling around 8.5 times earnings, with a current ratio just under 2. EBITDA has increased consistently since 2015. The company has trimmed the total number of mines it operates and cut costs – yet still managed to increase revenues. These improvements in cost control and productivity, along with better prices have raised profits and cash generation. Debt’s down too, from $12.9bn in 2015 to $4.4bn today. The stock has risen by 36% in the last month though, so it’s not as good a bargain as it was!
Copper company KAZ Minerals focuses on large scale, low cost, open pit mining in Kazakhstan, Russia, and Kyrgyzstan. Like Anglo American, KAZ Minerals restructured – and has performed impressively since 2014. Unlike other mining companies, Kaz Minerals focuses primarily on copper mining. Diversification within this mining sector would be beneficial to your portfolio, and this stock could help with its strong focus on a vital industrial metal like copper. Like Centamin, the group’s operations have not been largely affected by Covid-19. Management are leaving production targets for the full year unchanged.
I think all these FTSE mining stocks have potential to keep going up if the economic recovery holds. So have a look, do some digging, and mine yourself some nice profits.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Toby Aston has no positions in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
