Motley Fool Australia » Share Market News » ASX 200 down 2.2%: Westpac tumbles, TPG reveals special dividend plans
ASX 200 down 2.2%: Westpac tumbles, TPG reveals special dividend plans
James Mickleboro | June 12, 2020 12:05pm | More on: CIP EHE JIN MP1 MSB MYX OBL PLS PNI PRU PTM TPM WBC ASX 200
At lunch on Friday the S&P/ASX 200 Index (ASX: XJO) is on course to follow the lead of U.S. markets and record a sizeable decline. The benchmark index is currently down 2.2% to 5,830.5 points.
Here’s what has been happening on the market today:
The Westpac Banking Corp (ASX: WBC) share price is trading notably lower again on Friday. As well as being caught up in the market selloff, an AUSTRAC update could also be weighing on its shares. This morning Westpac revealed that AUSTRAC is further investigating matters that were brought to its attention by the bank recently. Westpac commented that the agency has advised that it may amend its statement of claim to include allegations arising from these investigations.
This morning S&P Dow Jones Indices announced the June 2020 quarterly rebalance of the S&P/ASX Indices. The benchmark index will welcome Centuria Industrial REIT (ASX: CIP) , Megaport Ltd (ASX: MP1) , Mesoblast limited (ASX: MSB) , Omni Bridgeway Ltd (ASX: OBL) , and Perseus Mining Limited (ASX: PRU) to the illustrious index. Heading to the exits are Estia Health Ltd (ASX: EHE) , Hub24 Ltd (ASX: HUB) , Jumbo Interactive Ltd (ASX: JIN) , Mayne Pharma Group Ltd (ASX: MYX) , Pilbara Minerals Ltd (ASX: PLS) , and Pinnacle Investment Management Group Ltd (ASX: PNI) .
The TPG Telecom Ltd (ASX: TPM) share price is pushing higher on Friday after providing an update on its special dividend plans . If its merger with Vodafone Australia completes successfully, TPG Telecom plans to pay a fully franked special dividend in the range of 49 cents per share to 52 cents per share.
Best and worst ASX 200 performers.
The best performer on the ASX 200 has been the TPG Telecom share price with a 2% gain. This follows its special dividend update. The worst performer has been the Platinum Asset Management Ltd (ASX: PTM) share price with a massive 12% decline. Investors may be concerned that Platinum’s fund outflows will accelerate again because of the market volatility.
We hear it over and over from investors, "I wish I had bought Altium or Afterpay when they were first recommended by The Motley Fool. I'd be sitting on a gold mine!" And it's true.
And while Altium and Afterpay have had a good run, we think these 5 other stocks are screaming buys . And you can buy them now for less than $5 a share!
James Mickleboro owns shares of Westpac Banking. The Motley Fool Australia's parent company Motley Fool Holdings Inc. owns shares of and recommends Jumbo Interactive Limited. The Motley Fool Australia's parent company Motley Fool Holdings Inc. owns shares of MEGAPORT FPO. The Motley Fool Australia has recommended Jumbo Interactive Limited and MEGAPORT FPO. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy . This article contains general investment advice only (under AFSL 400691). Authorised by Scott Phillips.
