June 30, 2020 - TheNewswire - Saskatoon, Saskatchewan - Mr. Gary Billingsley, President, reports that Aurex Energy Corp. ("Aurex" or the "Company")(TSXV:AURX) is providing this biweekly default status report in accordance with National Policy 12-203 Management Cease Trade Orders ("NP 12-203" or the "Policy").
On June 16, 2020 the Company announced that it had made application to the Alberta Securities Commission ("ASC"), under NP 12-203, requesting that a temporary management cease trade order ("MCTO") be granted in respect of the anticipated late filing of the Company's annual audited financial statements, management's discussion and analysis, and officers' certificates for the year ended December 31, 2019 (the "Annual Filings"). The MCTO was granted June 17, 2020.
On April 28, 2020 and June 1, 2020, the Company announced (along with the June 16, 2020 announcement, the "Default Announcements") it was relying on temporary regulatory filing relief pursuant to Alberta Securities Commission Blanket Order 51-517 (the "Blanket Order"), due to delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and in particular the cross-border complications affecting the Company's US subsidiaries in completing the Annual Filings and in filing its interim financial statements, management's discussion and analysis, and officers' certificates for the period ended March 31, 2020 (the "Q1 Filings"). Since restrictions and cross-border issues continue due to COVID-19, the Company required an extension to the June 15, 2019 deadline and applied for, and was granted, the MCTO. Subject to current conditions remaining the same, the Company anticipates, and it and its auditors continue to use their best efforts in, completing the Annual Filings on or about July 15, 2020, and the Q1 Filings on or about July 31, 2020.
Under the Blanket Order, and while the MCTO remains in effect, Aurex's directors, officers and insiders cannot trade the Company's securities until the Annual Filings have been made.
The Company confirms that it intends to continue to satisfy the provisions of the alternative information guidelines under NP 12-203 and reports that: the Company does not have any information at this time regarding any anticipated specified default subsequent to the default in completing the Annual Filings; the Company is not subject to any insolvency proceedings, and since the Default Announcements, there is no other material information concerning the affairs of the Company that has not been generally disclosed.
The Company intends to issue bi-weekly status reports as long as it remain in default in respect of the Annual Filings.
Aurex Energy Corp. is a Canadian-based resource exploration and development company with its head office in Saskatoon, SK. Aurex is focused on the acquisition and development of a diversified portfolio of resource properties critical to current and future energy production. This includes natural gas for LNG, base metals, platinum group elements, strategic metals including cobalt, and gold.
