Mayfair Platinum took the newspapers, airwaves, conference halls and the internet to promote his term deposit alternative. ASIC says it went too far.
James Mawhinney talks up the Dunk Island tourism project in a Mayfair promotion.
As Mayfair 101 boss James Mawhinney paced the stage, he asked people in the audience to raise their hand if they were earning less than 3 per cent interest with their bank.
“Pretty much everyone,” he grinned, looking into the audience at Sydney’s Wesley Conference Centre last November. “If you’re earning more, I would like to know.”
Melbourne-based Mawhinney was presenting at the Switzer Income conference, hosted by the financial group of industry veteran Peter Switzer.
That conference was just one of the many marketing avenues that Mayfair 101 used for its brand IPO Wealth, and later Mayfair Platinum, to entice investors seeking a safe place to earn a modest income on their savings.
Mayfair Platinum used full-page advertisements in newspapers, including in The Australian Financial Review, took to the radio airwaves blasting adverts in between classic hits, ran seminars throughout the country and used sophisticated digital marketing strategies to attract funds.
To add credibility, Mawhinney enrolled respected figures in finance, including internationally acclaimed economists.
To add glamour, when Mayfair decided to acquire Queensland’s Dunk Island, it rolled out Instagram influencers flown in on helicopters and YouTube videos to tout a $180 million tourism play.
And to demonstrate a five-star service, it even promoted reviews on consumer ranking website TrustPilot, where investors gushed about the “comfort of knowing that one's investment is good”.
It was an expensive all-encompassing campaign usually deployed by mass market brands.
But Mayfair Platinum’s market was limited. Its investment products, Mayfair maintained, were only available to cashed-up wholesale, sophisticated investors.
An investor can qualify as wholesale if they earn more than $250,000 of gross income annually, have more than $2.5 million in net assets or can write an investment cheque of more than $500,000. There are no other tests beyond that.
But how sophisticated were these investors really? The corporate watchdog has its doubts and this month filed a lawsuit to stop the marketing blitz.
“The Mayfair products were marketed to wholesale but inexperienced investors, at least a substantial subset of whom were unlikely to understand the significant risk associated with the Mayfair products,” Australian Securities and Investments Commission lawyers said in a filing.
ASIC has probed for two years from the sidelines as investment firms run by James Mawhinney have taken to the media, the conference circuit and the internet to raise $180 million of funds from ordinary Australians.
IPO Wealth was the first incarnation, and was structured as a managed fund. That meant an external trustee, Vasco Financial, was charged with the responsibility of protecting investors and ensuring disclosures were adequate.
But in mid-2019, Mawhinney created a new brand: the illustrious sounding Mayfair Platinum. The company no longer promoted a managed fund but debentures, or fixed income notes, effectively a loan agreement between two consenting wholesale parties.
That dispensed for the need for an external trustee to take responsibility for the promoter’s actions.
Investors in Mayfair products earn a modest interest rate and the proceeds were to be used in speculative ventures including an Indian accounting firm, the Dunk Island rejuvenation and a superyacht project.
But experts have repeatedly cautioned that risks lay behind the glitz.
These funds may have been marketed as an alternative to term deposits, but they did not benefit from the government guarantee nor from a regulatory regime ensuring depositor funds are sacrosanct. And the investments themselves are not backed by loans such as mortgages, but by speculative venture assets.
The returns, experts argued, should be much higher relative to the risk, something that sophisticated investors should have no doubt worked out.
Still, as the marketing kicked in, more and more people took notice and some contacted their financial advisers.
Mayfair’s marketing could be personal at times.
One industry account has a wealthy potential customer, who had initially registered an expression of interest, being told an executive could fly interstate to meet and discuss investing.
The approach then allegedly deepened with a later offer to fly that potential investor to Melbourne for an information session and round of golf – although none of the offers nor the investment was ultimately taken up.
“This is, by far, a more aggressive approach than other property-based fund managers specialising in sophisticated investors,” Darren Howlin, managing director of financial services consultancy Research IP, tells the Financial Review.
Sulieman Ravell, managing director of advisers Wealth Focus, did a quick analysis of the operation when a client asked in November to have a look at the products. His view? Avoid investing.
“The marketing stated it was invested in a secured investment product. I explained there is a big difference between secured and secure, and what is it secured over?” he recalls.
“I also noted one of the offices based in London. One of my concerns was a small company working across different regulatory environments such as UK and Australia. It's very difficult to establish which set of regulations they fall under,” he says.
Mayfair’s marketing and its claims attracted media scrutiny too.
The Financial Review ran a series outlining the investment risks, the structure of Mayfair’s products which afforded investors little protection if things went wrong, and Mawhinney’s occasionally controversial background .
Even funds management stalwart Platinum Asset Management sued Mayfair Platinum for using the Platinum wording.
But technically, Mayfair was operating within the rules. The sophisticated investor test has been in place for years on its website, and in advertisements disclosed that this was its target market.
If investors qualified as wholesale, they would have to live with the consequences and the stripped-down investor protections.
But what gnawed at the regulator was whether investors were being adequately informed of the risks in the aggressive marketing.
On March 13, ASIC moved, telling Mayfair it was considering issuing a warning on its website to investors. This triggered a court battle that temporarily halted any publication of the warning for 48 hours.
In its defence, Mayfair argued they merely offered an alternative to term deposits, for investors that may be “tired” of them.
“To say that a product is an ‘alternative to’ another product (or might be used by someone tired of another product) is not to assert – and cannot be taken to assert – that the products are equivalent,” Mawhinney said in a legal filing.
He also raised concerns that an ASIC warning could have a “far-reaching and permanent impact”, forcing investors to redeem and triggering an asset fire sale.
Mayfair had made its physical presence felt with mainstream media advertisements – to the point where other financial advertisers asked publications to remove their spending from aggregate calculations because their big spending distorted the data.
But it was Mayfair’s online efforts that would force ASIC’s hand.
This month, the corporate regulator filed Federal Court proceedings claiming Mayfair 101 and Mayfair Platinum engaged in misleading and deceptive advertising.
Its case said Mayfair had used sponsored links that would appear when certain words were typed into search engines such as Google or Bing.
If a prospective investor searched “bank term deposit" or "term deposit" online, a sponsored Mayfair Platinum link would appear. Mayfair's promotional material also included terms such as "term deposit alternative", "certainty", "confidence" and "capital growth".
Statements made by Mayfair, ASIC alleged, crossed the line for reasons including it compared their investments to bank deposits despite being significantly riskier.
ASIC also alleged that Mayfair misrepresented that its products were designed for investors seeking “certainty and confidence" in their investments.
The ASIC case also focused on a website operated by a Mayfair company Online Investments called termdepositguide.com.
While Mayfair’s brand was not explicit on the website, individuals that found themselves directed to the website, and filled in the form, were in fact investing in Mayfair’s debenture offerings.
Mayfair, which has refused to answer questions, said on Monday night it would vigorously contest the ASIC proceedings against its advertising.
The risks had been clearly disclosed and it had co-operated with the corporate watchdog, Mayfair maintained.
“No investor … has had a capital loss and all interest distributions have been paid in full,” it said.
ASIC said it sought an injunction to stop Mayfair issuing products and marketing, claiming that some investors since March 11 had been unable to pull their funds out.
But even after redemptions were allegedly frozen, Mayfair was becoming more aggressive in its hunt for short-term cash.
On March 17, Mayfair emailed prospective investors to tell them interest rates were heading to zero and that it was positioning itself to “benefit from the market correction” – offering a special 5.45 per cent six-month rate.
That same day, Mayfair’s lawyers were telling Dunk Island property vendors it would suspend settlements because of the coronavirus and credit market turmoil.
Then, just as late as Friday, advertisements steering investors towards termdepositguide.com were still appearing online: “Term Deposit Rates Low? Earn 3%+PA. Setup in 24 hours.”
