Who's this for? The Platinum Card® from American Express Exclusively for Morgan Stanley also comes with high-end travel benefits and access to luxury hotels and airport lounges worldwide. If Platinum perks appeal to you and you have a qualifying Morgan Stanley account, this card can help you grow your portfolio while you travel.
Cardmembers earn 5X Membership Rewards® points on flights booked directly with airlines or with American Express Travel; 5X Membership Rewards® points on eligible hotels booked on amextravel.com ; and 1X points on all other eligible spending. With Invest with Rewards, you can deposit Membership Rewards points to your qualifying Morgan Stanley brokerage account.
There is also a welcome bonus of 60,000 Membership Rewards® points after spending $5,000 in purchases in the first three months of card membership. This is equal to a $600 deposit into your Morgan Stanley account.
There are no foreign transaction fees with the Morgan Stanley card, but there is a considerable annual fee of $550. However, you can offset this cost if you take full advantage of the annual $200 airline fee credit, Global Entry or TSA PreCheck® fee credit (every four years), access to the Global Lounge Collection and up to $200 in Uber savings.
Those with a qualifying Morgan Stanley Platinum CashPlus brokerage account will also be eligible to earn an annual Engagement Bonus of $550 and get a free supplemental card. There is no minimum spending requirement to receive this perk.
If you're looking for a no-fee alternative, consider the Morgan Stanley Credit Card From American Express . It comes with a welcome bonus of 10,000 Membership Rewards® points after you spend $1,000 in purchases in the first three months. Earn 2X Membership Rewards® points on airfare purchased directly from airlines, purchases at U.S. restaurants and select U.S. department stores and car rentals booked directly with select car rental companies. Earn 1X points for all other eligible purchases (terms and limitations apply). You can use your Membership Rewards® points to deposit cash into your qualifying Morgan Stanley brokerage account.
