CHICAGO--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Insights-driven digital experience agency Bounteous is now an Adobe Platinum Regional partner in the Adobe Solution Partner Program. This upgraded status follows Bounteous’ fourth specialization across Adobe Experience Cloud.
Bounteous joins a select group in the newly defined category by Adobe, a status for specialized companies with significant presence in a particular geographic area. Bounteous serves multinational regions and, with its record growth and concentration of onshore talent, is one of Adobe’s largest partners in North America.
“We are thrilled to be part of an elite group of organizations that has achieved this status within the Adobe partner ecosystem,” said John N. Anthony, Bounteous SVP, Digital Strategy & Solutions. “It is a testament to the depth and breadth of our service offerings across the entire Adobe Experience Cloud stack and the expertise that Bounteous has cultivated over the past few years. Our commitment to this partnership will continue to be a top focus of ours as we invest in broadening our reach to serve even more clients with Adobe-related needs.”
Bounteous has developed Adobe specialized practices in the Americas region in multiple Experience Cloud solutions, including Adobe Analytics, Adobe Experience Manager), Adobe Experience Manager: Run and Operate, and Adobe Campaign Standard. Specializations are a stamp of approval from Adobe, given to partners who have achieved technical proficiency, client delivery, and satisfaction.
“Over the past few years, Bounteous has emerged as a trusted partner to many of Adobe’s Experience Cloud clients,” said Tony Sanders, Senior Director, Partner Sales for the Americas. “We are delighted that Bounteous has been elevated to Platinum Regional. It is a significant accomplishment that speaks to their consistent commitment to our partnership and the dedication they bring to their engagements.”
The 2018 Adobe Emerging Partner of the Year , Bounteous holds approximately 100 certifications across the entire Experience Cloud. As a Magento Commerce partner for over 12 years, Bounteous has rich experience delivering complex commerce implementations for multinational brands. Bounteous experts are the top contributors to ACS AEM Commons , and were named both the 2019 and 2018 AEM Rock Star , awarded to the world’s best Adobe Experience Manager architects.
Bounteous regularly contributes in multiple capacities across solutions of Adobe Experience Cloud from certifications and industry events to one-of-a-kind solutions and cross-cloud extensions. The recently hosted public webinar, A 360° View of Adobe Experience Platform (AEP ), overviews Adobe Experience Platform, a scalable Customer Data Platform (CDP) that empowers businesses to interact with customers in a seamless experience across multiple digital and physical touchpoints.
Founded in 2003 in Chicago, Bounteous creates big-picture digital solutions that help leading companies deliver transformational digital brand experiences. Our expertise includes Strategy, Experience Design, Technology, Analytics and Insight, and Marketing. Bounteous forms problem-solving partnerships with their clients to envision, design, and build their digital futures. For more information, please visit www.bounteous.com .
For the most up-to-date news, follow Bounteous on Twitter , LinkedIn , Facebook , and Instagram .
