We know, advertisements are annoying and slow down the internet. Unfortunately, this is how we pay the bills and our authors.
We would love for you to enjoy our content, we've worked hard on providing it. Please whitelist our site in your adblocker, refresh the page, and enjoy!
A common topic of interest for Cadillac vehicles are Platinum models. So, we decided to explain, in great detail, what Cadillac Platinum vehicles are all about, what they include, and how they’re configured.
Simply put, Platinum Cadillac models are the most range-topping equipment groups available in Cadillac vehicles. In other words, a Platinum Cadillac is one that’s fully-loaded, with a price to match.
In the past, Platinum was a standalone trim level, as was the case on the Cadillac XTS, CT6, Escalade (2015-2020), and XT5 (2017-2019). Recently, however, Cadillac has reconfigured Platinum to be a standalone package, as part of its recently-established and subsequently-revised Y trim level strategy .
That means that the Platinum Package is now a standalone option on either Premium Luxury or Sport models. Note that the package is not offered on base Luxury trim models. Offering Platinum as a package gives buyers more flexibility, since they can choose the vehicle persona (Luxury or Sport) that they like better, without being forced into a one or the other, which was the case when Platinum was a standalone trim level slotting above Premium Luxury models. As a reminder, Premium Luxury models feature more traditional chrome/bright accent work, while Sport models feature a more modern, blacked-out appearance.
The Cadillac Platinum package is not offered on all Caddy models, but rather on a few select vehicles. Below, we specify what vehicles offer the Platinum package, and their contents.
The Platinum Package is not offered on the all-new Cadillac CT4 . It would appear that Cadillac believes that there is not enough “space” to offer such a package on its entry-level sedan.
On the Cadillac CT5 , Platinum is available as an optional package on the Premium Luxury, Sport and CT5-V models, the Platinum Package on the new CT5 delivers the following features:
