Cash Advance Fee: Either $10 or 3% of the amount of each cash advance, whichever is greater
For someone rebuilding credit, the Credit One Bank Platinum Visa Card is a potential alternative. While it offers a slightly lower APR (based on creditworthiness) and offers 1% cash back on all purchases, it does carry an annual fee ($0 to $99, based on creditworthiness) and low initial credit limit. Many customers will find the fee structure difficult to look past even after considering the ability to earn cash back.
If you’re relatively new to credit cards, the Discover it Student Cash Back card may compare favorably to the Capital One Platinum. It carries no annual fee and offers 5% cash back on a rotating list of categories (when activated quarterly), along with 1% on all other purchases.
Additionally, at the end of the first year Discover will provide a dollar-for-dollar match on all cash back earned. Remember, the Capital One Platinum does not provide any cash back.
Finally, there is another Capital One product to consider: the QuicksilverOne. The rate and benefits are similar to that of the Platinum, though the QuicksilverOne offers 1.5% cash back on all purchases. It would thus take only $2,600 in spending to offset the $39 annual fee. Provided you meet that expense threshold, the QuicksilverOne is the better option. Also, the cash back benefit is versatile: it may be redeemed as a check or statement credit or cover a recent purchase.
Is The Card For You?
For someone with average credit (580+), the Capital One Platinum card is on the short list of viable options. Since Capital One reports to all three major credit bureaus, you may be rewarded for establishing a new history of responsible credit usage. The potential for additional credit extension is also a plus. While this card doesn’t offer a promotion rate on balance transfers, it doesn’t charge a balance transfer fee. Furthermore, it makes spending internationally more affordable with no foreign transaction fees.
That said, the high APR on this card could be a decisive factor if you tend to carry a balance month-to-month. Also, the low initial limit may make it difficult to maintain a low credit utilization percentage, which is critical when trying to improve one’s score. However, average age of credit is another important consideration, and the $0 annual fee will make this card easy to keep around.
Overall, while this card may meet your credit-specific needs in the short term, it is probably best viewed as a stepping stone to cards with better features.
