by The Moodie Davitt Report News Room Source: ©The Moodie Davitt Report 30 May 2020
The Moodie Davitt Report is delighted to announce that family-owned Spanish fragrance to fashion house Puig has become a Platinum Partner at the pioneering Moodie Davitt Virtual Travel Retail Expo.
Puig owns some of travel retail’s best-known fragrance brands, including Carolina Herrera, Christian Louboutin, Jean Paul Gaultier, Nina Ricci, Penhaligon’s, and Paco Rabanne.
The unique five-day ‘live’ Virtual Travel Retail Expo, which is followed by a 30-day showcase (click here to register) begins on 12 October, just after the conclusion of the Chinese Golden Week holidays. It features a powerful series of activities across the five days, including a Symposium, category workshops and a new consumer research initiative. Early bird rates for exhibitor bookings expire on 1 June.
The hugely ambitious digital project is the culmination of over 3,000 man and woman hours from The Moodie Davitt and FILTR teams over the past three months. FILTR, an integrated design and communications agency, has conceived the virtual environment and easily navigable user experience. The company is also providing account management and stand curation services to every exhibitor.
“At Puig we connect our brands’ storytelling with our consumers’ emotions and we create fragrance experiences that make people dream. Everything we do, we do it with passion for innovation and creativity. The Virtual Travel Retail Expo offers a great opportunity to connect with customers and make them dream,” Puig said. “As a Platinum Exhibitor we look forward to captivating our partners with the beauty of our brands through the extraordinary capabilities of the digital realm.”
The Moodie Davitt Report Founder & Chairman Martin Moodie said: “Puig is one of the great names of the fragrance and fashion worlds, a third-generation family company that has never lost sight of its original values built around innate passion, a long-term vision, outstanding products, sustainability and a perpetual focus on innovation.
“I have had the pleasure on several occasions of meeting Chairman & CEO Marc Puig, most memorably during the company’s unforgettable 100th anniversary celebrations during the Puig Vela Clàssica in Barcelona in 2014, so I know how those values are embraced and nurtured every day from the top down. Talk to any leading travel retailer and they will tell you also about Puig’s flexibility and creativity, qualities that we look forward to being showcased at our pioneering Virtual Expo.”
Flashback to the Puig anniversary in 2014 as Martin Moodie meets Marc Puig (centre) and Marc’s father, the legendary Mariano Puig, one of the great drivers of the company’s success story
The Virtual Launch Pad is one of several digital innovations at the Expo that allows brands to unveil or showcase products for the buyers, press and KOLs in attendance
China Duty Free Group and The SEVA Group are Diamond Partners of the event. Platinum Partners to date include Beam Suntory; Pernod Ricard Global Travel Retail; Parfums Christian Dior; Whyte & Mackay; Shiseido Travel Retail; Clarins; Duty Free Global; and KrisShop. A full list of exhibiting partners to date will be published in coming days.
This powerful campaign from Carolina Herrera for the Good Girl fragrance was a striking sight at airports across the world in 2019, including Dubai International (DXB) above and Hamad International Airport (below).
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Puig has repurposed its manufacturing sites to produce hydro-alcoholic hand gel gel in order to play its part in curbing the outbreak. Puig has distributed the gel to hospitals and public health institutions in Spain in collaboration with local authorities.
