Lorie Hollabaugh • February 24, 2020 •
Pictured (L-R): Cindy Mabe (President, UMGN), Ann Edelblute (Owner, The HQ), Royce Risser (EVP of Promotions, UMGN), Carrie Underwood, Mike Dungan (Chairman & CEO, UMGN), David Garcia (Underwood’s Co-Producer), Brian Wright (EVP of A&R, UMGN), Jackie Jones (Vice President, Artist & Industry Relations, RIAA). Photo: Country Radio Seminar 2020/Kayla Schoen
Carrie Underwood was surprised with an RIAA Platinum certification plaque for her latest album, Cry Pretty, and four certified singles from the album, on Friday (Feb. 21). Following Underwood’s artist interview as part of the annual Country Radio Seminar, held at Nashville’s Omni Hotel, UMG Nashville CEO & Chairman Mike Dungan and UMG Nashville President Cindy Mabe presented Underwood with the latest accolade for her sixth studio album, the first she co-produced alongside David Garcia.
“Cry Pretty is an album of risk and boundary pushing,” Mabe said. “Carrie put her whole heart, raw emotion and personal story into writing, producing and releasing the music from this album for the world to see behind the curtains. Cry Pretty is Carrie’s artistic evolution and provides a chance for fans to see her at her most vulnerable and raw, so celebrating Platinum status is such an incredible gift that proves big risk gives way to big reward.”
Underwood said, “This means a lot, because I feel like this is the project that I’ve done, and the album that I’ve done, that is the most ‘me.’ I’m honored and I’m humbled, and God is good.”
The critically-acclaimed album debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 chart, cementing Underwood’s place in history as the only woman to land four country albums at the top of the all-genre Billboard 200 chart. The album was the best-selling all-genre female debut in 2018 and she continues to hold the record as RIAA’s No. 1 certified female artist for Digital Singles.
On March 3, she will release her first fitness lifestyle book, Find Your Path: Honor Your Body, Fuel Your Soul, and Get Strong with the Fit52 Life. The book provides a common-sense approach and tips from Underwood on staying active, eating well, and looking as beautiful as you feel, 52 weeks a year.
Carrie Underwood with a plaque for her Certified Platinum Album, Cry Pretty. Photo: Country Radio Seminar 2020/Kayla Schoen
