Carson City's newest salon, Pure Platinum Salon and Spa, opens New Year's Day on S. Carson Street
Submitted by Kelsey Penrose on Fri, 01/03/2020 - 2:11pm
A new Salon has opened for the start of the new decade at the corner of 5th Street and S. Carson Street, across from the Ormsby House.
Owner Cindi Miller moved to Carson City twelve years ago, and always had her eyes set on becoming a Salon owner. Now, she’s opened Pure Platinum Salon and Spa, located at 501 S. Carson St.
She worked at the now-closed Platinum Salon in Carson City, and once it closed, several of the stylists who had worked at the popular salon went into business for themselves, as Miller is doing now.
“I really thought, ‘what do I want to do for the new decade in 2020?’” said Miller. “I thought, ‘I’m ready.’”
Miller secured her new location on the top floor of the building at the corner of S. Carson Street and 5th Street and quickly got to work remodeling the suite to fit her needs as a stylist and salon owner.
The salon is well lit with high, wide windows, white walls and new flooring, and the windows give a bird’s eye view to the goings on of Downtown Carson, which is great for people watching.
There are still two hair stations available, and the salon is looking for a nail technician. An aesthetician is moving in shortly, who will be providing all manner of skin care remedies, and applications are being taken for a massage therapist. Miller has also reached out to the local beauty school to offer apprenticeship opportunities to current students.
Miller herself is a Redken-certified Color Specialist, and hopes to follow in the footsteps of Platinum in having her salon become a “Redken Elite Salon,” which would open up education opportunities for stylists.
“One of the things that got me interested in this career at 19 or 20 is that I always knew that I wanted a family one day, and knowing that, I also like to be able to provide,” said Miller. “In this line of work, you can take the trip to Disneyland, you can go up to the mountain to go skiing with the family for the day, or volunteer in the classrooms; you still get to feel like a mom while also being a provider, and that’s really special.”
You can learn more about the Pure Platinum Salon and Spa by stopping by at 501 S. Carson Street on the 3rd floor, accessible by elevator or stairs, or by visiting her professional facebook here.
Arts and Entertainment - Thursday, July 2, 2020 - 7:47pm
Heading into the July 4 holiday weekend, there’s a number of activities around the Carson City region to celebrate. New safety guidelines for the state of Nevada have been enforced, so please make sure to bring a mask and practice social distancing.
Carson City Health and Human Services is reporting seven new positive cases and three additional recoveries of COVID-19 in the Quad-County region on Thursday, July 2, 2020. This brings the total number of cases to 361, with 258 recoveries, seven deaths and 96 cases active.
Agencies respond to brush fire near China Springs Road in Douglas, crash on US 50 near Spooner Lake
UPDATE: Forward progress on the fire was stopped as of 5:27 p.m., according to an East Fork Fire battalion chief.
East Fork Fire responded Thursday afternoon to a brush fire in the China Springs area on the west side of Highway 395. Multiple resources are responding, including a brush unit from Carson City that was placed on standby.
The Carson City Sheriff’s Office Investigation Division is asking for assistance in identifying subjects involved in a destruction of property case.
Arts and Entertainment - Thursday, July 2, 2020 - 4:06pm
The Brewery Arts Center will deliver live music directly to the citizens of Carson City while practicing social distancing once again this week.  Miles Construction Company has generously donated the use of a Flatbed Truck and with financial support from The Change Companies, the Nauman Foundation, and Carson Tahoe Hospital, the BAC is proud to bring you Moxy Ruckus this 4th of July holiday from 6 to 9 p.m. in the neighborhood by Eagle Valley Middle School.
Heading into the holiday period, average summer temperatures and sunny conditions will continue through Independence Day weekend around the Carson City region and at Lake Tahoe, according to the National Weather Service.
A 55-year-old former cook was arrested Wednesday for alleged multiple burglaries at a Carson City restaurant that began in September of last year.
The Tahoe Fire and Fuels Team is promoting Lake Tahoe Wildfire Awareness Month during July. This year’s theme is “Fight fire with a plan” to encourage residents and visitors to prepare their family, property and possessions now before a wildfire starts by creating a plan.
The Carson City Seventh-day Adventist Church is participating in the Feed NV Drive-Thru Food Drive sponsored by the Food Bank of Northern Nevada on Thursday, July 9, 2020 from 9 a.m. to noon.
Arts and Entertainment - Thursday, July 2, 2020 - 10:27am
The Brewery Arts Center and longtime partner Carson City Classic Cinema Club team up to bring you a summer of drive-in movies that are fun for the whole family.
Bleu Cafe is proud to announce that we are reopening our restaurant for lunch! Starting on Monday, July 6 at 11 a.m. we will open our doors for lunch. Our standard menu will be available to you.
In the wake of the global pandemic, and after looking at many strategies to hold the 39th event, The Great Reno Balloon Race has determined that it cannot safely and financially hold the 2020 spectator event.
The July 4 holiday weekend at Lake Tahoe will look and feel different this year with basin firework shows canceled and social distancing safety practices required on beaches, campgrounds and along hiking trails. Even with the COVID-19 pandemic, the U.S. Forest Service says it is hopeful the holiday period will be a great opportunity for people to get outside to celebrate Independence Day and all the wonders of Lake Tahoe.
Arts and Entertainment - Wednesday, July 1, 2020 - 4:41pm
The Capital City Arts Initiative’s illustrated talk, Women Artists of the Great Basin, by Reno artist and author, Mary Lee Fulkerson, is now available online. The event is part of CCAI’s ongoing Nevada Neighbors speakers’ series; all future talks will be recorded and presented online.
Celebrate the Fourth of July weekend with a historic steam train ride from Virginia City to Gold Hill in our beautifully restored outdoor cars with social distancing, powered by 100-year-old heritage locomotives.
Carson City Health and Human Services is reporting 8 new positive cases and 12 additional recoveries of COVID-19 in the Quad-County region for Wednesday, July 1, 2020. This brings the total number of cases to 354, with 255 recoveries and seven deaths, 92 cases remain active.
Nevada Gov. Steve Sisolak announced Wednesday that he is planning to begin a special session in Carson City to address the State’s Fiscal Year 2021 budget on Wednesday, July 8. The planned date of the session was determined after coordinating with legislative leadership.
While there may not be fireworks this Fourth of July, there are still many activities in Carson City and beyond!
Happy Wednesday Carson City! You know what is especially patriotic? Dogs. Dogs are probably the most patriotic animal next to the Bald Eagle himself. And wouldn't you know it, it happens to be the Fourth of July this weekend! A perfect time to get yourself a new friend.
There’s been a lot of confusion and discussion since Nevada Gov. Steve Sisolak mandated that everyone must wear a face covering while in public, and one of the points of confusion was which agency is handling reports of non-compliant businesses.
Teen takes COVID-19 quilt on U.S. tour, will be in Carson City today at capitol complex
A Seattle area high school student will pass through Carson City today, Wednesday, and will be at the state capitol building to display a quilt he designed to raise awareness of COVID-19.
A 57-year-old Carson City man was arrested Tuesday for suspicion of felony fourth degree arson after allegedly attempting to ignite a neighbor's BMW using gasoline and a water bottle, a sheriff's deputy booking report says.
Coin Press No. 1, which stamped coins at the Carson City Mint from 1870 to 1893, will operate from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. July 4 at the Nevada State Museum in Carson City. This will be the first time the museum has operated Coin Press No. 1 since it closed temporarily in March due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Laws implementing a wide range of criminal justice reforms, establishing a state board responsible for regulating marijuana and creating a payday loan database finally take effect Wednesday, more than a year after the 2019 legislative session ended.
Carson City Little League held its first scrimmages of the season Monday at Governor's Field under the new health and safety guidelines enforced by the state of Nevada.
Carson City Health and Human Services is reporting 13 new positive cases and 13 additional recoveries of COVID-19 in the Quad-County region for Tuesday, June 30. This brings the total number of cases to 346, with 243 recoveries and seven deaths, 96 cases remain active.
Arts and Entertainment - Tuesday, June 30, 2020 - 4:26pm
The Brewery Arts Center in Carson City is continuing to monitor the latest developments about COVID-19. To comply with the mandate of Governor Sisolak, we are canceling the 2020 Levitt concert series to help lessen the spread of the virus. It is imperative that we act according to the directives of the government, public health authorities, and medical professionals.
According to Storey County Commissioner Jay Carmona the fireworks show in Virginia City has been canceled today as of 1 p.m. The Cruise will be continuing as planned.
According to Carmona, there was an issue with releasing the cancellation announcement but the fireworks are indeed cancelled this year.
Through grassroots fundraising, a group of Carson City pickleball players raised over $12,000. The group will be donating the funds to the Foundation for Carson City Parks and Recreation for court surface repairs and the conversion of one tennis court to a pickleball court.
UPDATE: As of 1 p.m., Storey County Commissioners announced that the 4th of July fireworks are cancelled. The cruise will continue as planned. Click here for the update.
While the annual Fourth of July firework shows began to be cancelled throughout the Silver State in May, Virginia City has opted for a social distancing celebration.
Feeding Pets of the Homeless, a national animal welfare nonprofit based in Carson City, Nev., received a $5,000 grant. The Humane Society of the United States grant helps to provide financial assistance towards fulfilling their mission.
In a letter distributed to all students, families, employees and community members, Carson City School District Superintendent Richard Stokes announced that due to the emergency directives from the Office of the Governor, schools within the District cannot reopen in normal fashion to begin the 2020-2021 school year.
The Carson City Sheriff’s Office Investigation Division is asking for assistance in identifying subjects involved in a destruction of property report.
Nevada is one of four additional states to receive approval from the U.S. Department of Education for its career and technical education plan submitted under the Strengthening Career and Technical Education for the 21st Century Act.
The AYSO Carson City Youth Soccer Region 140 organization is bringing excitement back to the state capitol.
Registration for the upcoming fall season is open for kids ages 3-18. Early bird registration ends July 15 and can be made online or in-person at Yogurt Beach, located at 3228 N. Carson St. in Carson City. In-person registration will be held Wednesday, July 15 from 6 to 8 p.m. and Saturday, July 18 from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Carson City Health and Human Services is reporting four new positive cases and no additional recoveries of COVID-19 in the Quad-County region on Monday, June 29. This brings the total number of cases to 333, with 230 recoveries and seven deaths, 96 cases remain active.
Judge Thomas R. Armstrong is proud to have fulfilled his promise to help young adults change their lives, stop the cycle of addiction, and make Carson City a safer place.
It was five years ago that the Misdemeanor Treatment Court began with the support and collaboration of Jason D. Woodbury, Carson City District Attorney, Karin L. Kreizenbeck, State of Nevada Public Defender, Ken Furlong, Carson City Sheriff, Chief Tad N. Fletcher, Department of Alternative Sentencing, and Community Counseling Center.
Crews fighting Poeville Fire aided by lower temperatures; fire 30 percent contained, 3,000 acres
The Poeville Fire east of Peavine Mountain in northwest Reno has burned an estimated 3,000 acres and is 30 percent contained as of Monday afternoon, according to the U.S. Forest Service.
Well Being has closed its doors to walk-in traffic like many small business in the state. But we have continued to offer services on-line for our members and area residents. We are running classes every weekday (see schedule below) online that you can join via the very easy to use app called “ZOOM”.
Celebrate the Fourth of July weekend with a historic steam train ride from Virginia City to Gold Hill in our beautifully restored outdoor cars with social distancing, powered by 100-year-old heritage locomotives.
While reading is usually its own reward, patrons who take part in the Carson City Library's 2020 Summer Learning Challenge will also be earning raffle tickets as they lose themselves in a good book, peruse the daily paper or attend a virtual program.
Starting May 26th, and continuing every Tuesday evening, 5:30 p.m. to dusk, the Clear Creek Bowmen will resume hosting their Tuesday Night Archery Shoots at the Tim Meigs Carson City Archery Range (Formerly the Centennial Park Archery Range).
Coin Press No. 1, which stamped coins at the Carson City Mint from 1870 to 1893, will operate from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. July 4 at the Nevada State Museum in Carson City. This will be the first time the museum has operated Coin Press No. 1 since it closed temporarily in March due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Brewery Arts Center will deliver live music directly to the citizens of Carson City while practicing social distancing once again this week.  Miles Construction Company has generously donated the use of a Flatbed Truck and with financial support from The Change Companies, the Nauman Foundation, and Carson Tahoe Hospital, the BAC is proud to bring you Moxy Ruckus this 4th of July holiday from 6 to 9 p.m. in the neighborhood by Eagle Valley Middle School.
Combining her passion for the Sierra Nevada wilderness and her love of painting, art instructor and professional watercolorist, Dana Childs is hosting a series of Plein Aire Painting Outings & Hikes.
Ryan Livermore, PGA presents the Livermore Kids Golf Academy at Silver Oak Golf Course in Carson City.  Ryan has more than 8 years of experience teaching kids the fundamentals of the sport of golf. The Livermore Kids Golf Academy is a fun and engaging way for children ages 6-14 to learn the game of golf. The Livermore Kids Golf Academy runs July 6, 2020 through July 9, 2020 and July 13, 2020 through July 16, 2020.  Contact the Silver Oak Golf Shop for more details. (775) 841-7000.
Bleu Cafe in Carson City to reopen Monday, July 6
Bleu Cafe is proud to announce that we are reopening our restaurant for lunch! Starting on Monday, July 6 at 11 a.m. we will open our doors for lunch. Our standard menu will be available to you.
The 2020 Jazz & Beyond Music and Art Festival this August will include the second annual Carson City Open Studios Tour on Saturday, August 22, and Sunday, August 23, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., at multiple studios throughout Carson City.
This "great green room" is filled with all kinds of things, but one thing is missing: your favorite childhood book! This book means everything to you, and you will do anything to get it back. Follow the clues, find the thieves and escape with your favorite book!
Carson City Parks, Recreation & Open Space welcomes you to our Volunteer Series: Weedy Wednesdays! This volunteer series is running every third Wednesday June through August of this year. Join us after your workday from 5:30 to 6:45 p.m. at various trails and open spaces around our city to learn about vegetation and work to remove noxious weeds.
Starting July 8th, 2020 and every Wednesday night thereafter for the next 5 weeks Carson City will have free drive-in movies at the Brewery Arts Center parking lot!
Living the Good Life Bistro is happy to include, with dining and cocktails, JAZZ, every other Wednesday. Cherie and John Shipley will be performing Weds. July 1, July 15 and July 29. Special guest artists will be featured.
The Carson City Seventh-day Adventist Church is participating in the Feed NV Drive-Thru Food Drive sponsored by the Food Bank of Northern Nevada on Thursday, July 9, 2020 from 9 a.m. to noon.
Thursday Night Cruise invites all vehicles for a FREE car show. Come show off your ride, enjoy the group of people, local food, 50/50 raffle and our Sponsors who make this possible. Click on flier for all the dates, times and locations.
The Carson City Library hosts weekly virtual family story-time. This is for PRE-K children (not yet in elementary school) and families: Join us for weekly themed stories and crafts. Craft instructions and additional resources, including activities for older children who may be at home, will be included. Email creativelearning@carsoncitylibrary.org to receive an invite to join this program.
CARSON CITY — While the COVID-19 pandemic forced many camps to cancel their summer 2020 programs, Girl Scouts of the Sierra offers a safe, affordable alternative for girls to experience the beloved summertime tradition.
With Camp Wasiu II’s Virtual Camp-In Camp Out, girls can fight learning loss with engaging science, technology, engineering, art, and math (STEAM) activities. Camp Wasiu II’s Virtual Camp-In Camp Out is Sunday, July 12 through Thursday, July 16.
Organizers are holding an ongoing rummage sale to raise funds for the Lighthouse Lodge, a re-entry program for Carson City women being released from incarceration.
The rummage sale, at 251 Jeanell Dr., suite 4, is open noon-5:30 p.m. on Mondays and Wednesdays and 10 a.m. - 6 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays, with a BBQ on Saturdays.
Karson Kruzers car club is cancelling their 35th Year "Run What Cha Brung" car show, which would have been July 25, 2020 at Mills Park in Carson City. We will reschedule for next year, July 24, 2021.
Carson City's 2020 Jazz and Beyond Music, Art Festival still a go for now
Mile High Band Association says that, as of now, the 2020 Jazz and Beyond Carson City Music and Art Festival is still planned for August 7 to 23. The Planning Committee is meeting by video conference and has confirmed several bands and reserved venues. Due to uncertainty about grants, sponsors, and ad sales, as well as COVID-19 restrictions, however, further bookings are on hold.
Carson City Kiwanis to host 7th Pancreatic Cancer Awareness Day on Sept. 19 at Silver Oak
Carson City Kiwanis will host the 7th Annual Pancreatic Cancer Awareness Day fundraiser on Saturday, September 19, 2020 at Silver Oak Golf Course in Carson City, NV. The net proceeds from the fundraiser will support the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network and the Marilyn Elaine Academic Scholarship, awarded annually to local high school graduates.
