Central Tempe home near ASU with indoor garden and rooftop pool is LEED Platinum certified. Take a look
A house built in the 1940s or 1950s stood on two adjacent lots in Tempe. When the land was purchased and everything on it razed, neighbors were anxious to see what would emerge on the spot flanked by a well-traveled street and railroad tracks with a hospital and Arizona State University’s main campus a five-minute walk away.
When the owner, an ASU alumnus and longtime Tempe resident, wanted the years-long vision of his dream home to become reality, he approached DKG Urban Concepts executives Derek Knuepfer and Clint Basham with detailed ideas that included a non-negotiable.
“He said, ‘I want to go LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design).’ I said, ‘What level do you want to go?’ He said, ‘Platinum,’” recalled Basham, the Scottsdale firm's chief executive, referring to the highest LEED certification level. “I said, ‘OK, you got it.’”
Knowing what was required to achieve this dictated materials, where they would be sourced and the sustainability of every feature beyond what would be visible to the naked eye.
“That process, it really does guide the design and every element,” Knuepfer said.
After nearly six years of planning, construction and fine-tuning, the 14,000-square foot home inspired by Spain’s southern region of Andalusia was unveiled in 2018 with 119.5 points on a 90-point LEED Platinum scale.
This makes homeowner Michael Pappas’ Casona de Pappas the highest rated LEED Platinum home in the nation.
The home boasts a professional recording studio, pizza oven, courtyard fountain, ingenious cooling system, intricate custom designs inside and out and a pool on the roof.
It spans two stories plus a basement that holds a wine cellar, commercial-grade prep kitchen and aquaponics room complete with a tilapia pond and fresh produce.
These interior comforts plus a stunning exterior has given this very private Tempe resident an eye-catching and jaw-dropping abode in the heart of a diverse and mostly understated central Tempe neighborhood.
During construction, 90% of all materials on site was diverted from the landfill and used for the home, on another site or recycled for other purposes. Wood from ash and pecan trees on the property were used to make the bar and stately front door.
The majority of materials used were sourced from within a 500-mile radius, including all wood doors and Mexican tile that runs throughout the home.
The sophisticated cooling system combines old and new methods. A traditional cooling tower anchors the southwest corner of the courtyard and works in tandem with a state-of-the-art HVAC system to push down cool air toward the first and second stories. It’s so effective that the doors and windows to the main house can be open and the space feels chilly even in summer.
The overall heat island effect is reduced thanks to shaded permeable hardscape, trees and the use of high albedo pure white stucco. Retractable awnings and overhangs allow pleasing warmth in while shielding rooms from high sun. The property is surrounded by drought tolerant plants such as lavender and rosemary that also act as natural pest control.
Solar Photovoltaic panels on the roof provide most of the home’s energy. An extensive rain harvesting system captures 100% of water runoff that’s stored in a 7,000-gallon underground cistern and used for outdoor irrigation and the indoor aquaponics system.
All five bathrooms contain low-water use fixtures.
“We took every opportunity to make everything more sustainable,” Basham said.
Pappas spent years designing every detail himself, down to the colors and millimeter of each embellishment. His artistic vision and attention to detail is visible from the first step onto the front porch that flaunts custom tiles and hanging lanterns.
A combination of handmade custom tiles and tiles imported from Mexico flow through every room, staircase and thoroughfare. The courtyard Terrazzo is comprised of individually crafted pieces made from flaxseed and recycled glass, all by Pappas’ original designs. This also applies to a Persian-inspired Terrazzo rug in the kitchen that’s made from 900 different pieces.
Made of soapstone, the Tulikivi pizza oven and fireplace in the kitchen is a cutting edge zero emission product.
A professional recording studio is outfitted with fabric that absorbs sound, LED light panels that can be programmed for sceneries such as floating clouds, hidden doors and a spiral staircase that leads to a balcony so audiences and listen from high.
On the second story, the home’s five bathrooms and four bedrooms include the master suite that’s fully tricked out with luxuries and a marble bathroom with a heated marble massage table and floors, soaking tub, huge shower and sauna.
A pool sits on the roof. And in the basement, there’s a commercial prep kitchen and a wine cellar with intricate custom brickwork that comprise the pillars and ceiling, and a tasting table made of reclaimed wine barrels.
Steps away, the aquaponics room features a tilapia pond that feeds a sprawling indoor garden of basil, kale, chard and other produce,  some of which are sold to local restaurants or farmers market vendors.
Outside, nearly all vegetation is edible. Nine different types of citrus are grown along with apples and pecans. Fruit trees surround a cozy meditation area in the backyard.
