So, although it’s not strictly an airfare perk and you do have to make some effort to leverage it, this benefit is something to consider if you’re likely to make airline purchases that fall within these categories.
On top of that, The Platinum Card from American Express offers its cardmembers savings through a lesser-known benefit called the International Airline Program (IAP) . The IAP is a booking portal (or service, if you want to do it via phone or online chat) that often yields significant discounts on premium-economy, business-class or first-class tickets on 25 partner airlines, including Air France/KLM, Cathay Pacific, Delta, Emirates, Lufthansa, Qantas, Singapore Airlines and others.
Cardholders can either use their card or pay with points from their account to book. We have found that reservations through the IAP can save thousands of dollars on some premium fares. So if your airline bookings tend to have you sitting up front, this benefit might be all the reason you need to carry The Platinum Card from American Express .
Both the Chase Sapphire Reserve and The Platinum Card from American Express cards now offer fairly comprehensive coverage if something goes wrong with your travel plans.
When you use the Sapphire Reserve to purchase an airline ticket, it confers all sorts of value-added benefits in case things go awry.
The card’s trip interruption and cancellation coverage maxes out at $10,000 per person or $20,000 per trip. Its trip delay protection kicks in at six hours or if your delay requires an overnight stay and is capped at $500 per ticket for things like meals and lodging. With delayed baggage protection, when a bag is missing for six hours or more, cardholders are covered up to $100 per day for up to five days for purchases like clothes and toiletries. Lost luggage is covered up to $3,000 per passenger.
Although the Amex Platinum did not offer a ton of travel protections before, Amex revamped the card’s coverage and benefits for 2020. Now cardmembers are eligible for trip cancellation or delay coverage of up to $10,000 per trip and $20,000 per account each consecutive 12-month period on round-trip, one-way, or combinations of round-trip and one-way tickets purchased entirely with the card (taxes and fees on award tickets as well as using Pay With Points also count). The card’s new trip delay insurance starts the clock at six hours and covers up to $500 per trip. It also offers lost luggage coverage of up to $3,000, but not baggage delay insurance .
Aside from airfare-specific bonuses and perks, you might want to consider a few other factors when choosing between these two cards.
Trip delay coverage can save you cash on long delays. (Photo via Getty Images)
First, the Chase Sapphire Reserve’s annual fee increased to $550 in January 2020 (the $550 fee applies to renewals after April 1, 2020) and its current sign-up bonus is 50,000 points after you use your card to spend $4,000 on purchases within the first three months of account opening. It refunds cardholders for Global Entry or TSA PreCheck application fees (up to $100) and gets cardholders into more than 1,3000 Priority Pass lounges at airports around the world.
One of its unsung perks is that it includes automatic primary insurance on most car rentals. The Sapphire Reserve also can save you on rides to the airport because it earns 10x points on Lyft rides and cardholders will be able to get a year of Lyft Pink for free (15% off Lyft rides and more). Cardholders also get $60 in DoorDash credit for 2020 and another $60 in DoorDash credit in 2021. Plus, when you set your DoorDash default payment to your Sapphire Reserve card (by Dec. 31, 2021) you’ll get at least 12 months of complimentary DashPass (no delivery fee).
The Platinum Card from American Express costs $550 per year to carry (see rates and fees ) and is currently fielding a welcome offer of 60,000 points after you use your card to make $5,000 in purchases in the first three months of account opening (though you might find offers of up to 100,000 points through the CardMatch Tool (offer subject to change at anytime). Among its benefits are a Global Entry or TSA PreCheck application fee credit (up to $100), up to $200 worth of Uber credits annually and both Marriott Bonvoy Gold and Hilton Honors Gold elite status. It also grants access to Priority Pass lounges, Delta Sky Clubs when flying Delta and Amex’s own Centurion Lounges .
Both the Chase Sapphire Reserve and The Platinum Card from American Express are excellent choices for airfare purchases. They both earn bonus points on airfare and include some great travel protections. The Chase card’s bonus earning usually applies no matter which portal you use to purchase your tickets, and its $300 annual travel credit is easier to use than the Platinum Card’s and can be put directly toward airline tickets.
On the other hand, the Amex card’s annual credit for up to $200 in airline incidental fees and participation in the International Airline Program might make more sense for travelers who can book through Amex Travel and tend to buy tickets in premium cabins.
Finally, you should think about whether you will get more use out of Chase Ultimate Rewards points and that program’s transfer partners (not to mention the 1.5 cents-per-point rate on direct redemptions for travel through the Ultimate Rewards portal) or those of American Express Membership Rewards. Once you answer these questions, you should be able to figure out which card will be better for your airfare purchases.
Featured photo by Josh Gribben/The Points Guy.
For rates and fees of the Amex Platinum card, click here .
I would like to subscribe to The Points Guy newsletters and special email promotions. The Points Guy will not sell your email.												 See PRIVACY POLICY.
Welcome to The Points Guy!
Ethan Steinberg Ethan's been a frequent flier for as long as he can remember, from studying abroad in Paris to moving to Shanghai after graduating college where he now serves as TPG's eyes and ears for all things travel in the Asia-Pacific region.
