Is This Card Right for You?
If you’re looking for a way to earn miles within the American AAdvantage program , the Citi® / AAdvantage® Platinum Select® World Elite™ Mastercard® is one of the few co-branded credit cards you can consider. While the earning rate on purchases isn’t spectacular, this card’s utility is still reasonable. Not only will you earn 1 mile for each dollar you spend on regular purchases, but you’ll be able to earn 2 miles per dollar spent on dining, gas and American Airlines purchases.
The main benefit of getting this card for the first year comes in the form of a generous signup bonus. Once you sign up, you can Earn 50,000 American Airlines AAdvantage® bonus miles after spending $2,500 in purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. That’s enough miles for an off-peak MileSAAver award from the U.S. to Europe, or for two off-peak round-trip MileSAAver awards from the U.S. to the Caribbean or Mexico.
You’ll also get some frequent flyer perks with this card, including a free checked bag for you and up to four companions on your domestic itinerary when you fly American. Since a checked bag would normally set you back $30 for most flights, that’s a potential savings of $150 one-way or $300 round-trip when you fly with four companions. You’ll also get a 25% in-flight discount on food and beverage purchases made with the airline, as well as preferred boarding that gets you on the plane sooner.
Finally, you’ll get a $125 flight discount after you spend $20,000 on your card within a calendar year and renew your card. That may be a high spending requirement for many people to meet, but it could be helpful for big spenders who use a rewards credit card for most of their regular purchases.
With all this being said, you should note that this card is not ideal if you plan to carry a balance. The ongoing variable APR will easily outweigh the value of any rewards earned, and this card doesn’t have any introductory offers that let you pay a lower interest rate for a limited time.
Earn 2 AAdvantage miles per dollar spent on eligible American Airlines purchases, dining, and gas and 1 AAdvantage mile per dollar on other purchases
The Citi® / AAdvantage® Platinum Select® World Elite™ Mastercard® does have a decent earning structure when you compare it to some other airline credit cards that only offer bonus miles on purchases of airfare. With this card, you’ll earn 2 AAdvantage miles per dollar spent on dining, gas station purchases, and purchases made with American Airlines for flights, seat upgrades, in-flight purchases and more. You’ll also earn 1 AAdvantage mile per dollar spent on other purchases, which can add up fast if you use your credit card for groceries, gas and regular bills.
Note that American Airlines is not a transfer partner for any programs except Bonvoy Rewards. Using an AAdvantage credit card is one of the few ways to earn AAdvantage miles without boarding a plane.
For the moment, American Airlines is still publishing an award chart for flights. However, this airline has moved toward a more dynamic pricing model in the last few years, and it’s been considerably harder to find SAAver award availability.
With that being said, there are still plenty of deals to be had when it comes to airfare. For flights in the Main Cabin, sweet spots still include round-trip flights to Europe from the U.S. during the off-peak season for 45,000 miles. You can also fly round-trip to Hawaii from the continental U.S. for as few as 40,000 miles, or to Central America for as little as 25,000 miles round-trip.
American also rolled out a selection of Web Specials last year. These web specials can be booked for less than a MileSAAVer award, although they are highly variable. With that being said, it’s not unheard of to find awards at steep discounts using this program.
When it comes to flights, you should also note that you can use American AAdvantage miles to book flights with an array of Oneworld airline partners, ranging from British Airways to Cathay Pacific, Japan Airlines and Qantas. Finally, you do have the option to redeem miles for more than flights. The American AAdvantage program extends additional options including redeeming miles for upgrades, flights, hotels, car rentals, Admirals Club memberships, and select services and merchandise.
To determine the rewards potential of the Citi® / AAdvantage® Platinum Select® World Elite™ Mastercard® we have to look at the bonus categories and calculate what an example American household might spend in those areas. Forbes uses data from various government agencies in order to determine both baseline income and spending averages across various categories. The 70th percentile of wage earning households bring in $100,172 annually and we base spending on that number.
The Citi® / AAdvantage® Platinum Select® World Elite™ Mastercard® has the following bonus categories:
2 AAdvantage miles per dollar spent at restaurants, gas stations and on eligible American Airlines purchases
1 AAdvantage mile per dollar on everything else.
Forbes calculates that the typical household spends $8,848 on restaurants and gas stations, and on airfare, which results in earning 17,696 Membership Rewards points. The $15,041 on other purchases that could reasonably be charged to a credit card would earn 15,041 AAdvantage miles. This means that the card would earn a total of 32,737 points per year in addition to the welcome bonus.
It helps to understand all the benefits you’ll receive before you sign up for a rewards credit card. Here’s a rundown of all the major perks you’ll receive with the Citi® / AAdvantage® Platinum Select® World Elite™ Mastercard®:
First Checked Bag Free: This benefit is good for you and up to four guests on your itinerary, although it’s only applicable to domestic itineraries marketed or operated by American Airlines.
Preferred Boarding: This benefit is good for you and up to four companions on your itinerary, and for all American Airlines flights.
$125 Flight Discount: You’ll qualify for a $125 discount on American Airlines flights each year when you spend $20,000 on your credit card.
Savings On In-Flight Purchases: You’ll save 25% on in-flight purchases of food or beverages when you use your credit card to pay.
Cash Advance: 5% of each cash advance; $10 minimum
If your goal is earning miles within the American AAdvantage program, this credit card is the best middle-of-the-road option to consider.
With that in mind, you could also sign up for the American Airlines AAdvantage MileUp℠ Card, which comes with no annual fee but a considerably less lucrative bonus offer and earning structure. Earn 10,000 American Airlines AAdvantage® bonus miles and receive a $50 statement credit after making $500 in purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. Considering 10,000 miles won’t even be enough for most one-way domestic trips with the American AAdvantage program, this card won’t get you far.
The Citi® / AAdvantage® Executive World Elite™ Mastercard® is also worth considering if you fly with American and want the highest level of benefits. Earn 50,000 American Airlines AAdvantage® bonus miles after making $5,000 in purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. Plus, Admiral's Club® membership in exchange for a $450 annual fee.
If you’re angling for elite status, you should also note that this card gives you 10,000 Elite Qualifying Miles (EQMs) if you can spend $40,000 on purchases within a calendar year. Not only that, but you’ll get an enhanced airport experience with priority check-in and early boarding, a first checked bag free, a $100 credit toward Global Entry or TSA Precheck, and no foreign transaction fees. This card may come with the highest annual fee of all American Airlines cards, but keep in mind that the Admirals Club membership is worth up to $650 on its own.
With that in mind, you can also look into other airline credit cards —and even flexible travel credit cards —if you’re not tied down to the American AAdvantage program. Flexible travel credit cards in particular can be a good option since they let you rack up considerable rewards then transfer them to airline and hotel programs later on, once you’re ready to book.
Is This Card Right for You?
The Citi® / AAdvantage® Platinum Select® World Elite™ Mastercard® is worth considering if you want some basic frequent flyer perks and a big welcome bonus without having to pay an annual fee the first year. With that in mind, make sure to compare it to other American Airlines credit cards, as well as to flexible travel credit cards that let you cash in points in more than one way.
At the end of the day, there’s no right or wrong airline credit card for anyone, but you should make sure to compare all the options before you decide. It can also help to play around with the American Airlines website to see how much flights would cost in miles for destinations you’re interested in, as well as general award availability for the trip you hope to book. Whether you plan to fly with American Airlines or a partner airline, it helps to have a handle on your options before you dive in and start earning miles with any rewards program.
