Women with platinum-resistant or refractory relapsed epithelial ovarian cancer continue to have a poor prognosis, and effective treatment of platinum resistance  --  or even of preventing or reversing it  --  remains the largest unmet need in ovarian cancer, according to experts.
"Although notable progress has been made in the treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer, the majority of patients with advanced disease still experience recurrence that ultimately results in fatality as a result of the emergence of chemotherapy resistance, particularly resistance to platinums," said Eric Pujade-Lauraine, MD, PhD, of Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu and ARCAGY-GINECO in Paris, and colleagues, writing in the Journal of Clinical Oncology .
The best treatment option is still the current standard of care, which "remains single-agent chemotherapy," noted Don S. Dizon, MD, of the Lifespan Cancer Institute at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence.
Current non-platinum, single-agent options for such patients include weekly paclitaxel, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD, Doxil), gemcitabine, or topotecan, often in combination with the antiangiogenic agent bevacizumab (Avastin).
Overall response rates (ORRs) with non-platinum single-agent therapy are similar and range from 10-15%, with a progression-free survival (PFS) of 3 to 4 months and an overall survival (OS) of approximately 12 months.
Results from the phase III AURELIA study , led by Pujade-Lauraine, showed that PFS almost doubled, from 3.4 to 6.7 months, when bevacizumab was added to single-agent chemotherapy (hazard ratio 0.48, 95% CI 0.38-0.60, P<0.001). However, the addition of bevacizumab only showed a trend toward improved OS (16.6 vs 13.3 months; P=0.171).
More recently, the phase III JAVELIN Ovarian 200 study , also led by Pujade-Lauraine, failed to demonstrate improved survival outcomes in 566 platinum-resistant or refractory ovarian cancer patients treated with the PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitor avelumab (Bavencio) alone or in combination with PLD, versus PLD alone. In the intent-to-treat population, median PFS was 3.7 months with the combination versus 3.5 months with PLD alone. Similarly, OS was 15.7 months versus 13.1 months, respectively.
"The heterogeneity and marked adaptability of the cancer genome, particularly in [high-grade serous ovarian cancer], indicate that overcoming resistance to therapy will require many different approaches," Pujade-Lauraine and colleagues wrote. "In this regard, increased knowledge of the ovarian cancer driver events will be key for the new therapy developments in the future."
The reviewers noted that the phase II QUADRA trial of single-agent niraparib (Zejula), a poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, provided evidence of activity in patients with platinum-resistant disease and both germline and somatic BRCA mutations. All patients had received three or more previous lines of therapy.
The ORR was 33% following treatment in 21 patients with platinum-resistant disease and 19% in 16 patients with platinum-refractory disease. The median duration of response was 9.2 months.
Despite limited treatment and survival outcomes that are "completely underwhelming," there is good news, Thomas Herzog, MD, of the University of Cincinnati Cancer Institute, told MedPage Today.
"Platinum-resistant disease has become the focus of novel developmental therapeutics with new approaches and compounds vying for regulatory accelerated approval," Herzog said. "During the entirety of my career, I have never seen as much research activity focused on this space with many of these research initiatives driven by biomarker and molecular anti-tumor strategies."
Even the definition of platinum resistance has evolved, Herzog noted. "Molecular signature, histologic subtype, maintenance-free interval, and lines of therapies often trump or enrich our understanding of the treatment-free interval [TFI] and traditional platinum-free interval [PFI] upon which platinum resistance is defined."
In clinical practice and in clinical trials, ovarian cancer continues to be categorized as either platinum-sensitive or platinum-resistant using the length of PFI. Temporal reference points include a PFI of less than 1 month, 1 to 6 months, 6 to 12 months, and more than 12 months.
However, an "important evolution" in these concepts is underway, Pujade-Lauraine and colleagues confirmed, noting the recent proposal at the fifth Ovarian Cancer Consensus Conference in Tokyo to reflect a wider range of treatments by replacing PFI with TFI. The terms of reference that were delineated included TFI from the last platinum dose as well as TFI from the last non-platinum therapy and TFI from the last biologic agent.
"The relevance of this new classification will be explored in the coming years," the authors predicted.
It has also been suggested that integration of the factors that influence outcome might predict prognosis better than use of PFI alone. In an AURELIA sub-study , for instance, a prognostic nomogram was validated to predict OS in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer.
Prognostic factors of different weight could also be used to improve algorithms of treatment and new drug evaluation, Pujade-Lauraine and colleagues pointed out. These factors would include the type and number of prior therapies; tumor burden, co-morbidities, and autonomy capacity; and the presence, type, and severity of symptoms at relapse, including ascites, abdominal symptoms, performance status, and pain.
In the meantime, enrollment in early-phase trials is often one of the best options for patients whose outcomes remain poor, the review authors emphasized.
The ongoing phase III ARIEL4 trial is evaluating single-agent rucaparib (Rubraca) compared with standard chemotherapy in BRCA-mutated ovarian cancer. Included are patients with platinum-resistant disease, and the study's primary completion date is June 2022.
Another ongoing phase III trial is looking at the use of olaparib (Lynparza) combined with the oral vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor cediranib (AZD2171) in patients with resistant disease, regardless of BRCA status; the estimated primary completion date is June 2023.
Pujade-Lauraine disclosed relationships with AstraZeneca, Tesaro, Roche, Clovis Oncology, Pfizer, EMD Serono, Merck, Incyte, and Arcagy Research.
