Copper futures are slightly retreating from their best levels in three months as investors seemingly take profits amid global economic uncertainty. The industrial metal had been gaining momentum on China’s recovery, as well as ballooning demand around the world. Is this just a blip in copper’s radar?
July copper futures dipped $0.007, or 0.28%, to $2.4845 per pound at 19:33 GMT on Wednesday on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. The red metal has been surging in recent sessions, advancing 4% in the last week and climbing more than 6% over the last month. However, copper prices are still down about 11% year-to-date.
The world’s biggest consumer of copper, China, is primarily driving the industrial metal’s ascent.
In the world’s second-largest economy, sales of automobiles rose 11.7% on the year in May. This is an important trend because the auto sector is an important demand driver for metals.
Wuhan, the epicenter of the Coronavirus, reported no new cases of COVID-19, which has many believing that perhaps a second wave of the virus will not be happening. This could bode well for global supply chains if the globe can largely avoid another round of the public health crisis.
Overall, there is a strong physical demand for copper in China. This view was supported earlier this week when it was reported that copper inventories in warehouses monitored by the Shanghai Futures Exchange (ShFE) declined at their fastest pace in nearly three years. Bonded warehouse stocks in China, meanwhile, jumped by 2,000 tons to 212,000 tons last week.
Nicholas Snowdon at Deutsche Bank told Reuters:
You can understand the price path so far, reflecting a forced liquidation of shorts in the market, but I think that’s broadly complete now.
The key question for further upside is whether Chinese physical demand can remain as strong going into mid-year as it has been in the past three months. Realistically, there are seasonal headwinds that are likely to moderate the strength of that demand, at least in the near term.
The Bank of America revised its 2020 forecast for copper upward by 5.4% to $5,620 per ton. BofA analysts wrote in a research note to clients that the easing of lockdown restrictions in the US would help boost raw material purchases worldwide. If construction and industrial activity rise in the second half, then this could translate into greater consumption of copper.
We also note that the current recession is different to the usual downturns on various other metrics: the epicenter is in services, not manufacturing; governments are gearing up to implement remarkable fiscal stimulus packages, reflected in China’s NPC and Europe’s Next Generation EU initiative.
In other metal commodities , July gold futures plunged $33.20, or 1.9146%, to $1,700.80 per ounce. August silver futures shed $0.28, or 1.53%, to $17.98 an ounce. July platinum futures fell $10.40, or 1.2%, to $858.30 per ounce. July palladium futures dropped $26.60, or 1.34%, to $1,956.00 per ounce.
