A run of record prices for palladium and rhodium has come to a screeching halt as car sales drop.
Record prices for palladium and rhodium have come to a screeching halt.
The coronavirus pandemic slammed demand for the two rare metals, which are both used for car parts, thanks to plunging vehicle sales.
“The three things that most determine car sales are credit, employment, and consumer confidence, and all are working against car sales,” says Steven Dunn, head of exchange-traded funds at Aberdeen Standard Investments.
“Three-quarters of Americans live in states or cities where they are being told to stay at home, except for essentials such as shopping for food, drugs, or seeking medical care,” he says.
Palladium futures prices US:PAM20 recently turned negative for the year. Prices settled at $1,892.20 an ounce on Wednesday, down 0.9% from the end of 2019. That’s a far cry from the record settlement of $2,711.70 on Feb. 27, when prices traded more than 42% higher for the year. They edged up to finish at $2,001 on Thursday . Rhodium spot prices on Thursday stood at $8,200 an ounce, according to data from specialty-chemicals company Johnson Matthey . They are still up nearly 36% year to date, but had reached a record $13,800 as recently as March 12.
Palladium and rhodium are primarily used in catalytic converters for vehicles with gasoline-powered engines, which help control harmful emissions from car exhausts. They’ve benefited from tighter emissions legislation.
Tougher emission standards in China, India, Europe, the U.S., and the United Kingdom have “reinforced the shift” from diesel vehicles, which primarily use platinum-based catalytic converters , in the wake of the Volkswagen 2015 emissions scandal, says Marnie Owen, global head of technical analysis at Informa Global Markets.
That led to platinum’s underperformance compared with palladium and rhodium. On Thursday, platinum futures PLN20,
settled at $788 an ounce, down more than 19% for the year.
Three-way catalytic converters, which cut the concentrations of three major exhaust gases—hydrocarbon, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxides—in gasoline-powered vehicles, “use more rhodium, which had boosted its demand in the face of declining auto sales even prior to Covid-19,” Owen says.
In March, new passenger-car registrations in the European Union , a proxy for sales, dropped 55.1% from a year earlier, according to the European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association. In the U.S., Toyota Motor North America reported a 36.9% fall in March vehicle sales versus a year ago.
Auto sales figures have knocked palladium “out of bed,“ but the metal is likely to climb back as it continues to benefit from China’s clean air standards, which push “more palladium into every tailpipe in that country,” says R. Michael Jones, chief executive officer of Platinum Group Metals.
For now, a supply shortage from the shutdown of production in some areas has offered some support for palladium and rhodium prices, says Ed Egilinsky, head of alternatives at Direxion.
A 21-day lockdown in late March to slow the spread of Covid-19 in South Africa led to shutdowns in metals production in the nation. The lockdown has been extended to the end of April.
“South Africa produces over 70% of the world’s platinum, and over 30% of palladium,” says Owen. With rhodium factored in, the 21-day lockdown “took an estimated nearly 60%” of global platinum group metal supply offline.
Idled mines may be slow to resume operations, even though they were permitted to reopen despite the lockdown extension, says Owen. Her outlook points to volatility in palladium and rhodium over the next three to six months, “with the possibility of another decline before the broader long-term uptrend resumes.”
