In an effort to continue to deliver on its promise of a Caribbean worry-free vacation, Sandals Resorts has introduced Sandals Platinum Protocols of Cleanliness.
Sandals said it already had industry-leading practices in place to guarantee cleanliness standards, but with these new protocols, visitors can expect heightened health and safety measures that address their changing expectations amidst the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
Related article :Sandals staff cannot wear uniforms while commuting, must wear masks
Founder and Chairman of Sandals Resorts, Gordon 'Butch' Stewart, in a press release, said: “At Sandals Resorts, cleanliness and safety have always been priority number one. Our loyal guests and incredible team members are part of the Sandals family, and we take care of our family. Their health and safety is our focus."
"We want our guests to not have to worry about a thing so they can enjoy the Luxury Included® vacation they’ve trusted in time and time again. We’re doing everything we can to offer peace of mind during a time that has been difficult for the entire world, and that is why we have continued to evolve our protocols to maintain an even safer, healthier stay.”
Sandals Platinum Protocols of Cleanliness will include several pre-emptive cleanliness measures that safeguard the guest journey from arrival to departure, including additional health and well-being requirements across all points of contact on the resort.
These six new and enhanced protocols will take effect across all 15 Sandals Resorts and three Beaches Resorts are:
All-Encompassing 18 TouchPoint Practice: Sandals Resorts has completed a thorough research assessment of all points of guest contact, resulting in the integration of advanced hygiene practices across eighteen key touch points – starting from the moment guests arrive at airport lounges through the entirety of the resort experience.
These touchpoints include the airport lounge; guest transfers to and from resort; guest rooms, food and beverage experiences; housekeeping and laundry; elite services including butler service and Club Sandals Concierge; maintenance; resort activities such as water sports; elevators; swimming pools, jacuzzis and spas; team members access points; fitness centres and the Red Lane Spa; public bathrooms; suppliers and receiving; all public areas including lobbies and beaches; back of house facilities such as storerooms and offices; Kids Camps and waterparks at Beaches Resorts; and HVAC systems.
Enhanced Triple-Check System for Cleaning and Sanitation: All resorts are diligently cleaned and sanitized on an ongoing basis, with a Triple-Check system and a minimum of three inspections daily. These inspections include all hard surfaces – from door handles and interiors of vehicles used for airport transfers; public restrooms, which are inspected, cleaned and sanitized in 20-minute intervals; kitchens, bars and restaurants, including menus, tables, cutlery, glassware, chairs and more; and swimming pools and hot tubs.
Additional hand sanitizing stations will be provided for guests and team members throughout the resorts, at all dining locations and within each individual guest room. Any items that guests will come in contact with – from room cards to welcome cocktails glassware – are sanitized before distribution.
New Certified Sandals Sanitized Guest Rooms: Sandals will introduce even more robust housekeeping measures as part of Sandals Platinum Protocols of Cleanliness, to include: the introduction of additional hospital-grade disinfectants; electrical aerosol sprayers for advanced cleaning; the use of UV-LED lighting equipment to inspect cleanliness; air duct sanitization for each arrival and upon each departure; weekly steam-cleaning and sanitization of carpeting; placement of anti-bacterial gels and soaps in each guest room; and strict adherence to the Triple-Check System.
At-Home to In-Room Check-in, beginning in June: Guests will have the ability to check-in online, allowing them to skip the front desk and go directly to their room. A refreshing welcome cocktail, a personal anti-bacterial hand towel and individual in-room hand sanitizer will always await arriving guests.
Social Distancing Practices: Sandals is introducing new ways to encourage guests to maintain a safe social distance while sustaining the relaxed experience the brand is known for, including: adding more airport transfers with fewer guests per vehicle; extending check-in times between visitors; setting up a safe social distance across restaurants, bars and beaches; replacing handshakes with a nod and a smile; and restricting elevator trips to one couple per trip at Sandals Resorts and one family per trip at Beaches Resorts, with staff members taking alternate routes.
Reiterating that Sandals has always had a benchmark for cleanliness, Sandals Resorts is reminding clients that in the past it has earned its place as the only hotel chain in the world to have all of its resorts certified by the EarthCheck benchmarking and certification program – awarded to companies that deliver clean, safe and healthy destinations for travellers whether they’re visiting, living or working in the destination – with nine resorts currently holding Master Certification.
The new protocols were launched on May 4, 2020.
Get the latest local and international news straight to your mobile phone for free:
