The vast majority of PGMs are mined in major producer South Africa ; a national COVID-19 lockdown in the country has prevented miners from reaching their quarterly output goals and is expected to keep total production tallies lower this year.
CPM Group’s Rohit Savant expects a sharp decline in total platinum supply this year.
“We expect both mine production as well as scrap supply to decline, and this decline is based on the disruptions that we’ve seen resulting from the coronavirus,” said the firm’s vice president of research.
In 2019, mine output combined with scrap supply amounted to 7.3 million ounces — one of the highest levels since 2015 and the third consecutive year of growth.
“CPM Group’s expectation of total supply for 2020 is about 6.4 million ounces,” said Savant. “And there is a great deal of uncertainty with regards to the forecast.”
After a 40 percent price slip in mid-March to US$588 per ounce — its lowest point since 2003 — platinum has added 36 percent to its value. However, the metal is expected to remain rangebound between US$855 to US$875, according to Jeffrey Christian, the head of CPM Group.
“Our expectation is that the price will continue to trade in this range for awhile. We do see scope for higher platinum prices in the future, but frankly it could be a couple of years from now before we see that,” he said during the Tuesday (June 30) webinar.
As automotive demand softens, increased interest in platinum exchange-traded funds (ETFs) may be a catalyst for the metal’s price to strengthen in the second half of the year.
In 2019, platinum held in ETFs reached a record of 3.3 million ounces. 2020 showed promise for platinum ETF growth until the March market crash, which saw prices fall 34 percent over two weeks.
“Pandemic-related risk-off sentiment resulted in some net reduction of about 500,000 ounces during March and April,” explained Savant. “Investors were seen coming back and adding metal during May — but not sufficiently to offset that loss.”
With platinum projected to experience price growth in the future as it is substituted for palladium in the autocatalyst industry, the value of palladium is unlikely to return to its pre-pandemic highs.
