2x miles on restaurants and U.S. supermarkets
Two one-time SkyClub guest passes, access to Amex Centurion lounges when flying on Delta tickets purchased with your Delta Reserve, access to complimentary upgrades for non-elite members
Earn 15,000 MQMs after spending $30,000 in a calendar year and again after spending $60,000, $90,000 and $120,000 in a calendar year
As you can see, these two cards overlap on a lot of benefits. Specifically, both cards include a Global Entry/TSA PreCheck application-fee credit (up to $100), the first checked bag free for you and up to eight companions on your reservation, priority boarding and 20% off inflight purchases.
Both cards also offer a Medallion Qualifying Dollar (MQD) waiver toward elite status. Customers who spend $25,000 a year will receive an MQD waiver all the way up to Delta Medallion Platinum elite status. Earning a waiver for Diamond requires a whopping $250,000 in annual spend.
But, there are some differences between the cards — with the biggest ones involving the welcome bonuses, lounge access, accelerator categories and help toward elite qualification . We’ll consider these in the following sections.
Delta flyers will be able to put these welcome bonus points to good use. (Photo by Alberto Riva/The Points Guy)
Since Amex only allows you to earn the bonus on each of its credit cards once per lifetime, you want to apply when the bonus is high. Luckily, the offers we’re currently seeing on both the Delta SkyMiles Platinum and Delta SkyMiles Reserve are compelling:
Delta SkyMiles Platinum : 40,000 bonus miles and 5,000 Medallion Qualification Miles (MQMs) after you spend $2,000 in purchases on your new Card in your first 3 months. Plus, earn a $100 statement credit after you make a Delta purchase with your new Card within your first 3 months. Terms apply.
Delta SkyMiles Reserve : 40,000 bonus miles and 10,000 Medallion Qualification Miles (MQMs) after you spend $3,000 in purchases on your new Card in your first 3 months. Terms apply.
There are a few different components to parse here, but the most important one for the average person is the bonus Delta miles. In that area, these cards are tied. TPG values Delta SkyMiles at 1.2 cents each , making the 40,000 bonus Delta miles that you can earn through this welcome bonus worth $480.
When comparing a premium rewards card to a non-premium card, the question is whether the increased annual fee is worth it for the extra benefits you receive. As of now, the difference in annual fees between the Delta SkyMiles Platinum and Delta SkyMiles Reserve is $300 ($550 (see rates and fees ) and $250 (see rates and fees ), respectively).
The Delta Reserve provides multiple types of lounge access when flying Delta. (Photo by Wyatt Smith/The Points Guy)
So what does the Delta Reserve offer to justify its hefty price tag? The first and most obvious perk is lounge access, which can easily net you $300 or more in value depending on how frequently you fly with Delta. In particular, you get:
Although Amex doesn’t currently have any Centurion lounges in Delta’s biggest hubs — Atlanta (ATL), Detroit (DET) and Minneapolis/St. Paul (MSP) — it’s slated to open one each in New York (JFK) and Los Angeles (LAX) in 2020, which will be great for Delta travelers passing through those airports. Of course, many Delta fliers might already have access to Amex Centurion Lounges, Delta SkyClubs (when flying Delta) and many other types of lounges through The Platinum Card® from American Express , so it’s important to make sure that the Delta Reserve wouldn’t be redundant in your wallet.
The Delta Reserve also comes out ahead with its annual companion certificate, which is valid for round-trip travel in domestic first class or Comfort+ and not limited to coach like the Delta Platinum . And you’ll earn 15,000 MQMs after spending $30,000 in a calendar year and again after spending $60,000, $90,000 and $120,000 in a calendar year. This means you can earn 60,000 MQMs in your first calendar year if you spend $120,000 on your card, and 60,000 MQMs each subsequent calendar year that you spend $120,000 on your card. That can give you a huge boost toward your desired elite status level with Delta.
Still, at the end of the day, $550 is a lot to spend on a card and the Delta Reserve is one of the only premium cards in this price range that doesn’t offer any type of annual statement credit to offset the annual fee.
The Delta Platinum with its lower annual fee may provide all the benefits you need. (Photo courtesy of Delta)
If you’re looking for a cheaper option, the mid-tier Delta Platinum is a great choice for a few reasons. Although both cards earn 3x on Delta purchases, the Delta Platinum has some sweet bonus categories that the Delta Reserve doesn’t. In particular, the Delta Platinum earns 3x miles on purchases made directly with hotels and 2x miles at restaurants and U.S. supermarkets.
Like the Delta Reserve , you can also earn MQMs when you reach particular spending thresholds on the Delta Platinum . The positive of the Delta Platinum is that it offers better bonus categories if you’re using the card for most of your spending. With the Delta Platinum you can earn 10,000 MQMs after spending $25,000 in a calendar year and another 10,000 MQMs after spending $50,000, for a total of 20,000 MQMs each calendar year that you spend at least $50,000 on your card.
So, if you don’t need to earn a lot of extra MQMs each year and won’t benefit from the Delta Reserve ‘s lounge access or premium-cabin companion certificate, the Delta Platinum might be a better option.
The premium credit card competition continues to heat up and issuers like Amex are updating their cards to keep them attractive to customers. Frequent Delta fliers might be willing to shell out $550 a year for the Delta Reserve and its SkyClub membership and Centurion Lounge access, but many travelers and even those pursuing Delta elite status might find the mid-tier Delta Platinum to be a much better value.
For rates and fees of the Delta SkyMiles Platinum card, click here .
For rates and fees of the Delta SkyMiles Reserve card, click here .
Additional reporting by Katie Genter.
Featured image by Wyatt Smith/The Points Guy.
I would like to subscribe to The Points Guy newsletters and special email promotions. The Points Guy will not sell your email.												 See PRIVACY POLICY.
Welcome to The Points Guy!
Ethan Steinberg Ethan's been a frequent flier for as long as he can remember, from studying abroad in Paris to moving to Shanghai after graduating college where he now serves as TPG's eyes and ears for all things travel in the Asia-Pacific region.
