I really dislike taking Advil or even Tylenol as plain aspirin doesn’t work on my symptoms. Kush strains do, they help me relax and not stress, my headaches melt away.
Cut & Dry’s Play varietal offers me an enchanting experience that I’ve searched, for but couldn’t find until now. This art of enjoyment includes relief in the form of removing my inner eye pressure. Play does what it is supposed to do, not one time but every time. This is why I enjoy cannabis.
This company has created a well-needed conduit for the passionate, but sometimes confused cannabis consumer. As a corporation, they offer a clever use for their hand-tended, therefore platinum-grade flowers. These are business school level skills at work for the good of their clienteles. When a company can be quick and agile in this path, it makes the consumer sales mantra easier to attain. Cut & Dry has made it easy for their buyer to enjoy such high quality.
I love this kind of organic growth in the corporate world.
This product really works for me. Glad I found the little package in my pocket. Certainly it made my morning much more at ease and fun.
Crushed, toasted hazelnuts give way to a tangle of cool, California citrus fruit salad and droplets of petrol. Baby skunk running around under your bedroom window offer whispers of their perfume up the nose directly leading into pools of richly textured Crème Brûlée and orange curd. There’s a touch of dark maple syrup and dare I say saffron at the finish, offering mystery and a soft, lung-filling finish.
It takes a little while to get started (it’s strong stuff, so please be patient) and that is a good thing, at least for me. My eye pressure melted away efficiently and with great fanfare. The experience is full body and deeply introspective, it opened my mind and the words just flowed and the music? I just dig Louis Armstrong and Earl Hines: Muggles.
Warren Bobrow, the Cocktail Whisperer, is the multi-published author of six books. Apothecary Cocktails: Restorative Drinks from Yesterday and Today, Whiskey Cocktails:
Warren Bobrow, the Cocktail Whisperer, is the multi-published author of six books. Apothecary Cocktails: Restorative Drinks from Yesterday and Today, Whiskey Cocktails: Rediscovered Classics and Contemporary Craft Drinks, Bitters and Shrub Syrup Cocktails: Restorative Vintage Cocktails, Mocktails & Elixirs, Cannabis Cocktails, Mocktails & Tonics: The Art of Spirited Drinks & Buzz-Worthy Libations and his celebrated, 2017 release, The Craft Cocktail Compendium. He also has an edition of Apothecary Cocktails translated into French for the European market. Bobrow led a panel on Cannabis Cocktails for Park Street University at the Berlin Bar Convent in Germany. Bobrow attended the B2B event named:Hall of Flowers in Santa Rosa, California in 2019. He currently makes his living in the Cannabis Industry having in prior years supported craft spirits focusing on craft Bourbon and unmanipulated rum. Warren has been a rum judge for the Rum XP and the Ministry of Rum having first tasted rum off of Anegada in the BVI- in the early 1980's.
Warren appeared on Viceland Live on February 27, 2019. He presented at 2018’s SXSW: Disrupting the Cannabis Kitchen and Cannabis Cocktails. He was the Mercedes-Benz Me Conference Mystery Speaker on Wellness for SXSW 2018. Bobrow has written articles for Saveur magazine, Voda magazine, Whole Foods-Dark Rye, Distiller, Beverage Media, DrinkupNY and many other national and global periodicals. He has written for SoFAB Magazine at the Southern Food and Beverage Museum in New Orleans and has in the past, written restaurant reviews for New Jersey Monthly. He has also contributed to the Sage Encyclopedia of Food Issues and the Oxford Encyclopedia edition: Savoring Gotham: A Food Lover's Companion to New York City. Warren judged the 2016 Asheville, NC, Cocktail Week. Warren was nominated for a Tales of the Cocktail Spirited Award in 2013. Warren appeared in the Saveur Magazine's "100" in 2010. He taught a Master Class on un-manipulated rum during the Moscow Bar Show in 2015 and a class on Mocktails and Acidulated Beverages, AKA: Shrubs at Stonewall Kitchen in York Harbor, Maine. His books consistently lead in overall sales during Tales of the Cocktail held yearly in New Orleans.
