Daily Gold News: Wednesday, June 3 – Gold Lower After Positive U.S. Data
Gold is 1.1% lower this morning following better-than-expected U.S. economic data releases. Financial markets remain in risk-on mode.
The gold futures contract lost 0.93% on Tuesday, as it retraced most of Friday’s advance of 1.35%. On Monday the price has reached slightly above $1,760. Yesterday’s daily low was at $1,728 and today it’s getting close to $1,700. Gold is still trading within its medium-term consolidation, as we can see on the daily chart:
Gold is 1.1% lower this morning following better-than-expected U.S. economic data releases. Financial markets remain in risk-on mode, as stocks continue to hover along their medium-term highs. What about the other precious metals? Silver lost 3.01% on Tuesday and today it is 2.2% lower. Platinum lost 3.60% and today is 2.1% lower. Palladium lost 0.29% yesterday and today it is 0.3% higher. So precious metals are trading lower this morning.
The recent economic data releases have been confirming negative coronavirus impact on global economies. Today’s ADP Non-Farm Employment Change has been better than expected. However, it was at -2.8 million. Investors will wait for the important ISM Non-Manufacturing PMI number release today. But markets’ attention will be focusing on Friday’s monthly jobs data release. And tomorrow we will get some quite important European Central Bank’s releases.
Below you will find our Gold, Silver, and Mining Stocks economic news schedule for the next three trading days:
10:00 a.m. Canada – BOC Rate Statement, Overnight Rate
7:45 a.m. Eurozone – Main Refinancing Rate, Monetary Policy Statement
8:30 a.m. U.S. – Unemployment Claims, Revised Nonfarm Productivity q/q, Revised Unit Labor Costs q/q, Trade Balance
Thank you for reading today’s free analysis. We hope you enjoyed it. If so, we would like to invite you to sign up for our free gold newsletter. Once you sign up, you’ll also get 7-day no-obligation trial of all our premium gold services, including our Gold & Silver Trading Alerts. Sign up today!
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
All essays, research and information found above represent analyses and opinions of Paul Rejczak and Sunshine Profits’ associates only. As such, it may prove wrong and be a subject to change without notice. Opinions and analyses were based on data available to authors of respective essays at the time of writing. Although the information provided above is based on careful research and sources that are believed to be accurate, Paul Rejczak and his associates do not guarantee the accuracy or thoroughness of the data or information reported. The opinions published above are neither an offer nor a recommendation to purchase or sell any securities. Mr. Rejczak is not a Registered Securities Advisor. By reading Paul Rejczak’s reports you fully agree that he will not be held responsible or liable for any decisions you make regarding any information provided in these reports. Investing, trading and speculation in any financial markets may involve high risk of loss. Paul Rejczak, Sunshine Profits’ employees and affiliates as well as members of their families may have a short or long position in any securities, including those mentioned in any of the reports or essays, and may make additional purchases and/or sales of those securities without notice.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
