Allen Sykora Thursday March 19, 2020 10:39
Editor's Note: With so much market volatility, stay on top of daily news! Get caught up in minutes with our speedy summary of today's must-read news and expert opinions. Sign up here!
(Kitco News) -   David  Morgan, publisher of the Morgan Report, figures “opportunities will come” for  investors to buy gold - and silver-mining stocks again, but favors waiting until  there are strong signs they have put in a bottom.
The  longtime precious-metals and mining analyst also normally favors shares of  companies that have multiple mines to avoid a “one-trick pony.” Meanwhile, he  is bullish on gold itself.
The  precious metals, and stocks of the companies that produce them, started 2020 on  a strong note, but have fallen back as global equities got hammered during  worries about the impact of the COVID-19 virus on the economy.
In  an interview with Kitco News, Morgan said that he thinks of the current crisis  as “2008 Part 2.” Markets back then were roiled when a subprime mortgage crisis  triggered a broader financial crisis.
“Gold  is the most negatively correlated asset to the stock market,” Morgan said.  “Initially, gold was continuing to make higher highs as the stock market  started to unravel [in response to the virus]. That only lasted a short time.  Then gold was liquidated for a variety of reasons, primarily bank intervention,  bank sales and margin calls.”
Meanwhile,  mining stocks fell in sympathy with the broader market, Morgan continued.
“Gold  stocks are stocks, and they usually go in the same direction as the general  stock market,” the analyst said.
Morgan  said he remains bullish on gold as long as it holds $1,350 an ounce. He looks  for precious metals to ultimately rise, just as they did in the wake of the  2008 financial crisis.
In  fact, “I expect the metals to do extremely well,” he said.
However,  Morgan continued, it’s more difficult to forecast individual mining stocks  since because of the uncertainty about how the COVID-19 outbreak could impact  their production. The number of ounces produced plus the price of metals are  the two significant factors that determine a mining company’s revenue.
“You  can have the best mine in the world, but if the workforce doesn’t show up  [because of a virus outbreak], what kind of mine have you got?” he said. “I  don’t want to be too negative, and I don’t want to be too positive. I want to  be realistic.”
The  mining sector got a taste of the possible “worst-case” scenarios this week when  several producers, including Pan American Silver Corp., announced that mines in  Peru were being closed for 15 days due to government restrictions to combat the  COVID-19 virus, Morgan pointed out.
“The  worst case is the mining industry will be disrupted, and no one is smart enough  to know for how long,” he said.
There  is always the potential for closures to be extended or more to occur elsewhere,  particularly if there is an actual outbreak virus at a mine. So far, closures  have been enacted as precautionary measures. The impacted companies themselves  have said it’s too early to gauge the ultimate impact on their total 2020  output and quarterly financial statements.
Nevertheless,  Morgan said, there will be buying opportunities in shares of precious-metals  producers. However, he said, he would not try to guess when a bottom might be  occurring, but instead to wait for prices to stabilize for a while first, using  some kind of measurement to verify that “a bottom has been obtained.” This  might mean allowing prices to uptick for a while, maybe holding above a price  level that an investor might consider important.
“At  that point, you might pay up a little bit, but at least you are assured that  things are recovering,” Morgan said. “I’d much rather see a bottom formed and  verified before I went in with a significant position.”
The  analyst said he suspects that the mining stocks will form an “L-bottom” rather  than a “V-bottom.” This would be similar to the 2008 bottom, when prices on a  daily chart took two or three months to start posting a steady rise. The rest  is history, as gold went on to a record prices above $1,900 an ounce in 2011.
He  tends to favor companies that have multiple mines, preferable in multiple  jurisdictions, to avoid scenarios where a producer with a single mine is  devastated if that mine were to be shut down by an outbreak – or any other  calamity or government action, for that matter.
“You  want something that spreads your risk out,” Morgan said. “You don’t want a  one-trick pony.”
He  later added, “It’s not that I don’t have a few of those. But they’re usually  scattered within the portfolio appropriately because of the fact that they are  higher risk.”
Morgan  looks for precious-metals companies to fare better than those in the business  of base metals, such as copper. Furthermore, he suggested, base-metals  companies might have to seek “creative” financing, perhaps turning to deals  with streaming and royalty companies.
“It’s  quite likely that there will be creative financing in the royalty space around  the base-metal producers,” Morgan said.
