INTERNATIONAL. AOE has become a Platinum Partner for the pioneering Moodie Davitt Virtual Travel Retail Expo , an exciting addition to a stellar list of exhibitors across multiple categories.
Embracing the tagline “Passionate agile minds thinking digital”, AOE has become the leading developer of digital ecommerce platform solutions in the aviation and travel retail sphere. AOE’s OM³ digital marketplace has been the chosen platform for numerous successful airport and retailer forays into omnichannel retailing, including Heathrow Boutique , The Mall (Auckland Airport) and KrisShop.com , the Singapore Airlines, 3Sixty Duty Free and SATS joint venture.
The company serves as a global technology service provider and consultancy, supporting enterprises in their strategic decisions and digital transformation processes.
“AOE has made a name for building benchmark omnichannel ecommerce marketplaces for airports and airlines around the world,” said AOE Founder & CEO Kian Gould.
“At the Virtual Travel Retail Expo, we plan to expand that omnichannel platform to a new level. As such, AOE’s ground-breaking Virtual Expo showcase will not be limited to talking the future of digital travel retail. It will encompass – and unveil – a whole new ecosystem, featuring a range of fundamentally interlinked partners, brands, technologies and, of course, travelling consumers to transform the travel retail channel.”
The Moodie Davitt Report Founder & Chairman Martin Moodie said: “Ever since it burst on the aviation and travel retail scene, AOE has been a thought leader and positive disruptor. Kian’s long-held views on the urgent need for airlines, airports and retailers to digitalise their retail offerings in a coherent ecosystem have been born out by what has happened during the COVID-19 crisis, where ecommerce – where it exists meaningfully – has been one of the few shining lights.
“Having spoken to Kian and his colleagues about the evolving industry landscape, I know that what AOE will be showing at our Virtual Travel Retail Expo will live up to the promised billing of delivering and championing a whole new ecosystem. I am confident that both his presentation in the Expo Knowledge Hub and AOE’s Virtual Stand will go down as a redefining moment in our industry’s evolution.”
[Last October, industry filmmaker and blogger Peter Marshall of TRUnblocked interviewed AOE’s newly hired Head of Airline Solutions Michael Raasch. The much-respected Raasch joined AOE from LSG Group, where he had served as Head of Consulting. Click on the YouTube icon to view.]
Note: The travel retail industry has leant tremendous support to the inaugural Virtual Travel Retail Expo with new exhibitors being named each week and several major announcements to be made in coming days. If you would like to exhibit please contact Martin Moodie at Martin@MoodieDavittReport.com . Airport executives and all travel retailers can register for free here .
The publication examines how airlines can “seize the omnichannel opportunity” to drive greater ancillary revenue from a smarter, safer platform. The future is clear, it concludes. The future is digital. Read More
