Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an interaction, or dismiss a notification.
This article is brought to you by the Personal Finance Insider team. It has not been reviewed, approved, or otherwise endorsed by any of the issuers listed. Some of the offers you see on this page are from our partners, like Citi and American Express, but our coverage is always independent.
Delta offers several co-branded credit cards with Amex. Two of the most popular options are the Delta SkyMiles® Gold American Express Card and the Delta SkyMiles® Platinum American Express Card .
From now until April 1, both cards offering limited-time welcome bonuses that can earn you more miles.
The Delta Gold card has a lower annual fee, and is a better option if you only fly Delta a few times a year,
If you're a more frequent Delta flyer, the Delta Platinum card could be worth the higher fee thanks to benefits like an annual companion certificate and the ability to earn Medallion Qualification Miles (MQMs) toward elite status.
Delta and American Express have several different co-branded credit cards , and the welcome offers for these cards fluctuate throughout the year. Currently (through April 1, 2020), the welcome offers are at an all-time high, offering up to 100,000 miles to new cardholders who meet the minimum spending requirements.
If you're a frequent Delta flyer but aren't sure which card is right for you, you've come to the right place. We're going to take a look at the two Delta consumer cards that make sense for the majority of travelers: the Delta Gold Amex card and the Delta Platinum Amex card . We'll compare these two options to help you decide if either is the right pick for you.
Keep in mind that we're focusing on the rewards and perks that make these credit cards great options, not things like interest rates and late fees, which will far outweigh the value of any points or miles. It's important to practice financial discipline when using credit cards by paying your balances in full each month, making payments on time, and only spending what you can afford to pay back.
The Delta Gold card is best for the occasional or casual Delta flyer. It comes with a $99 annual fee that's waived the first year, and until April 1 it's offering a hefty welcome bonus of 60,000 Delta miles after you spend $2,000 in the first three months of having the card. You'll also get an additional 10,000 miles after your first account anniversary, for a total of up to 70,000 miles.
If you spend at least $10,000 in purchases on the Delta Gold card in a calendar year, you'll get a $100 Delta flight credit, which can help offset the annual fee. The card recently added some new bonus spending categories where you can earn 2 miles per dollar spent: US supermarkets and restaurants worldwide.
While there are compelling reasons to get the Delta Gold card for its welcome offer and ongoing benefits, keep in mind that several cards offer better bonuses on spending at restaurants and Us supermarkets, and there are also plenty of cards — including the no-annual-fee Wells Fargo Propel American Express® card — that offer 3x points on all travel.
