Disney officials have shared some helpful tips for Walt Disney World Annual Passholders as they become eligible to make theme park reservations using Disney Park Pass.
Tomorrow, June 26, 2020, Walt Disney World Resort will be opening the Disney Park Pass system to all Annual Passholders (remaining general ticket holders will gain access on Sunday, June 28). As the system opens, all Pass holders will be eligible to make theme park reservations for up to three days at a time. Please note Disney will not open new availability at a pre-announced time of day. (For example, it may not be 7 a.m. It will be at an unannounced time. We recommend checking in periodically)
Annual Passholders staying at select Disney Resort hotels or other select hotels with valid theme park admission will be eligible to make theme park reservations for each day of their stay(s). For example, if a Disney World Annual Passholder has three five-night reservations, they will be able to hold up to 15 theme park reservations at one time.
The video below explains more information on the Disney Park Pass system and how to make a theme park reservation, whether you are an Annual Passholder from afar or Florida resident.
Disney will be using virtual waiting rooms as needed to manage the high volume of guests looking to make park reservations for their upcoming visits. Disney also anticipates many Passholders and Guests will begin making their park reservations right away, so wait times may be longer earlier in the day. Please use your patience and remember that as Fairy Godmother says, “even miracles take a little time.”
To help you make your Parks reservations, Disney sent us a few helpful reminders that we think will make your Annual Passholder Disney Park Pass-making a bit easier:
Ensure your ticket or Annual Pass is linked to your My Disney Experience account for each member of your travel party.
Please be sure you are searching for available park days within the valid use period of your ticket or Annual Pass. You can view your valid use period under Tickets and Passes in My Disney Experience. All reservations are subject to availability and applicable pass block-out dates.
Contact the Disney Reservation Center via phone or online chat if these tips do not resolve the issue. Please note that Disney is experiencing a high call and chat volume at this time.
Disney recognizes that theme park and WDW reservations will change the way many Passholders prefer to enjoy their pass. With that in mind, Disney is offering alternative options to help Passholders manage their pass, including an additional one-month extension to any passes that will automatically be processed and visible in My Disney Experience accounts in October 2020. Click here for more details on DisneyWorld.com. This is on top of the extension (stop and restart) that Disney added to APs during the closure of the Parks.
As a reminder, Weekday Select, Theme Park Select, Silver, Gold, Platinum, Platinum Plus, and Premier Passholders will have the opportunity to register for a special preview at Magic Kingdom Park or Disney’s Animal Kingdom Theme Park on July 9 or 10. Email invitations with additional preview registration details will be sent out soon.
Are you primed and ready for tomorrow’s Disney Park Pass and the WDW Reservations system opening? Leave us a comment below!
