DRPG has been awarded the highest accreditation from the Investors in People scheme.
Investors in People specialise in transforming business performance through people and is known to help businesses grow, develop and compete.
The Platinum status means principles, policies and practices around supporting people are embedded in an organisation. DRPG first received the accreditation in 2004, demonstrating its growth through Bronze, Silver, Gold and Platinum.
The assessment happened over several days including a full culture audit and interviews with over 40 team members. The auditors commented: “It is remarkable how well you have sustained this through the current lockdown and are already exploiting opportunities for changes in services and methods as a result of it.”
The assessment report emphasised a strong culture of trust, inclusion and empowerment within the group. The report stated: “People are truly at the heart of your plans for success. Your approach is bringing success, and the ambitious crusade to accelerate growth to achieve £100m turnover is being supported enthusiastically by everyone.”
Dale Parmenter, CEO, DRPG, said: “Our team lie at the heart of the business and are central to every success that we achieve together. I am more than proud of all our team who, no matter how much we grow, keep that family feel that drives our culture and keeps us true to our values. Not only is it an honour to be awarded the highest accreditation, it is also a learning opportunity which helps us to highlight areas we should be proud of and those which can be improved further, helping to hold us accountable to our people and our values.”
Paul Devoy, CEO, Investors in People, added: “We would like to congratulate DRPG. Platinum accreditation on ‘we invest in people’ is a remarkable effort for any organisation, and places DRPG in fine company with a host of organisations that understand the value of people.”
Heather McDermott, head of HR, DRPG, commented: “It is inspiring to work for an organisation and form part of a team that really wants to be successful. I’m lucky to support a business that really does put its people first, and at the heart of everything that it does, and is not afraid to challenge the norm.”
