/NOT FOR DISSEMINATION IN THE UNITED STATES OR THROUGH U.S. NEWSWIRE SERVICES/
VANCOUVER, BC, June 16, 2020 /CNW/ - Eastern Platinum Limited ("Eastplats" or the "Company") reports that the chrome concentrate operation at Crocodile River Mine ("CRM") located in South Africa was temporarily halted on the weekend as a result of a confirmed case of COVID-19 and some precautionary steps the Company is taking, including personnel self-isolation and full scale deep cleaning of CRM. To ensure the safety and health of the staff, the Company is instituting a full baseline testing of staff and contractors for COVID-19. The Company has prepared and is undertaking additional training and education, and targets chrome concentrate production to restart not later than Saturday June 20, 2020.
The effects of the COVID-19 are changing rapidly and the consequences of the temporary shutdown of CRM are expected to be minimal, however if it is extended the effects cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but could have material adverse effects on the Company's business and cashflows.
This press release contains "forward-looking statements" or "forward-looking information" (collectively referred to herein as "forward-looking statements") within the meaning of applicable securities legislation.  Such forward-looking statements include, without limitation, forecasts, estimates, expectations and objectives for future operations that are subject to a number of assumptions, risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond the control of the Company.  Forward-looking statements are statements that are not historical facts and are generally, but not always, identified by the words "will", "plan", "intends", "may", "will", "could", "expects", "anticipates" and similar expressions. Further disclosure of the risks and uncertainties facing the Company and other forward-looking statements are discussed in the Company's most recent Annual Information Form available under the Company's profile on www.sedar.com .
In particular, this press release contains forward-looking statements pertaining to: the effects of a temporary shutdown at CRM, effects and duration of COVID-19, effects on the Company's business and cashflows. These forward-looking statements are based on assumptions made by and information currently available to the Company.  Although management considers these assumptions to be reasonable based on information currently available to it, they may prove to be incorrect.  By their very nature, forward-looking statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties and readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these statements as a number of factors could cause actual results to differ materially from the beliefs, plans, objectives, expectations, estimates and intentions expressed in such forward-looking statements.  These factors include, but are not limited to, unanticipated problems that may arise in our production processes, commodity prices, lower than expected grades and quantities of resources, need for additional funding and availability of such additional funding on acceptable terms, economic conditions, currency fluctuations, competition and regulations, legal proceedings and risks related to operations in foreign countries.
All forward-looking statements in this press release are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement, the "Cautionary Statement on Forward-Looking Information" section contained in the Company's most recent Management's Discussion and Analysis available under the Company's profile on www.sedar.com .  The forward-looking statements in this press release are made as of the date they are given and, except as required by applicable securities laws, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation, and does not undertake, to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
No stock exchange, securities commission or other regulatory authority has approved or disapproved the information contained herein.
