Company receives high marks for sustainability, ethics and human rights efforts
TORONTO--( BUSINESS WIRE )--CHEP, a Brambles company and a global leader in supply chain solutions, today announced CHEP Canada received EcoVadis’ prestigious Platinum ranking – ranking in the top 1 percent of sustainable businesses within its industry.
This is the fifth consecutive year CHEP Canada has ranked by EcoVadis, and the first time it has achieved a Platinum ranking. The EcoVadis methodology framework assesses companies’ policies and actions, as well as their published reporting, related to the environment, labor and human rights, ethics and sustainable procurement. CHEP Canada ranking designates it as “advanced” in its Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) efforts.
“We are honored that EcoVadis has once again recognized CHEP’s commitment to sustainability and are humbled to achieve Platinum recognition for the first time,” said Paola Floris, Vice President and General Manager, CHEP Canada. “Through our share and reuse circular business model, as well as our customer collaborations through our Zero Waste World program, CHEP promotes social responsibility in every aspect of our business – it’s core to our values and mission.”
EcoVadis provides sustainability ratings for more than 65,000 companies and more than 200 industries. Its methodology is based on international CSR standards, including the Global Reporting Initiative, the United Nations Global Compact and ISO 26000.
CHEP Europe and CHEP Australia have also received EcoVadis Gold recognition for CSR for the last several years.
EcoVadis is the world’s most trusted provider of business sustainability ratings, intelligence and collaborative performance improvement tools for global supply chains. Backed by a powerful technology platform and a global team of domain experts, EcoVadis’ easy-to-use and actionable sustainability scorecards provide detailed insight into environmental, social and ethical risks across 190 purchasing categories and 160 countries.
CHEP helps move more goods to more people, in more places than any other organization on earth. Its pallets, crates and containers form the invisible backbone of the global supply chain and the world’s biggest brands trust CHEP to help them transport their goods more efficiently, sustainably and safely. As pioneers of the sharing economy, CHEP created one of the world's most sustainable logistics businesses through the share and reuse of its platforms under a model known as ‘pooling’. CHEP primarily serves the fast-moving consumer goods (e.g. dry food, grocery, and health and personal care), fresh produce, beverage, retail and general manufacturing industries. CHEP employs approximately 11,000 people and it believes in the power of collective intelligence through diversity, inclusion and teamwork. CHEP owns approximately 330 million pallets, crates and containers through a network of more than 750 service centers, supporting more than 500,000 customer touch-points for global brands such as Procter & Gamble, Sysco, Kellogg’s and Nestlé. CHEP is part of the Brambles Group and operates in approximately 60 countries with its largest operations in North America and Western Europe.
For more information, visit the company’s website at www.chep.com or follow us on Instagram @chep_global , Twitter @CHEPCanada and LinkedIn . Please also check out our YouTube channel . For information on the Brambles Group, visit www.brambles.com .
