Barbara Casasola dress, £1175 (net-a-porter.com). Chanel Fine Jewellery earrings, £4,950 (chanel.com)
Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Fill out this field Email address is invalid You already have an account. Please log in .
I would like to receive updates on cool openingsand celebrity lifestyle news every week, by email
Emily Ratajkowski surprised her Instagram fans on Tuesday with a major hair makeover. The 29-year-old, who has kept to her natural brunette color since the start of her modeling career, has now gone platinum.
“I’ve never colored my hair or changed the length significantly in my entire life,” said Ratajkowski, who is a spokesmodel for luxury French hair care line Kérastase , in a press statement.
“I’m absolutely thrilled that Kérastase gave me their blessing to become a blonde. I just celebrated my birthday and am so happy to be coming out of quarantine with a fresh new look,” the Inamorata founder added.
And in case there was any doubt, Ratajkowski confirmed that there is indeed some truth behind the age-old saying that ‘Blondes have more fun.’
“Beauty is meant to be fun and expressive and this is definitely, hands down, the most fun I’ve ever had with my look before,” said the model, who has worked with Kérastase for two years.
Kérastase global president Rosa Carrico shared that the platinum makeover wasn’t just a last-minute, bored-in-quarantine decision. “We planned it for so many months,” Carrico wrote alongside a video of Ratajkowski showing off her new color.
Even if Ratajkowski’s brunette color makes a return in the coming months, her platinum locks will live on in Kérastase’s Blonde Absolu campaign, debuting January 2021.
In the meantime, she’ll be caring for her new color with the Blonde Absolu range that is dedicated to blondes. Featuring shampoos , conditioners and masks aimed at hydrating bleached hair and neutralizing brassiness, Blonde Absolu also includes a heat protectant to keep the hair (and color) safe from damage caused by hot styling tools.
