Get the Latest Investment Ideas Delivered Straight to Your Inbox.
The findings indicate the potential for Group Ten Metals to produce the rare platinum group element as a coproduct.
Group Ten Metals Inc. (PGE:TSX.V; PGEZF:OTCQB; 5D32:FSE) announced in a news release that various analyses confirmed potentially significant values of rhodium in multiple target areas at its Stillwater West platinum group elements (PGEs)-nickel-copper-cobalt project in Montana.
"Our work targeting this rare and very valuable metal in 2019 not only identified grades that are significantly above the majority of current mine grades but also identified a potential source of the metal in North America at a time when the U.S. is looking to secure domestic supplies of platinum group elements," President and CEO Michael Rowley said in the release.
"At current prices, 0.5 g/t of rhodium is equivalent to more than 5 g/t of platinum, so it quickly adds value as a potential coproduct," added Rowley. Rhodium is only mined as a coproduct at platinum and nickel mines. Earlier this year, the rhodium price increased to $11,000 an ounce.
Vancouver, British Columbia-based Group Ten Metals analyzed 51 surface samples of rock and 207 samples of drill core taken from target areas at Stillwater West that were located to the west of Iron Mountain, as far as 10 kilometers away.
Multiple rock samples returned high-grade rhodium, including 1.07 grams per ton (1.07 g/t) at the Bald Hills target, 0.541 g/t at the Pine target and 0.572 g/t and 0.492 g/t at the Dunite Ridge target. The rhodium results from Dunite Ridge and Bald Hills are significant because both targets also demonstrated high-grade platinum and palladium. Additionally, the rhodium grade correlated with the platinum, palladium and chromite content.
Drill core samples from the Iron Mountain and Camp target areas showed rhodium grades of up to 0.167 g/t. (Currently, a range of rhodium grades is mined, the highest about 0.5 g/t.)
"We now have a much better understanding of the occurrence of rhodium in the lower Stillwater complex and can target it accordingly in future campaigns," Rowley said. "Stillwater West continues to yield exciting results starting with the broad intercepts of exceptional PGE-Ni-Cu-Co grades reported previously and, more recently, high-grade gold and rhodium results. We look forward to providing further news including updates on 3D modelling work at the most advanced target areas in addition to summaries of our work at reef-type targets, and our plans and expectations for the 2020 field season at Stillwater."
Group Ten Metals described in the news release the current global market for rhodium, a PGE used in automotive catalytic converters. South America produces about 80% of the world's rhodium with Russia accounting for the bulk of the remaining 20%. In 2019, worldwide rhodium production totaled 1.1 million ounces, which was not enough to counteract the existing multiyear supply shortage.
Want to be the first to know about interesting PGM - Platinum Group Metals investment ideas?  Sign up to receive the FREE Streetwise Reports' newsletter.
1) Doresa Banning compiled this article for Streetwise Reports LLC and provides services to Streetwise Reports as an independent contractor. She or members of her household own securities of the following companies mentioned in the article: None. She or members of her household are paid by the following companies mentioned in this article: None.
2) The following companies mentioned in this article are billboard sponsors of Streetwise Reports: Group Ten Metals. Click here for important disclosures about sponsor fees. As of the date of this article, an affiliate of Streetwise Reports has a consulting relationship with Group Ten Metals. Please click here for more information.
3) Comments and opinions expressed are those of the specific experts and not of Streetwise Reports or its officers. The information provided above is for informational purposes only and is not a recommendation to buy or sell any security.
4) The article does not constitute investment advice. Each reader is encouraged to consult with his or her individual financial professional and any action a reader takes as a result of information presented here is his or her own responsibility. By opening this page, each reader accepts and agrees to Streetwise Reports' terms of use and full legal disclaimer . This article is not a solicitation for investment. Streetwise Reports does not render general or specific investment advice and the information on Streetwise Reports should not be considered a recommendation to buy or sell any security. Streetwise Reports does not endorse or recommend the business, products, services or securities of any company mentioned on Streetwise Reports.
5) From time to time, Streetwise Reports LLC and its directors, officers, employees or members of their families, as well as persons interviewed for articles and interviews on the site, may have a long or short position in securities mentioned. Directors, officers, employees or members of their immediate families are prohibited from making purchases and/or sales of those securities in the open market or otherwise from the time of the interview or the decision to write an article until three business days after the publication of the interview or article. The foregoing prohibition does not apply to articles that in substance only restate previously published company releases. As of the date of this interview, officers and/or employees of Streetwise Reports LLC (including members of their household) own securities of Group Ten Metals, a company mentioned in this article.
Silver Tops Gold in May, Setting up a Summer Surge
Although the gold to silver ratio has tightened a bit, it remains elevated and could indicate more upside for silver, according to McAlinden Research Partners.
Peter Epstein of Epstein Research profiles this explorer with a past-producing high-grade silver and gold mine.
Ron Struthers of Struthers' Resource Stock Report considers the current outlook for miners in Nevada and highlights ProAm Explorations, which he believes is a bargain primed for advancement.
Gold Terra's Yellowknife City Project straddles two behemoth, historical, high-grade mines that produced 14 Moz of gold.
Millrock Resources CEO Gregory Beischer speaks with Maurice Jackson of Proven and Probable about his company's drill program in the shadow of the Pogo gold mine.
Money manager Adrian Day reviews the prospects of two of his favorite resource companies and comments briefly on the pullback in gold prices.
Technical analyst Clive Maund discusses the factors he sees weighing on precious metals in the near term.
Want to be the first to know about interesting PGM - Platinum Group Metals investment ideas?  Sign up to receive the FREE Streetwise Reports' newsletter.
Want to read more about PGM - Platinum Group Metals investment ideas?
Get Our Streetwise Reports Newsletter Free and be the first to know!
Streetwise Reports is registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Lion One Metals is currently drilling with two rigs and surface sampling various high-priority targets.Lion One Metals is currently drilling with two rigs and surface sampling various high-priority targets.Lion One Metals is currently drilling with two rigs and surface sampling various high-priority targets.Omineca Mining and Metals aims to culminate its 2020 program with drilling. Omineca Mining and Metals aims to culminate its 2020 program with drilling. Omineca Mining and Metals aims to culminate its 2020 program with drilling. Liberty Gold is also gradually scaling up its 2020 drilling at the project.Liberty Gold is also gradually scaling up its 2020 drilling at the project.Liberty Gold is also gradually scaling up its 2020 drilling at the project.Although the gold to silver ratio has tightened a bit, it remains elevated and could indicate more upside for silver, according to McAlinden Research Partners.Although the gold to silver ratio has tightened a bit, it remains elevated and could indicate more upside for silver, according to McAlinden Research Partners.Although the gold to silver ratio has tightened a bit, it remains elevated and could indicate more upside for silver, according to McAlinden Research Partners.Peter Epstein of Epstein Research profiles this explorer with a past-producing high-grade silver and gold mine.Peter Epstein of Epstein Research profiles this explorer with a past-producing high-grade silver and gold mine.Peter Epstein of Epstein Research profiles this explorer with a past-producing high-grade silver and gold mine.Ron Struthers of Struthers' Resource Stock Report considers the current outlook for miners in Nevada and highlights ProAm Explorations, which he believes is a bargain primed for advancement.Ron Struthers of Struthers' Resource Stock Report considers the current outlook for miners in Nevada and highlights ProAm Explorations, which he believes is a bargain primed for advancement.Ron Struthers of Struthers' Resource Stock Report considers the current outlook for miners in Nevada and highlights ProAm Explorations, which he believes is a bargain primed for advancement.Gold Terra's Yellowknife City Project straddles two behemoth, historical, high-grade mines that produced 14 Moz of gold.Gold Terra's Yellowknife City Project straddles two behemoth, historical, high-grade mines that produced 14 Moz of gold.Gold Terra's Yellowknife City Project straddles two behemoth, historical, high-grade mines that produced 14 Moz of gold.Millrock Resources CEO Gregory Beischer speaks with Maurice Jackson of Proven and Probable about his company's drill program in the shadow of the Pogo gold mine.Millrock Resources CEO Gregory Beischer speaks with Maurice Jackson of Proven and Probable about his company's drill program in the shadow of the Pogo gold mine.Millrock Resources CEO Gregory Beischer speaks with Maurice Jackson of Proven and Probable about his company's drill program in the shadow of the Pogo gold mine.Money manager Adrian Day reviews the prospects of two of his favorite resource companies and comments briefly on the pullback in gold prices.Money manager Adrian Day reviews the prospects of two of his favorite resource companies and comments briefly on the pullback in gold prices.Money manager Adrian Day reviews the prospects of two of his favorite resource companies and comments briefly on the pullback in gold prices.Technical analyst Clive Maund discusses the factors he sees weighing on precious metals in the near term.Technical analyst Clive Maund discusses the factors he sees weighing on precious metals in the near term.Technical analyst Clive Maund discusses the factors he sees weighing on precious metals in the near term.Lion One Metals is currently drilling with two rigs and surface sampling various high-priority targets.Lion One Metals is currently drilling with two rigs and surface sampling various high-priority targets.Lion One Metals is currently drilling with two rigs and surface sampling various high-priority targets.Omineca Mining and Metals aims to culminate its 2020 program with drilling. Omineca Mining and Metals aims to culminate its 2020 program with drilling. Omineca Mining and Metals aims to culminate its 2020 program with drilling. Liberty Gold is also gradually scaling up its 2020 drilling at the project.Liberty Gold is also gradually scaling up its 2020 drilling at the project.Liberty Gold is also gradually scaling up its 2020 drilling at the project.Although the gold to silver ratio has tightened a bit, it remains elevated and could indicate more upside for silver, according to McAlinden Research Partners.Although the gold to silver ratio has tightened a bit, it remains elevated and could indicate more upside for silver, according to McAlinden Research Partners.Although the gold to silver ratio has tightened a bit, it remains elevated and could indicate more upside for silver, according to McAlinden Research Partners.Peter Epstein of Epstein Research profiles this explorer with a past-producing high-grade silver and gold mine.Peter Epstein of Epstein Research profiles this explorer with a past-producing high-grade silver and gold mine.Peter Epstein of Epstein Research profiles this explorer with a past-producing high-grade silver and gold mine.Ron Struthers of Struthers' Resource Stock Report considers the current outlook for miners in Nevada and highlights ProAm Explorations, which he believes is a bargain primed for advancement.Ron Struthers of Struthers' Resource Stock Report considers the current outlook for miners in Nevada and highlights ProAm Explorations, which he believes is a bargain primed for advancement.Ron Struthers of Struthers' Resource Stock Report considers the current outlook for miners in Nevada and highlights ProAm Explorations, which he believes is a bargain primed for advancement.Gold Terra's Yellowknife City Project straddles two behemoth, historical, high-grade mines that produced 14 Moz of gold.Gold Terra's Yellowknife City Project straddles two behemoth, historical, high-grade mines that produced 14 Moz of gold.Gold Terra's Yellowknife City Project straddles two behemoth, historical, high-grade mines that produced 14 Moz of gold.Millrock Resources CEO Gregory Beischer speaks with Maurice Jackson of Proven and Probable about his company's drill program in the shadow of the Pogo gold mine.Millrock Resources CEO Gregory Beischer speaks with Maurice Jackson of Proven and Probable about his company's drill program in the shadow of the Pogo gold mine.Millrock Resources CEO Gregory Beischer speaks with Maurice Jackson of Proven and Probable about his company's drill program in the shadow of the Pogo gold mine.Money manager Adrian Day reviews the prospects of two of his favorite resource companies and comments briefly on the pullback in gold prices.Money manager Adrian Day reviews the prospects of two of his favorite resource companies and comments briefly on the pullback in gold prices.Money manager Adrian Day reviews the prospects of two of his favorite resource companies and comments briefly on the pullback in gold prices.Technical analyst Clive Maund discusses the factors he sees weighing on precious metals in the near term.Technical analyst Clive Maund discusses the factors he sees weighing on precious metals in the near term.Technical analyst Clive Maund discusses the factors he sees weighing on precious metals in the near term.
