Gold has been a winning investment over the last year, rising by more than 30% in 12 months. During the same period, the FTSE 100 has fallen by 25%. Buying FTSE 100 stocks today probably feels uncomfortable. But that’s what gold buyers were saying a year ago, when gold prices had been flat for three years.
I think the tide has turned. In my view, the smart choice is to get out of gold and back into stocks. Today I’m going to look at two FTSE 100 shares that look cheap to me at current levels.
One FTSE 100 stock I think offers decent value at current levels is mining group Anglo American (LSE: AAL) . The Anglo share price has fallen by 40% so far this year, leaving it lagging behind the FTSE.
However, the majority of the firm’s operations has not seen any significant impact from coronavirus pandemic and is continuing normally. Although Anglo is exposed to the risk of falling commodity prices, I’m starting to think this FTSE 100 stock’s current valuation could be a good level at which to invest.
I’m also attracted to the group’s mix of assets. Alongside its copper, nickel, coal, and iron ore mines, Anglo owns the De Beers diamond business. It’s also one of the world’s largest producers of platinum and palladium.
Demand for diamonds is down at the moment. So is demand for platinum and palladium, which are used in automotive catalytic converters. But an economic recovery could stimulate a strong recovery in demand.
At around 1,300p, Anglo shares trade broadly in line with their book value and on a multiple of less than 9 times forecast earnings for 2020. The stock also offers a forecast a dividend yield of nearly 5%.
Although it could still be a little too soon to invest, I think this FTSE 100 stock could offer decent value for long-term investors at current levels.
Many FTSE 100 stocks have already cut their dividends this year.
In my view, there are only a handful of high-yielding FTSE 100 shares that still look safe for income. One of my top picks is Legal & General Group (LSE: LGEN) . At the time of writing, these shares offered a forecast yield of 8.9%. I’m fairly confident this will be paid in 2020.
In a statement on 3 April, the firm said that it enjoys “robust” solvency and recognises the importance of the dividend to investors, including many pensioners. Unlike rival banks and insurers, Legal & General intends to pay a final dividend for 2019.
I support the board’s position on this. I don’t see any reason why the group’s insurance business should suffer a big hit from the coronavirus pandemic. And I agree that its solvency position is healthy – or at least it was in 2019, when Legal & General generated £1.6bn of surplus cash. That’s enough to cover the dividend 1.6 times.
I think this FTSE 100 stock is probably one of the best buys in the financial sector at the moment. Although the near-term outlook is uncertain, I’m sure this 184-year old business will continue to thrive.
With the shares now trading on just 6.5 times forecast earnings (plus that chunky 8.9% yield), I rate Legal & General as a buy.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Roland Head has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
