2021 Ford Mustang Mach 1 Will Come As A Coupe Only, No Convertible
2020 Mustang EcoBoost 2.3L High Performance Package: What Do You Want To Know?
2021 F-150 Raptor Isn’t Happening, But A New Model Is Coming Soon (Updated)
Earlier this month, our spies caught a prototype of the 2021 F-150 Platinum out in the wild, giving us a highly detailed look at the interior of the new high-end Ford truck . But the exterior of this new 2021 Ford F-150 prototype also deserves some attention, as there are quite a few things going on here that weren’t present on the last Platinum model we spied out in the wild.
First things first: this 2021 F-150 prototype is confirmed to be a Platinum via its newly-redesigned badges, which were exposed on this truck.
Up front, we see a new grille, featuring a large silver grille surround, with a single bar in the center hoisting Ford’s Blue Oval logo. Between the two bars are several “floating” trim elements, which we will refer to as “stars”. There are 18 of these stars in the first section, and 18 in the second section. The stars are “stacked” in a vertical format in rows of two, with the exception of the two columns just above and below the Ford logo, where only a single star appears.
Then there are the headlights, with large LED accents first making a horizontal line along the top of the headlight cluster, followed by a vertical line on the outer edge of the cluster. The lights continue Ford’s trademark “C-shaped” signature into the upper section of the bumper. In fact, Ford’s teaser of the 2021 F-150 shows off this exact lighting configuration.
Those lower accent lights appear to also feature a set of fog lights above them, which is an interesting new design feature.
Inside the cluster is a set of two stacked LED projectors serving as the primary forward lighting elements. A rectangular graphic encapsulates the projectors. At the bottom of the rectangle is the turn signal, which we can see enabled in the leading photo.
The bottom of the front fascia features features a chrome skid plate and tow hooks.
At the side, the new 2021 F-150 Platinum prototype is wearing a set of vertical tow mirrors instead of regular units. These units have chrome caps at the top of the mirror, along with an integrated turn signal indicator.
The truck is wearing several other chrome elements, including the base of the window surround, door handles, and power retractable running boards – much like the current model. The six-spoke, polished silver wheel design is all-new.
Out back, the taillights feature a red housing with a clear C-shaped element. There is also a chrome tailgate handle.
A single-exit side exhaust with a shiny tip is also present and accounted for.
In previous spy shots , we saw part of Platinum script embossed on the tailgate, atop a shiny/chrome background.
Overall, the 2021 F-150 Platinum looks like it’s going to continue in the same direction as the current model, offering plenty of shiny trim bits and a healthy amount of luxury features.
Currently, the Platinum is the second-highest F-150 trim level, slotting between Raptor and Limited.
The 2021 Ford F-150 is scheduled to make its global debut this Thursday, June 25 th. Along with an all-new exterior and interior, the 14th generation pickup is also expected to have various other new features including a flat-fold seat for comfy naps , an onboard power generator , an all-digital gauge cluster, and a large center screen. Additionally, the truck will also have over-the-air update capability , and we’re also hoping that a multi-function tailgate will make an appearance.
The very first units of the 2021 F-150s are set to begin rolling off the line at the Ford Dearborn Truck Plant on October 12th and at the Ford Kansas City Assembly plant on November 9th, dates that were essentially confirmed via a recently leaked summer shutdown schedule . Ford also officially stated the week prior that the new Ford F-150 was still on track for a fall launch .
We’ll have more on the new F-150 very soon, so be sure and subscribe to Ford Authority for the latest Ford F-Series news , Ford F-150 news , and non-stop Ford news coverage.
