(Reuters) - U.S. stock index futures resumed their slide on Tuesday as gloomy quarterly earnings reports and a historic plunge in U.S. crude prices to below zero raised the specter of a deep global recession in the coming months.
Wall Street fell on Monday as WTI crude CLc1 crashed to minus $40 for the first time in history as sweeping restrictions to contain the coronavirus hits oil demand. With nowhere to store the excess capacity, traders fled from contracts that would deliver barrels of oil to them in May.
Exxon Mobil Corp ( XOM.N ) shed 3.7% in premarket trading and Chevron Corp ( CVX.N ) slipped 4.0% as the front month May WTI CLc1 contracts continued to trade below $0 on Tuesday. June contracts also fell by $4, signalling more weakness in demand in the face of a near halt in global activity. [O/R]
Coca-Cola Co ( KO.N ) provided the latest evidence of the damage wrought by the pandemic, saying its current-quarter results would take a severe hit from low demand for sodas.
Investors will also keep a close eye on first-quarter earnings from major U.S. companies including Texas Instruments ( TXN.O ) and Travelers Companies ( TRV.N ) later in the day.
At 06:29 a.m. EDT, Dow e-minis 1YMcv1 were down 430 points, or 1.83%, S&P 500 e-minis EScv1 were down 39.25 points, or 1.41% and Nasdaq 100 e-minis NQcv1 were down 71.25 points, or 0.82%. SPDR S&P 500 ETFs ( SPY.P ) were down 1.59%.
The S&P 500 index .SPX closed down 1.79% at 2,823.16​ on Monday.
Reporting by C Nivedita in Bengaluru; Editing by Saumyadeb Chakrabarty
Disclaimer: The views expressed in this article are those of the author and may not reflect those of Kitco Metals Inc. The author has made every effort to ensure accuracy of information provided; however, neither Kitco Metals Inc. nor the author can guarantee such accuracy. This article is strictly for informational purposes only. It is not a solicitation to make any exchange in commodities, securities or other financial instruments. Kitco Metals Inc. and the author of this article do not accept culpability for losses and/ or damages arising from the use of this publication.
