Platinum Asset Management Limited (ASX: PTM)
Is the Platinum Asset Management Ltd (ASX: PTM) share price a buy after the release of its FY19 result.
Platinum Asset Management was founded in 1994, one of the co-founders was leading investor Kerr Neilson. Platinum is a fund manager that aims to provide investors exposure to international shares using a contrarian, long-term and bottom-up investment process. Platinum’s International Fund has delivered a 12.1% per year compound return since 30 April 1995.
The fund manager reported that its total revenue decreased by 15.3% to $299 million after a 3.6% decrease of funds under management (FUM) to $24.8 billion from $25.7 billion a year before.
The average FUM for the year decreased by 4.1% to $25.3 billion. Platinum said that the reduction in FUM was driven by net fund outflows of $246 million.
Platinum disclosed that most of its managed funds and portfolios lagged the broader market returns during FY19, which translated into lower fund flows, lower investment performance fees and therefore lower profit.
Platinum’s shareholders suffered a 16.7% decline of net profit to $157.65 million as a result of the lower net profit.
The fund manager blamed the ongoing uncertainty of the US – China trade war and lower growth expectations, which hurt the share prices of ‘value’ stocks and those with cyclical earnings.
Interestingly, no member of the investment team received any variable awards under the profit share plan and the CEO/Chief Investment Officer (being Andrew Clifford) decided not to receive any bonuses.
The Platinum Board decided to declare a final fully franked dividend of 14 cents per share, bringing the total year dividend to 27 cents per share, a decrease of around 16%.
Is The Platinum Share Price A Buy?
Platinum said it’s more important for them to minimise the risk of loss to clients than to achieve the maximum return possible, even if it means at times it underperforms the competition.
It sees an opportunity to grow overseas, with expansion in the UK and the US. This could be promising, but it will have to do well to make investors believe that it can provide better returns after fees that the passive ETFs with low fees.
It’s hard to know if Platinum is worth buying or not. It partly, perhaps largely, depends on the investment returns generated which can’t be known. So for me personally I’d rather invest in the growth shares in the free report below instead.
Here are 3 stocks I own in April 2020...
Amidst the COVID-19 confusion, there are some companies still growing FAST (think: online meetings through Zoom, streaming companies like Netflix and eHealth services provided by Teledoc).
While the world grapples with COVID-19, some companies are still growing rapidly. The entire cloud computing market is valued around $US210 billion but if you ask me, it seems clear as day that this market is only going to get bigger in 2020 and beyond.
That's why our top investment analyst has just identified 3 growth stocks in a net cash position, with strong competitive forces... and obvious tailwinds at their back. He owns all three of them right now!
Claim a FREE investing report on our analyst's "3 best share ideas for the cloud revolution" when you create a free Rask Australia account.
Our report is 100% free and unlocks hundreds of hours of bonus content.
Simply click here to access the report.
Disclaimer and warning: This information is published by The Rask Group Pty Ltd and contains general financial advice and information. That means, the information/advice does not take into account your objectives, financial situation or needs. Because of that, you should consider if the advice is appropriate to you and your needs, before acting on the information. In addition, you should obtain and read the product disclosure statement (PDS) before making a decision to acquire a financial product. If you don’t know what your needs are, you should consult a trusted and licensed financial adviser who can provide you with personal financial product advice. Please read our Terms of Service and Financial Services Guide before using this website.
At the time of publishing, Jaz does not have a financial interest in any of the companies mentioned.
Jaz is a keen investor who loves to thoroughly poke holes in an investment idea before it has a chance of making it into her portfolio. Jaz invests for the long-term and doesn't sweat the small stuff. She strongly believes that empowering people with knowledge is the best way for them to take charge of their finances, which is exactly the approach she takes with her own money and investments.
