WB: Please tell me about your company? Do you have a mentor in business? Business acumen? What is your six month and twelve month goals?
GS: My father was my mentor. He passed away two years ago and although he may not be here in a physical sense, I still look up to him and use many of the lessons he taught me about business and how to succeed.
The benefit of being able to work with my son has given me a new way of seeing things- Platinum gets the benefit of 2 perspectives. I make decisions with my son. Taking it a step further, Cody and I make decisions with our employees. We want their input and opinions. It's so important to listen to those who work for you. Again, this isn't about making a quick buck. We want to create an inclusive working environment where, whether you're entry level or a seasoned executive, people feel comfortable giving us their feedback and insight to better the company.
Our 6 month plan is to open in the Arizona market this summer. Within the next 12 months we want to expand our product offerings and our overall footprint into 5 states. We are currently in California, Michigan and Oklahoma. Not only do we want to be in these states, but we want to be one of the top selling brand in each state.
WB: What obstacles do you face when working in cannabis? Stigmas? What markets do you want to enter next? Obstacles?
GS: Business in general is difficult in cannabis because there's so much pushback. Banking is one of the biggest obstacles. We pay our taxes like any other business, comply with payroll laws for our 100+ employees and we still can't run like a "normal" business. It's definitely frustrating when bank accounts get shut down with little to no notice and they won't always give us a reason as to why. We still manage to work through all of these issues but they're unnecessary.
The long held notion that people who consume cannabis are stoners/lazy/slackers is slowly dissipating but being replaced with another stereotype- that everyone in cannabis has a lot of money. I wish that were true! Cannabis is not a "get rich quick scheme." If you think it is, you're wrong. It's like any other business, and because of regulations set up in states like California, there's a large barrier to entry. You need money to make money in cannabis so this whole idea everyone in cannabis has money is a stereotype.
WB: Do you have a food memory from childhood that you’d like to share? A meal you’d like to describe from any time? Favorite recipe?
GS: When I was a kid I loved to eat candy. In a way, it comes full circle that I co-own a cannabis company that offers gummy coins and chocolate bars. While our products are not for children, the idea that something I've always enjoyed has worked its way into my adult career. As an adult, I've personally developed more of a "salt tooth" and absolutely love sushi!
GS: When I was younger I was all about making as much money as I could. As I've gotten older, I've shifted my perspective to focus on others. My happiness isn't centered on how much I have, but what I can give to others. I don't think enough people focus on what truly makes them happy. They think it's money, but it's not. I know it sounds corny but helping people makes me so happy. Seeing my employees buying homes, meeting professional and personal goals they never thought they could meet gives me such pride, not just as an employer, but as a person.
Warren Bobrow, the Cocktail Whisperer, is the multi-published author of six books. Apothecary Cocktails: Restorative Drinks from Yesterday and Today, Whiskey Cocktails:
Warren Bobrow, the Cocktail Whisperer, is the multi-published author of six books. Apothecary Cocktails: Restorative Drinks from Yesterday and Today, Whiskey Cocktails: Rediscovered Classics and Contemporary Craft Drinks, Bitters and Shrub Syrup Cocktails: Restorative Vintage Cocktails, Mocktails & Elixirs, Cannabis Cocktails, Mocktails & Tonics: The Art of Spirited Drinks & Buzz-Worthy Libations and his celebrated, 2017 release, The Craft Cocktail Compendium. He also has an edition of Apothecary Cocktails translated into French for the European market. Bobrow led a panel on Cannabis Cocktails for Park Street University at the Berlin Bar Convent in Germany. Bobrow attended the B2B event named:Hall of Flowers in Santa Rosa, California in 2019. He currently makes his living in the Cannabis Industry having in prior years supported craft spirits focusing on craft Bourbon and unmanipulated rum. Warren has been a rum judge for the Rum XP and the Ministry of Rum having first tasted rum off of Anegada in the BVI- in the early 1980's.
Warren appeared on Viceland Live on February 27, 2019. He presented at 2018’s SXSW: Disrupting the Cannabis Kitchen and Cannabis Cocktails. He was the Mercedes-Benz Me Conference Mystery Speaker on Wellness for SXSW 2018. Bobrow has written articles for Saveur magazine, Voda magazine, Whole Foods-Dark Rye, Distiller, Beverage Media, DrinkupNY and many other national and global periodicals. He has written for SoFAB Magazine at the Southern Food and Beverage Museum in New Orleans and has in the past, written restaurant reviews for New Jersey Monthly. He has also contributed to the Sage Encyclopedia of Food Issues and the Oxford Encyclopedia edition: Savoring Gotham: A Food Lover's Companion to New York City. Warren judged the 2016 Asheville, NC, Cocktail Week. Warren was nominated for a Tales of the Cocktail Spirited Award in 2013. Warren appeared in the Saveur Magazine's "100" in 2010. He taught a Master Class on un-manipulated rum during the Moscow Bar Show in 2015 and a class on Mocktails and Acidulated Beverages, AKA: Shrubs at Stonewall Kitchen in York Harbor, Maine. His books consistently lead in overall sales during Tales of the Cocktail held yearly in New Orleans.
