The Global Platinum Silicone Tubing & Hose Market was valued at US$ 3,230.8 Mn in 2018 and is expected to reach approximately US$ 6,211.4 Mn by 2026 at a CAGR of approximately 8.5% by 2027.
Market reports under the Platinum Silicone Tubing & Hose industry are supported by various macro and micro economic factors impacting the industry. We browse through historical data and provide an overview of the emerging markets and the next big opportunities for investors within the niche market. Increasing demand from emerging countries provides a good business opportunity for companies to invest in coming years. Our reports are updated with changing industry regulatory policies and offer insight depending on client’s requirement.
In terms of value, the global platinum silicone tubing & hose market was valued at US$ 3,230.8 Mn in 2018 and it is expected to reach US$ 6,211.4 Mn by 2026 at a CAGR of 8.5%. Platinum-cured silicone tubing is an exceptional choice for the purpose of fluid transfer in pharmaceutical and biotechnology applications. It provides advantages such as resistance to high temperatures and less potential leachability.
Market Segmentation of Platinum Silicone Tubing & Hose Market:
Following Top Key players are profiled in this Market Study:
NewAge Industries Inc. (US), Dow Corning Corporation (US), TBL Performance Plastics (US), Cole-Parmer Instrument Company, LLC (US), Tubes International (Poland), Trelleborg AB (Sweden), Parker-Hannifin Corp. (US), Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics. (France), Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. (US), Venair (Spain), Nordson Medical Corporation (US) amongst others
Platinum Silicone Tubing & Hose Market report analyses the impact of Coronavirus (COVID-19) on the Platinum Silicone Tubing & Hose industry.
Since the COVID-19 virus outbreak in December 2019, the disease has spread to almost 180+ countries around the globe with the World Health Organization declaring it a public health emergency. The global impacts of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) are already starting to be felt, and will significantly affect the Platinum Silicone Tubing & Hose market in 2020.
The outbreak of COVID-19 has brought effects on many aspects, like flight cancellations; travel bans and quarantines; restaurants closed; all indoor events restricted; emergency declared in many countries; massive slowing of the supply chain; stock market unpredictability; falling business assurance, growing panic among the population, and uncertainty about future.
COVID-19 can affect the Global economy in 3 main ways: by directly affecting production and demand, by creating supply chain and market disturbance, and by its financial impact on firms and financial markets.
Download Sample ToC to understand the COVID19 impact and be smart in redefining business strategies.
Based on the type, the platinum silicone tubing & hose market is segmented into general purpose, high pressure, medical grade, and food grade. Among these, the medical grade type holds the highest share in the market owing to the properties of platinum silicone tubes such as resistance to oxidation and radiation, the ability to survive in repeated sterilizations, and the ability to repel bacterial growth.
On the basis of the end-user, the medical segment holds the highest share in the platinum silicone tubing & hose market, owing to properties which help in resisting UV, ozone, gases, moisture, and extreme temperatures
Regional Analysis of Platinum Silicone Tubing & Hose Market:
