Most investors are familiar with gold, silver, and even copper, and their associated ETFs, but one metal that gets less of the glory is platinum.
Platinum, a white metal that is primarily used in jewelry such as rings is one of the popular precious metals. However, platinum has other applications as well, as it is coveted by professionals like dentists or utilized in products like medical equipment, electrical devices, and sometimes even in chemotherapy treatments. The white precious metal is mined and produced in various parts of the world, but about 80% of it is derived from South Africa.
When it comes time to incorporate platinum into a portfolio, investors can play the platinum futures market,  investigate a platinum or precious metals index, or more simply gain access to the metal by investing in a platinum ETF or ETN. One issue to consider however is the metals limited liquidity. Listed below are several platinum funds to consider:
Aberdeen Standard Physical Platinum Shares ETF (“the Shares”) are issued by Aberdeen Standard Platinum ETF Trust (“the Trust”). The investment objective of the Trust, Symbol: PPLT, is for the Shares to reflect the performance of the price of platinum, less Trust’s expenses. The Shares are designed for investors who want a cost-effective and convenient way to invest in physical platinum. The ETF has an expense ratio of 0.6%.
According to their website, the GraniteShares Platinum Trust is designed to seek the performance of the price of platinum, less trust expenses. It is the lowest-cost, physically-backed Platinum ETF on the market. The metals are physically backed, were the trust holds physical platinum bars in a secure vault. The ETF has an expense ratio of 0.5%.
ETRACS CMCI Long Platinum Total Return ETN is an exchange-traded note issued in the USA by UBS AG (Jersey Branch). The Note will provide investors with a cash payment at the scheduled maturity or early redemption based on the performance of the underlying index, the UBS Bloomberg CMCI Platinum Total Return Index. The ETN has an expense ratio of 0.65%.
For more alternative ETF strategies, visit our Alternatives Channel .
