Todd 'Bubba' Horwitz Friday June 12, 2020 07:53
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Gold , silver and platinum loved the Fed on Wednesday; all three spiked right after the FOMC  announcement. The Fed continued building upon the word’s largest legalized  Ponzi scheme. There is no denying that the Fed has the common sense of a gnat.  Drop them in the middle of nowhere, and they mat never find their way home.
Once again  Wednesday, the Fed kept the bazookas working, telling Wall Street that they  have an unlimited supply of paper and ink and will print money forever. This  announcement sent the metals soaring higher, with gold, silver and platinum  closing near their highs for the day.
Gold has now  taken care of much of the damage that had been done during the two-week  sell-off. Gold should run into a little resistance at $1,750 in the August  futures. A breakout from there could lead to $1,800. Silver, like gold, popped  nicely, rebuilding the bullish posture and looks destined for $19 in the  September futures. Platinum is still a short; Wednesday’s rally was nothing  more than an oversold bounce.
Remember,  markets can change in any direction any time, and markets do not announce  themselves. For now, gold and silver are in bullish formations and platinum  bearish. We are still cautious because of the light trade and lack or  liquidity, but are long gold, silver and short platinum.
We are now  offering a comprehensive commodity report that complements our other services.  The Technomental Commodity Report comes out on Wednesday evenings and provides  comprehensive fundamental and technical coverage of most commodities that trade  on the futures markets in the U.S. and U.K., as well as stocks, bonds and  digital currencies. There is a summary report on Friday after the markets  close, and robust quarterly reports on each of the six commodity sectors and a  general overview that recaps the past three months and offers projections and  suggestions for the next quarter. Andy Hecht, the author of the report, has  been a commodity trader since the early 1980s and has vast experience in  markets across all asset classes.
