US gold futures fell 2.2 per cent to $1,696.40.
Spot gold slid 1.9 per cent to $1,693.83 per ounce by 11:00 a.m. EDT (1500 GMT), having earlier hit a near one-month low of $1,688.89.
Gold fell more than 2 per cent on Wednesday as risk sentiment improved on hopes of a recovery from a coronavirus-driven economic slump, with investors largely overlooking civil unrest in the United States and its friction with China.
Spot gold slid 1.9 per cent to $1,693.83 per ounce by 11:00 a.m. EDT (1500 GMT), having earlier hit a near one-month low of $1,688.89.
US gold futures fell 2.2 per cent to $1,696.40.
"There is a strong risk-on sentiment right now... US equity markets are breaking out," said Phil Streible, chief market strategist at Blue Line Futures in Chicago.
US stocks opened higher as investors remained optimistic about an economic rebound, with world shares hitting three-month highs.
Sentiments were also bolstered by data showing US private payrolls fell less than expected in May, suggesting layoffs were abating as businesses reopen, though the overall economy's recovery will be slow.
"Generally markets are getting comfortable with the fact that even though the data is bad, things are likely to improve and that's taking the shine off gold," said Michael Hewson, Chief Market Analyst at CMC Markets UK.
Despite the pullback, gold is expected to remain supported by a weaker dollar, widespread protests in the United States, souring US-China relations and massive stimulus measures, Hewson added.
Gold, considered a safe-haven investment, tends to gain on political and economic uncertainties.
The dollar index fell to a more than two-month low.
US protesters ignored curfews overnight as they vented their anger over the death of an unarmed black man at the hands of police, but there was a marked drop in the violence.
Holdings of SPDR Gold Trust gold-backed exchange-traded fund rose to 1,129.28 tonnes on Tuesday, their highest since April 2013.
Elsewhere, palladium eased 0.1 per cent to $1,948.18 an ounce, while platinum dipped 1.1 per cent to $829.94.
Silver fell 3 per cent to $17.55.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
