Todd 'Bubba' Horwitz Thursday June 18, 2020 07:51
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
The struggles  for gold continue; although it has held support, the market looks bad. The only  savior for gold has been the battle at $1,725 in the August futures. There  appears to be a big seller in gold that shows up daily, although for now the  bulls have been able to fend off the seller. However, gold is now at another  key point where the next big move will be defined. Although we remain long, I  would guess the next big move will be down.
Silver doesn’t look as bad as gold but has struggles on its own. All that is saving  silver is the ability to hold $17.50 based on the September futures. We are  long silver, but like in gold, expect the next big move to be lower. However,  we will not try and guess and wait for the algorithm to switch directions.
Despite a  couple of rally attempts, platinum is headed lower. The trend is clearly lower  and $850 in the October futures is key resistance. We are short and sellers of  rallies into resistance. Like in gold and silver, we will play the signals  given by the algorithm.
Whether you  are a trader or investor, the best investments or trades are the ones that go  with the current direction. Trying to predict the next move or forecasting the  next trend is a fool’s game. Whatever you are trading, discipline and money  management are the keys to success.
We are now  offering a comprehensive commodity report that complements our other services.  The Technomental Commodity Report comes out on Wednesday evenings and provides  comprehensive fundamental and technical coverage of most commodities that trade  on the futures markets in the U.S. and U.K., as well as stocks, bonds and  digital currencies. There is a summary report on Friday after the markets  close, and robust quarterly reports on each of the six commodity sectors and a general  overview that recaps the past three months and offers projections and  suggestions for the next quarter. Andy Hecht, the author of the report, has  been a commodity trader since the early 1980s and has vast experience in  markets across all asset classes.
