At 09:26 Eastern time (13:26 GMT) the gold futures for June delivery on the commodity exchange in new York fell 0.5% to $1 726,85 per Troy ounce, while spot gold lost 0.4%, dropping to $1 727,97.
In conditions of recovery of European stock markets, and smoldering tension between the U.S. and China, supporting the status of the dollar, gold was under pressure for most of the day.
Nick Frape, General Manager of ABC Bullion in Sydney, said Monday in a weekly review that in the short term, he expects the reduction of quotations of gold to the range of $1 710-1 712 per ounce, but with a subsequent potential upside breakout.
Silver futures also fell 0.7%, to $17,58 per ounce, after data of the Commission on commodity futures trading showed that the net speculative long position last week reached their highest level since early April.
Platinum futures fell 0.1 percent to 885,85$ per ounce.
Gold was supported by doubts about the fate of the proposal by France and Germany to take a loan on behalf of the EU and to distribute the grants among the participating countries of the block most affected by the coronavirus. Analysts said that this proposal, if adopted, could change the rules of the assessment of sovereign risk in the Euro zone, signaling a greater willingness to support the poorer and heavily indebted countries.
However, the coalition of Netherlands, Finland, Austria and Sweden at the weekend gave a critical response to the proposal, insisting that the aid was distributed in the form of loans, not grants. Paul Donovan, chief economist of UBS Global Wealth Management, expects the final compromise will look more like the Franco-German proposal. The EU Commission must submit its own proposals later this week.
Natasha Kumar has been a reporter on the news desk since 2018. Before that she wrote about young adolescence and family dynamics for Styles and was the legal affairs correspondent for the Metro desk. Before joining The Times Hub, Natasha Kumar worked as a staff writer at the Village Voice and a freelancer for Newsday, The Wall Street Journal, GQ and Mirabella. To get in touch, contact me through my natasha@thetimeshub.in 1-800-268-7116
