Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
The best performing metal this week was platinum,       up 5.65 percent, due to stronger retail buying. Gold and silver rose on       Friday morning on safe haven buying. U.S.-China relations remain tense and       China announced that it will impose new security laws on Hong Kong. Palladium       rose the most since March, holding above $2,000 an ounce on Monday, due to       renewed optimism about China’s economy and stimulus for automakers. The       metal finished the week up 4.04 percent. Bloomberg notes that palladium       had fallen by a third since hitting a record in late February.
ETFs backed by gold have seen 20 straight       days of inflows, adding 154,000 ounces on Thursday, and bringing       year-to-date gains of 20 percent, according to BMO Capital Markets, citing       Bloomberg data.
Purchases of physical platinum by retail       investors almost tripled to 312,000 ounces in the first quarter of this       year – the most on record – according to the World Platinum Investment       Council (WPIC). Prestige Bullion said that over 2,000 platinum coins       featuring an elephant sold out to U.S. and Asian investors after being       minted in March. The company says that more coins will be produced once       South Africa’s virus lockdown is lifted and will feature other animals       including the lion, rhinoceros, leopard and buffalo, reports Bloomberg.       “The low platinum price in March was a buying opportunity, but the       concerns regarding global risk and the huge negative fiscal impact of the       COVID-19 pandemic are likely to continue the demand for precious metals,       including platinum,” said Trevor Raymond, director of research at WPIC.
The worst performing metal this week was gold,       down slightly by 0.77 percent. Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered       the army to help Polyus PJSC, Russia’s largest gold miner, treat an       outbreak of COVID-19 at its Siberian unit, reports Bloomberg. 77 doctors       and nurses set up a field camp and mobile hospital near the Olimpiada       mine, the nation’s largest mine. There are approximately 866 virus       infections in the area.
According to Johnson Matthey Plc, the       coronavirus pandemic will cut the use of platinum-group metals in       autocatalysts by at least 15 percent to 20 percent in 2020. The       autocatalyst manufacturer said in a report on Monday that automakers are       “expected to look closely at potential opportunities to reduce the PGM       content of their systems, or to substitute some palladium with platinum, if       they can do so without compromising their ability to meet current or       future emissions limits.”
Venezuela’s central bank sued the Bank of       England (BOE) for access to $1 billion in gold reserves, reports       Bloomberg. The troubled South American nation asked the BOE to liquidate       its gold and send the funds to the United Nations Development Programme,       which is working with Venezuela to prepare for an increase in COVID-19       infections. This new lawsuit is another twist to the long dispute of       cutting off President Nicolas Maduro’s regime from its overseas assets.
Joe Foster, portfolio manager and gold       strategist at Van Eck Absolute Return Advisers Corp, says the yellow metal       is expected to hit $2,000 an ounce in the next 12 months. Foster said in a       webcast this week that “gold has had a V-shaped recovery as a response to       the pandemic shock.” Bullion could trade even higher over the next several       years if there is an inflationary cycle or unforeseen worst-case scenario,       added Foster and as reported by Bloomberg.
The falling gold-silver ratio could be an       indication that silver is on its way to outperforming the yellow metal. In       March, the ratio rose as high as 127 and this week it is down to below       102, reports Kitco News. George Gero, managing director with RBC Wealth       Management, says the ratio could fall back down to the 90s and that       “silver was held back because of its industrial component. Now with the       reopening of many of the economies, the industrial component is a tailwind       instead of a headwind.”
Bloomberg’s Vincent Cignarella thinks the       gold rally is real and not a bear trap due to the gold-copper ratio. The       ratio of gold, the most widely recognized haven asset, and copper, a key       industrial metal used globally, is often used as an indicator of the economy’s       strength. “Since March 23, the 2020 low in equities and the ratio of       copper to gold has stabilized and trended sideways – a potential       indication stocks and yields have put in a bottom.”
Crispin Odey, one of Europe’s       highest-profile hedge fund managers, said governments may ban private gold       ownership if they lose control of inflation, reports Bloomberg. Odey wrote       in a letter that “it is no surprise that people are buying gold. But       authorities may attempt at some point to de-monetize gold, making it       illegal to own as a private individual.” In 1933 the U.S. government       forced purchases of private gold holdings as a part of a devaluation of       the dollar. Odey has compared the coronavirus pandemic to the Great       Depression of the 1930s and argues that governments before having resorted       to debasing coinage.
Bloomberg’s Mark Cudmore has a bearish       outlook for gold: “Like a teenager rebelling against the smothering love       of over-protective parents, gold may upset a lot of people in the weeks       ahead.” Cudmore notes that the yellow metal’s big drivers – global       stimulus amid the pandemic and the U.S.-China trade war – are both stale       now. Gold was supported by “shock-and-awe” policy support in March and       April, and if there isn’t “something fresh soon” there could be a       correction ahead.
COVID-19 remains a major threat globally       as the virus continues to spread and lockdown measures ease in only in       some countries. Brazil, a top miner and exporter, has seen a surge in       infections. Reports out of China this week show that the virus is       manifesting differently than doctors have seen before, raising concerns of       a second wave of infections.
