| TNN | Jul 2, 2020, 21:13 IST
NEW DELHI: A record 53.6 million tonnes (Mt) of electronic waste (e-waste), an average of 7.3 kg per capita, was generated worldwide in 2019, said the UN’s Global E-waste Monitor, 2020, released on Thursday.
Globally, the generation of e-waste grew by 9.2 Mt since 2014 (up by 21% in just five years) and is projected to grow to 74.7 Mt by 2030 – almost doubling in only 16 years, showing increasing use of electrical and electronic equipment.
The Monitor, however, presented a worrying scenario where only 17.4% of the total e-waste was collected and recycled last year – it means that gold, silver, copper, platinum and other high-value, recoverable materials conservatively valued at US $57 billion, a sum greater than the gross domestic product of most countries, were mostly dumped or burned rather than being collected for treatment and reuse.
Non-collected e-waste is also a serious health and environmental hazard as it contains several toxic additives or hazardous substances, such as mercury, brominated flame retardants (BFR), and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), or hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs).
"The increasing levels of e-waste, low collection rates, and non-environmentally sound disposal and treatment of this waste stream pose significant risks to the environment and to human health," said the UN report.
"The recycling figures for India would also be close to the global figures since it is almost impossible to estimate the volumes being handled by the informal sector," said Satish Sinha, domain expert and associate director at Delhi-based policy advocacy group, Toxics Link.
Emphasising on the need to have a close and hard look at the Indian scenario of e-waste management, he said, "The country announced e- waste rule in 2011 and again revised this in 2016, but we are far from getting things right. The major issue has been in implementation and compliance deficits and this requires constant attention."
According to the UN report, since 2014 the e-waste categories have increased fastest in temperature exchange equipment (+7%), large equipment (+5%) lamps and small equipment (+4%). The report said this trend was driven by the growing consumption of such products in lower income countries, where those products improve the living standards.
On the other hand, small IT and telecommunication equipment have been growing more slowly, and screens and monitors have shown a slight decrease (-1%), explained largely by lighter flat panel displays replacing heavy monitors and screens.
In Indian context, Sinha expressed his concerns over absence of "good and credible data", saying it would be tough to create mechanisms to enforce systems and measures in a scenario where there is complete absence of data on total quantity of waste generation, recycled volumes and generation of materials of strategic nature.
Underlining necessity of recycling from strategic point of view, he said, "E waste is a unique source of rare metals that are critical for manufacturing of electronic gadgets and currently China enjoys a distinct advantage on these metals on account of both primary deposits and mining from waste."
The UN report noted that the proper e-waste management can also help mitigate global warming. "In 2019, an estimated 98 Mt of CO2-equivalents were released into the atmosphere from discarded fridges and air-conditioners, contributing roughly 0.3% of global greenhouse gas emissions."
Noting that the informal and improper e-waste recycling is a major emerging hazard silently affecting health of future generations, Maria Neira, director, environment, climate change and health department, World Health Organization (WHO), said, "One in four children are dying from avoidable environmental exposures. One in four children could be saved, if we take action to protect their health and ensure a safe environment."
"WHO is pleased to join forces in this new Global E-waste Monitor to allow evidence, information about health impacts and joint solutions and policies to be made available to protect our future generations' health."
According to the report, Europe ranked first worldwide in terms of e-waste generation per capita with 16.2 kg per capita. Oceania came second (16.1 kg) followed by the Americas (13.3 kg). Asia and Africa were much lower: 5.6 and 2.5 kg, respectively.
Start Your Daily Mornings with Times of India Newspaper! Order Now
