Spot gold markets remained shut due to lockdown in the country to check the spread of Covid-19, according to HDFC Securities.
The global palladium market will see its smallest deficit since at least 2012 this year, while the platinum market remains significantly oversupplied, an industry report said.
NEW DELHI: Gold and silver continued their ascent on Wednesday as Covid-19 patient count continued to surge rapidly deepening the worries of investors on Dalal Street who rushed to safe havens.
India has reported 1.06 lakh cases by now with over 3,300 deaths. Investors have been largely unimpressed by the stimulus measures announced by the government.
Gold futures were up 0.53 per cent or Rs 248 at Rs 47,298 per 10 grams. Silver futures added 1 per cent or Rs 489 to Rs 49,310 per kg.
Spot gold markets remained shut due to lockdown in the country to check the spread of Covid-19, according to HDFC Securities .
Spot gold was unchanged at $1,743.99 per ounce by 0030 GMT, having gained 0.7 per cent in the previous session on recession fears. U.S. gold futures rose 0.2 per cent to $1,748.50.
The dollar gained about 0.2 per cent against key rivals, making gold costlier for investors using other currencies, while Asian equities were likely to come under pressure.
The global palladium market will see its smallest deficit since at least 2012 this year, while the platinum market remains significantly oversupplied, an industry report said.
Palladium fell 1.4 per cent to $2,029.50 per ounce and silver eased 0.1 per cent to $17.38, while platinum gained 0.4 per cent to $836.01.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
