Todd 'Bubba' Horwitz Monday June 15, 2020 07:44
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
On Thursday, gold was on its way to breaking out and bringing $1,800 into play but a  late-day sell-off kept it in a trading range and still in danger of failing.  Thursday’s inside day was disappointing, although it appears gold may make  another attempt to run today. There are still concerns with gold; $1,725 in the  August futures is a key level to hold and over $1,775 would be considered a  breakout.
Silver is  either consolidating on the lower end of support or getting ready to reverse to  the short side. The $17.75 level in the September futures is a major level that  must hold or there could be a reversal to the short side. A breakout above  $18.50 should lead to new highs. At this point, we are long and will assume  higher but are extremely cautious.
Platinum reversed to short the other day and was lower Thursday with a minor rally  today. Our next target to the downside is $800 in the October futures.  Resistance is $875 in the October futures. We are looking to sell rallies in  platinum.
The picture  in metals is murky; silver and gold are bullish but at key levels. We remain  long both but need to see more buying to convince us they are going much  higher. Platinum is clearly lower and we are short.
We are now  offering a comprehensive commodity report that complements our other services.  The Technomental Commodity Report comes out on Wednesday evenings and provides  comprehensive fundamental and technical coverage of most commodities that trade  on the futures markets in the U.S. and U.K., as well as stocks, bonds and  digital currencies. There is a summary report on Friday after the markets  close, and robust quarterly reports on each of the six commodity sectors and a  general overview that recaps the past three months and offers projections and  suggestions for the next quarter. Andy Hecht, the author of the report, has  been a commodity trader since the early 1980s and has vast experience in  markets across all asset classes. Sign up here: Bubba Trading Technomental Report
