GOLD PRICES headed for their strongest weekly gain since late 2008 on Friday, adding more than 8.2% as the rebound in global stock markets faded despite governments and central banks unleashing record financial aid, stimulus and lending programs to try and offset the economic slump caused by the novel coronavirus and resulting lockdowns worldwide.
Government bond prices rose, pushing interest rates sharply lower again, while industrial commodities fell back with equities, taking crude oil back below $25 per barrel.
Having made its largest 1-day jump in Dollar terms since January 1980 on Monday, the gold price headed for a $125 weekly gain ahead of the Friday PM benchmarking in London.
The S&P500 share index in New York meantime lost a third of the week's earlier 14.1% rebound, and thus failing to erase last week's plunge.
"The US has just passed an era-defining stimulus package that dwarves the 2008 measures, and the Fed has committed to do 'whatever it takes' to protect the economy," says Jonathan Butler, strategist at precious metals trader and global conglomerate Mitsubishi.
Comex April contracts today retreated below London spot prices after surging to a premium of $100 per ounce earlier this week.
"The causes were multiple," Butler says, pointing to cash liquidity issues "amid the recent scramble for the Dollar, [plus] a good deal of speculative activity in gold and, perhaps most importantly, a lack of physical gold bars with which to fulfil deliveries into the exchange amid the closedown of international air travel and three of Switzerland's four gold refineries, plus the impact of the South African mining closure."
Sold out of many retail products, Australia's Perth Mint "is adding additional shifts to its refining output to meet some of that increased demand," according to Kitco News.
While South Africa's Rand Refinery has been exempted from the No.7 gold-mining nation's lockdown, its operations will be "signiﬁcantly scaled-down" and it is struggling anyway to book air-freight space to fly out gold bars.
"While a few refiners have suspended production," said trade body the London Bullion Market Association to members late Thursday, the large-bar market "has 72 accredited Good Delivery gold refiners located in 31 countries...[so other] refiners are ready and able to accommodate the industry's needs.
"Refiners and other market participants are [also] actively engaged with logistics companies to overcome travel constraints and ensure the physical movement of metal via, for example, chartered or cargo flights," the LBMA added.
Adrian Ash is director of research at BullionVault, the physical gold and silver market for private investors online. Formerly head of editorial at London's top publisher of private-investment advice, he was City correspondent for The Daily Reckoning from 2003 to 2008, and is now a regular contributor to many leading analysis sites including Forbes and a regular guest on BBC national and international radio and television news. Adrian's views on the gold market have been sought by the Financial Times and Economist magazine in London; CNBC, Bloomberg and TheStreet.com in New York; Germany's Der Stern; Italy's Il Sole 24 Ore, and many other respected finance publications.
See the full archive of Adrian Ash articles on GoldNews.
Please Note: All articles published here are to inform your thinking, not lead it. Only you can decide the best place for your money, and any decision you make will put your money at risk. Information or data included here may have already been overtaken by events – and must be verified elsewhere – should you choose to act on it. Please review our Terms & Conditions for accessing Gold News .
