Todd 'Bubba' Horwitz Monday June 01, 2020 07:44
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
One thing we  have learned the last couple of days is that there is underlying strength in  the metals. Gold, silver and platinum were all in danger this week at one time  or another, and all three managed to fend off the sellers and maintain their  bull markets.
Gold has been  under the most pressure for the last couple of weeks. There appears to be a big  seller that shows up once a day usually around 9 a.m. EDT. Gold takes a big hit  but has been able to recover and hold support. This does guarantee a run to the  recent highs, but based on the pattern, we are long looking for higher prices.
Silver and platinum have been almost identical in price action. The only difference this  week between the two is silver is higher for the week while platinum is  slightly lower. The patterns are good and indicate the rally is not over.
Gold and platinum are lower for the week but still in solid consolidation patterns with  an upward bias. Silver is up for the week but also in consolidation. We have no  reason to believe the rally will not continue.
On Saturday,  I will be sharing my Equity Portfolio Management model at noon EDT. Join me for  some great information on how we use our algorithms. Register here: Saturday, May 30, noon EDT – Equity Portfolio Management
We are now  offering a comprehensive commodity report that complements our other services.  The Technomental Commodity Report comes out on Wednesday evenings and provides  comprehensive fundamental and technical coverage of most commodities that trade  on the futures markets in the U.S. and U.K., as well as stocks, bonds and  digital currencies. There is a summary report on Friday after the markets  close, and robust quarterly reports on each of the six commodity sectors and a  general overview that recaps the past three months and offers projections and  suggestions for the next quarter. Andy Hecht, the author of the report, has  been a commodity trader since the early 1980s and has vast experience in  markets across all asset classes.
