Indicative of sentiment, holdings of SPDR Gold Trust , rose 0.8 per cent to 1,191.47 tonnes on Thursday.
Gold prices in the national capital declined by Rs 488 to Rs 49,135 per 10 gram on Thursday amid rupee appreciation, according to HDFC Securities.
NEW DELHI: Gold and silver prices saw profit booking in the morning session on Friday as a better than expected US jobs data and relatively lower contraction in factory activity back home improved risk appetite.
The US economy created jobs at a record clip in June, but 31.5 million Americans were collecting unemployment checks in the middle of the month. Meanwhile, the total number of coronavirus patients in India reached 6.3 lakh while fatalities climbed above 18,200 levels.
Gold futures were down 0.13 per cent or Rs 63 at Rs 48,095 per 10 grams. Silver futures dipped 0.12 per cent or Rs 58 to Rs 49,095 per kg.
Gold prices in the national capital declined by Rs 488 to Rs 49,135 per 10 gram on Thursday amid rupee appreciation, according to HDFC Securities. Silver also went lower by Rs 1,168 to Rs 50,326 per kg.
Globally, gold was flat, trading in a narrow $4 range on Friday, as worries over surging coronavirus cases globally and lingering trade tensions between the United States and China overshadowed strong US jobs data.
Spot gold was unchanged at $1,775.12 per ounce by 0232 GMT. U.S. markets are closed on Friday for observing Independence Day on July 4. US gold futures eased 0.1 per cent to $1,787.80.
Gold is considered a safe store of value during political and financial uncertainty. Indicative of sentiment, holdings of SPDR Gold Trust , rose 0.8 per cent to 1,191.47 tonnes on Thursday.
Palladium was steady at $1,901.44 per ounce, while platinum rose 0.5 per cent to $806.63, set for its first weekly gain in six. Silver gained 0.6 per cent to $17.90, heading for its fourth consecutive weekly gain.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
