Gold pares gains as US equities, dollar recover
One kilogram gold bars are displayed for a photograph at the YLG Bullion International headquarters in Thailand on January 13, 2016.
Gold pared earlier gains on Wednesday as investors took profits and U.S. share markets gained footing, even as the spread of the coronavirus dimmed the global outlook.
Spot gold was up 0.5% at $1,644.03 per ounce, having earlier jumped over 1% to 1654.68. U.S. gold futures eased 0.2% to $1,646.8.
"The market is well saturated with bullish news. I think we are seeing some participants taking profit here ... especially the longs are taking advantage," said Ryan McKay, a commodity strategist at TD Securities.
"The stronger dollar is also weighing on gold prices slightly," he added.
The dollar rebounded from a two-week low and U.S. markets also opened higher, after suffering their worst four-day percentage fall in over a year in the previous session.
Gold is up over 3% so far this month, having hit a seven-year high of $1,688.66 earlier this week as the rapidly spreading coronavirus aggravated fears of an economic slowdown.
The effects of the outbreak are likely to reverberate beyond China as most major economies in the region are expected to either slow significantly, halt or shrink in the current quarter, Reuters polls found.
"Besides the safe-haven demand, a growing number of people who are buying in anticipation of weaker growth from the spread of coronavirus and action from the Fed," McKay added.
Money markets are now pricing in roughly two 25-basis-point (bps) rate cuts by the U.S. Federal Reserve, and expect a 10 bps cut by the European Central Bank by December.
Lower interest rates reduce the opportunity cost of holding non-yielding bullion.
Indicative of rising investor interest in bullion, holdings in the SPDR Gold Trust, the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, climbed to the highest since November 2016 at 940.09 tonnes on Tuesday.
"Considering that a couple of uncertainties are still lingering in the market, along with the coronavirus threat and very low yields, investors are taking positions at a lower price," said Bob Haberkorn, senior market strategist at RJO Futures.
"If we see yields at these levels and no other positive news come about the virus situation, we will see gold go back to levels it hit earlier."
Elsewhere, palladium gained 1.1% to $2,728.05 per ounce, while platinum fell 1.4% to $913.12, having touched its lowest in over two months earlier.
Silver rose 0.6% to $17.87 an ounce, having fallen as much as 3.4% in the previous session.
