Gold futures are slipping on Monday as the broader financial market turned positive. The yellow metal had been falling throughout the trading session on profit-taking and margin calls. Gold prices continued their slide after the US central bank sparked a rally in equities over its announcement that it will start buying individual corporate bonds.
August gold futures dropped $7.50, or 0.43%, to $1,729.80 per ounce at 18:09 GMT on Monday on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. Gold enjoyed a 2% rally last week, lifting its year-to-date gain to just below 14%.
Silver, the sister commodity to gold, is trading relatively flat to start the trading week. July silver futures shed $0.042, or 0.24%, to $17.44 an ounce. The white metal slumped 3% last week, adding to its YTD decline of 2.5%.
The metals market fell on investors taking some profits on the latest jump in gold prices. It did not help matters that there were likely some margin calls, too, which prompted traders to participate in forced selling. Gold has experienced this before, most prominently during the market mayhem in March. Investors had to liquidate their gold holdings to cover their margin calls.
On Monday, the Federal Reserve announced that it would begin to acquire single corporate bonds, in addition to scooping up corporate debt in the secondary market through exchange-traded funds (ETFs).
According to a press release, the Fed said it would purchase individual bonds that have remaining maturities of five years or less and possess credit ratings of BBB- or Baa3 as of March 22. In total, the Fed has given itself a limit of $750 billion to buy corporate debt , but it has shown it is willing to ditch its self-imposed ceilings.
The Eccles Building confirmed that it wants to develop “a corporate bond portfolio that is based on a broad, diversified market index of US corporate bonds.”
This index is made up of all the bonds in the secondary market that have been issued by U.S. companies that satisfy the facility’s minimum rating, maximum maturity, and other criteria. This indexing approach will complement the facility’s current purchases of exchange-traded funds.
A slumping US dollar limited gold’s loss on Monday. The US Dollar Index, which measures the greenback against a basket of currencies, fell 0.61% to 96.73, from an opening of 97.09. The buck has declined 3% over the last month, wiping out nearly all its losses in 2020. A weaker greenback is good for dollar-denominated commodities because it makes it cheaper for foreign investors to purchase.
In other metal markets, July copper futures tumbled $0.0315, or 1.21%, to $2.5685 per pound. July platinum futures tacked on $3.70, or 0.45%, to $822.70 an ounce. July palladium futures dipped $1.80, or 0.09%, to $1,936.70 an ounce.
