Except as described above regarding the liquidation of the ETF, shares of the Funds may be sold during trading hours on the exchange through any brokerage account, shares are not individually redeemable, and shares may only be redeemed directly from a Fund by Authorized Participants. There can be no assurance that an active trading market for shares of a Fund will develop or be maintained. Shares may trade above or below NAV. Brokerage commissions will apply.
The Funds are distributed by Foreside Fund Services, LLC. GraniteShares is not affiliated with Foreside Fund Services, LLC.
You could lose money by investing in the Funds. There can be no assurance that the investment objective of the Funds will be achieved. None of the Funds should be relied upon as a complete investment program. The investment program of the Funds are speculative, entails substantial risks and include asset classes and investment techniques not employed by more traditional mutual funds. Investments in the Funds are not bank deposits and are not insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any other government agency.
Investing in physical commodities, including through commodity-linked derivative instruments such as Commodity Futures, Commodity Swaps, as well as other commodity-linked instruments, is speculative and can be extremely volatile, and may not be suitable for all investors. Market prices of commodities may fluctuate rapidly based on numerous factors, including: changes in supply and demand relationships (whether actual, perceived, anticipated, unanticipated or unrealized); weather; agriculture; trade; domestic and foreign political and economic events and policies; diseases; pestilence; technological developments; currency exchange rate fluctuations; and monetary and other governmental policies, action and inaction. Derivatives may be more sensitive to changes in market conditions and may amplify risks.
A liquid secondary market may not exist for commodity-linked derivative instruments. This may make them difficult for certain Funds to sell them at an acceptable price.
Because the Funds may effect redemptions principally for cash, rather than in-kind distributions, an investment in a Fund’s shares may be less tax efficient than investments in shares of conventional ETFs, and there may be a substantial difference in the after-tax rate of return between a Fund and conventional ETFs.
A Fund may engage in frequent trading of derivatives. Active and frequent trading may lead to the realization and distribution to shareholders of higher short-term capital gains, which would increase their tax liability. Frequent trading also increases transaction costs, such as commissions, which could detract from the Fund’s performance.
