When you use the Amex Platinum Concierge for any of these services, the assistance you receive is offered on a complimentary basis. You only pay for the actual goods and services they help connect you with, such as concert tickets or household help.
How do I maximize the Amex Platinum Concierge?
If you want to make the most of Amex Platinum Concierge services, your best bet is using this benefit when you want to save time. This means delegating tasks to the concierge that would otherwise require you to sit on the phone or spend hours researching online.
Some of the best ways to maximize this service include:
Asking for help with dinner reservations: Ask your concierge to research restaurants to find the best options for the cuisine you want and dining times that work with your schedule. Your concierge can make dinner reservations on your behalf, and all you have to do is show up.
Getting access to sold-out events: If a concert or sporting event seems sold out, your concierge may be able to get special access to seats you may not even know about. Ask them to do the grunt work involved in getting you the best seats in the house.
Sending flowers or gifts: Whether you need to send flowers for Mother’s Day or you want to send your wife a surprise, the Amex Platinum concierge can provide you with suggestions and ideas. Better yet, they can order the gift and set up delivery for you, charging the purchase to your credit card.
Organizing household help: Maybe you need a chef to whip up a meal for a last-minute dinner party. Perhaps you need an electrician to install new lighting in your home, or a plumber to come and install a new kitchen faucet. Your concierge can help research providers and set up an appointment at a time convenient for you.
Planning a trip: If you need to book airfare or research hotel options in any destination, the Amex Platinum Concierge will do the research and provide recommendations for you. They can even book your travel plans on your behalf, saving you time and stress.
These are just a few examples of how you can maximize this service, but there are plenty more ways to use this perk to save yourself both time and stress. To get the most out of concierge service, call into the help desk any time you’re short on time and you need help with a task. You may be surprised at how helpful concierge services can be, but you won’t know until you try it.
How do I contact the American Express Platinum Concierge?
American Express offers a specific concierge hotline you can call into for personalized help with almost anything you need. Once you’re a cardholder, you can call the number on the back of your card or contact your concierge service at 1-800-801-6564. If you’re outside of the United States, you can also access your concierge by calling collect at 1-954-503-8868 and dialing option 2.
From there, you’ll be connected with a dedicated expert who can help you plan a trip, make reservations and more.
While credit card concierge services are typically considered a secondary benefit, they can be worth exploring if you’re spending too much of your time and energy on simple tasks. The concierge service you get with The Platinum Card® from American Express is complimentary, and it can make your life easier.
If you’re hoping to get the most of your credit card perks and you happen to have The Platinum Card® from American Express, don’t forget to give this valuable service a try. If you don’t have this card yet, you should do some research to see if it might be a good fit, or even if you should get the Amex trifecta . Also, check out our American Express Membership Rewards guide to learn all the ways you can use points earned with this card.
