Platinum,  one of the more industrious precious metals, has become a popular  trading instrument in recent years, as investors have seen the benefits  of making a play on this hard asset. Platinum’s uses span from catalytic  converters to thermometers and even dental equipment. Given its heavy  dependence on an emerging market, South Africa, as far as supply is  concerned as well as its massive presence in the industrial world,  trading platinum futures has become an ideal play for a number of active  investors. Below, we outline the best ways to trade these contracts as  well as some helpful tips to help you stay ahead of the platinum curve.
First things first, those looking to invest in futures will need to  decide which exchanges they would like to utilize. Below, we outline  three of the most popular options in the world for trading platinum  futures.
New York Mercantile Exchange: Like so many other  popular commodities, the CME Group (specifically the NYMEX) dominates  U.S. trading for platinum. Contracts currently extend out for one year  (with a slight contango), trading in the months of January, April, July,  and October. Each contract represents 50 troy ounces with prices quoted  in U.S. dollars and cents per ounce. Another benefit to these contracts  is that they trade Sunday-Friday between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and  5:15 p.m (CST), meaning that investors can make a play for approximately  23 hours every day (there is a 45 minute break period between each day)  [see also Jim Rogers Says: Buy Commodities Now, Or You’ll Hate Yourself Later ].
Tokyo Commodity Exchange: The TOCOM  is another popular haven for platinum traders as it offers an  international spin on this hard asset. Contracts trade in the months of  February, April, June, August, October, and December, giving more  flexibility than the NYMEX. Also note that this exchange offers a  standard platinum contract (of 500 grams) as well as platinum mini  futures (of 100 grams), allowing those with smaller capital pools to  still make a play on the commodity.
Multi Commodity Exchange: Finally, investors looking to stay abroad can look to India’s Multi Commodity Exchange (MCX)  based in Mumbai. Though the exchange offers fewer months in which to  trade, its contracts are representative of 250 grams, giving a nice  middle ground to the offerings of the TOCOM. Futures can be traded  Monday through Saturday and begin on the 25th of every contract month  [see also The Ten Commandments of Commodity Investing ].
Traders looking for a leg up on platinum trading need to keep its  major price drivers in mind. As a commodity that is primarily mined in  one country, any kind of strike or disruption in South Africa could have  a major impact on prices and the supply/demand makeup around the world.  Another key factor to watch will be developments in the auto industry,  as roughly half of the world’s platinum is dedicated to use in  automobiles. Should platinum be replaced by a cheaper alternative or see  its use grow in the coming years, prices will adjust swiftly and  accordingly.
For those unable to stomach the risk and volatility associated with  futures contracts, there are a number of exchange traded options that  can be utilized. The most popular option is the ETFS Physical Platinum  Shares Fund (NYSEARCA: PPLT )  which is home to nearly $700 million in total assets, but note that  this fund invests in physical bullion, not futures contracts. For those  looking to get in on the futures side of the equation, the UBS E-TRACS  CMCI Long Platinum Total Return ETN (NYSEARCA: PTM ) and the iPath Dow Jones-AIG Platinum Total Return Sub-Index ETN (NYSEARCA: PGM ) are two popular options.
Disclosure: No positions at time of writing.
Disclaimer: Commodity HQ is not an investment  advisor, and any content published by Commodity HQ does not constitute individual investment advice. The opinions offered herein are not  personalized recommendations to buy, sell or hold securities or investment assets. Read the full disclaimer here .
