How is the coronavirus affecting commodity markets?
Welcome to the one place for all coronavirus commodities coverage.
The coronavirus outbreak has sparked a number of questions and volatility in markets across the globe. Throughout the crisis our market experts have been following the developments and what these might mean both domestically and globally for the commodities markets. This page offers you insight into what's happening in the markets and opportunities to be part of bigger discussions.
Get prepared to act with confidence, rather than react to volatility. Start today .
Join us in a complimentary live discussion about how Covid-19 has impacted global lithium supply, demand and prices.
From the low-price environment and lithium’s extended supply chain to the emergence of standardized battery-grade compounds, here...
Challenging years ahead for global OCTG demand: Key takeaways from Fastmarkets’ latest OCTG Intelligence Service Forecast Update
The latest forecast of global oil country...
Stainless steel prices are relatively stable this month, showing little change since our previous tracker. Such stability masks growing issues for stainless steelmakers...
MORNING VIEW: Markets buoyant on vaccine hope; all eyes on today’s US employment report
Markets participants are in an optimistic mood while they focus on economic data that is improving and hopes of...
Green investing helps drive low-carbon aluminium, En+ Group chair says
Reduced industrial activity & international travel during the Covid-19 pandemic has revealed what a lower emissions...
With the market watchful of the continued uncertainty surrounding the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic...
Prices for deep-sea origin steel scrap imported to Bangladesh fell over the past week after a new sale from the United States...
The recent announcement about Vale’s resumption of operations in Brazil, along with new concerns...
Australian lithium miner Orocobre expects to sell a total of 1,600 tonnes of lithium carbonate from its flagship Olaroz mine...
Aluminium: Poised for a technical breakout. Fears over a second wave of Covid-19 continue to grow, forcing prices of...
Brazilian sellers have ramped up containerized exports of steel scrap into South Asian markets over the past year...
Markets were mixed this morning, Wednesday June 17, while bullish sentiment continues to be fueled...
Bangladeshi mills are unwilling to pay current offer prices for bulk cargoes and will wait for price decreases before...
Blast furnace (BF) capacity, which was reduced in Europe, Japan and the United States and has now come back online after restrictions started to be removed....
Risks to prices from late in the third quarter onward remain, largely centered on rising domestic steel output, declining prime scrap prices as manufacturing capacity returns and the risks of a second wave of Covid-19...
FOCUS: Time to revisit Asia’s largest untapped zinc-lead deposit?
At 5,500 meters above sea level, a team of four from a major Chinese zinc smelter was driving up a snowy mountain in the...
The latest forecasts from Fastmarkets’ team of analysts are ready to view. Aluminium: Demand outlook revised...
Recent closures and restrictions at several furnaces that produce high-grade steel products across South Korea...
The overall short-term impact of Covid-19 on the global economy.  The influence of Covid-19 on major regional markets including China, the...
Carmakers Volkswagen AG and Ford Motor Company have signed agreements that strengthen their global alliance in...
Aluminium: Short-term upside targets achieved LME aluminium’s price recovery to $1,600 per tonne has been driven...
The overall short-term impact of Covid-19 on the global graphic paper markets. The impact on demand and operating rates...
The government of South Africa has eased the country’s lockdown, yet the continued threat of Covid-19 will dampen...
Covid-19 and US lumber markets. A Fastmarkets RISI Viewpoint
Over-the-shoulder sector helping drive the over-performance in lumber demand thus far in the Covid-19 epidemic...
Despite a mixed picture, generally strong uptrends are underway in most of the base metals...
While metals prices were mixed this morning, Wednesday June 3, broader markets were...
Sentiment in the iron ore market continues to be dominated by concerns about supply disruptions in Brazil...
The worst of the copper demand destruction caused by the global Covid-19 pandemic is behind us....
Why is it so hard to make enough facemasks?Somebody should make up a new name for things we never give any thought to, but which are vital to our lifestyle or even our very existence...
The London Metal Exchange has formally canceled this year's LME Week, which was due to take place in London later this year, "due to the Covid-19 pandemic."...
The overall short-term impact of Covid-19 on the Asian paper and paper markets...
The overall short-term impact of Covid-19 on the Latin American paper packaging markets...
Global manganese ore production contracted by 22% in April from March because of the Covid-19 pandemic...
A poll conducted during our webinar showed concerns for Nickel availability for the battery sector when EV growth picks up post Covid-19...
A couple of months into the global Covid-19 pandemic, the sell-off in steel markets appears to be abating...
Aluminium: Early signs of post-lockdown demand recovery. With major economies outside China reopening...
Indian steelmakers have exported huge volumes of steel during the Covid-19 crisis, and sales closed...
Hopes that the global economic engine fires up on the first attempt may...
Offer prices have increased over the past week ... but several buyers remained out of the market...
MAP: Coronavirus impact on cobalt supply, demand [UPDATED]
The spread of the Covid-19 virus is forcing shutdowns and a reassessment of consumers’ cobalt requirements...
AT A GLANCE: Livent earnings fall 66% in Q1 on lower lithium prices, Covid-19 impact
A summary of US-based lithium producer Livent‘s financial results for the first quarter of 2020...
A second wave of Covid-19 infections will hit the global commodities markets even harder than the initial outbreak...
AT A GLANCE: Albemarle earnings fall 13% in Q1; expects Covid-19 to hit Q2 figures
A summary of US-based lithium and other specialty chemical producer Albemarle’s financial results for the first quarter of 2020.
US President Donald Trump is threatening to abandon a preliminary trade deal leading to an easing of trade tensions with China, citing the...
The spread of the Covid-19 virus is causing disruption to immediate supply chains and future demand forecasts across the technology and consumer electronics sector...
The London Metal Exchange has launched a window of trading intended to drive liquidity in to the cobalt cash-settled contract, settled against Fastmarkets'...
The Chinese domestic spot battery-grade lithium carbonate price fell by 1.1% on Thursday April 30 with buyers still....
Indian authorities have withdrawn the operating license from at least one shipping line after allegations that charges were being wrongfully....
The impact of Covid-19 is undeniably huge. It continues to make its presence felt across all commodity markets, including the ferrous supply chain....
Defaults among overseas buyers have become a problem for Chinese steel exporters in recent weeks, with falling prices and weakening demand triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic leading to....
Chinese domestic portside manganese ore prices of both high and low grades registered significant increases in the latest assessments on Friday....
Rio Tinto cuts 2020 copper guidance on Covid-19, Kennecott earthquake
Rio Tinto has cut its 2020 copper production guidance due to the Covid-19 pandemic and an earthquake last month at its Kennecott operations in the US state of Utah....
MAP: Coronavirus impact on cobalt supply, demand [UPDATED]
The spread of the Covid-19 virus is forcing shutdowns and a reassessment of consumers’ cobalt requirements. Prices of cobalt - metal, intermediates and salts....
Import prices for bulk cargoes of deep-sea ferrous scrap in Bangladesh rose by $25 per tonne over the week to Thursday April 16 amid....
While downward pressure mounts on the steelmaking raw material markets, premiums for higher-grade iron ores have been sustained....
US Section 232 tariffs a factor in NAS' swift Covid-19 response, company says [CORRECTED]
North American Stainless Inc (NAS) has, in part, credited Section 232 tariffs for its ability to quickly shift production to meet the stainless steel....
South Africa’s Department of Mineral Resources (DMR) has granted approval for Tshipi é Ntle Manganese Mining to partially restart operations at the Tshipi Borwa manganese mine from April 14, Jupiter Mines, which operates Borwa....
The latest forecasts from Fastmarkets’ team of analysts are ready to view. Although LME aluminium began this week on the rebound, prices extended....
How will the pandemic affect the iron ore outlook for 2020?
No market has been left untouched by the escalating coronavirus pandemic, but iron ore prices have proved relatively buoyant for the past two months compared with the....
The output and sales of new energy vehicles (NEVs) in China tumbled by over 50% year on year in the first quarter of 2020 due to the effects of the Covid-19 virus on operations.....
South Korea’s two largest steelmakers plan to slash their intake of import scrap over the coming months amid weak finished steel demand, market sources....
The economic analysis teams at Fastmarkets RISI share their latest thoughts on how the global COVID-19 pandemic is affecting global markets and the major segments in the forest products industry...
MAP: Coronavirus impact on cobalt supply, demand [UPDATED]
The spread of the Covid-19 virus is forcing shutdowns and a reassessment of consumers’ cobalt requirements...
Alumina refineries are struggling to stay above the cost curve with prices at four-year lows, while smelter cuts upstream could further widen refining losses....
Covid-19 vs 2015 financial crisis - how much further can steel prices fall?
The fate of the steel world continues to hang in the balance: Numerous scrapyards have stopped operations, blast furnaces around the world have stopped and aggressive...
French mining and metals group Eramet will put on hold the construction of its Argentinian lithium production plant for an indefinite period due to the economic uncertainty sparked by the Covid-19 pandemic.
Delivery and sales of electric vehicles (EVs) from leading EV manufacturer Tesla showed no sign of weakness despite the economic setbacks triggered by the global spread of Covid-19, according to preliminary data released by the company on Friday April 3.
North America lithium producer Livent has resumed operations at its Argentinian production facility after the local government gave the company the green light to restart its activities, it said on Monday April 6.
Striking the right balance between supply and demand for lithium has been difficult, given the still relatively nascent demand for electric vehicles (EVs) and the time needed to ramp up...
Lithium fundamentals show no sign of near-term recovery, says broker SCB
Demand for lithium chemicals will not recover before mid-2021 due to the added headwinds caused by the global spread of the Covid-19 epidemic to an already oversupplied...
Fastmarkets reviews the latest developments in South African ores and alloys supply following the lockdown order from President Cyril...
Australian lithium spodumene concentrate producer Pilbara Minerals has reported first-quarter sales figures from its Pilgangoora Lithium-Tantalum Project in...
The Chinese domestic spot battery-grade lithium carbonate price fell by 1.1% on Thursday April 2 due to reluctance on the buy side to accept higher prices.
Fastmarkets will continue to provide the price data, news and analytics you rely on in these turbulent times...
Fastmarkets, as a provider of business critical news and price information for the metals, mining, agriculture and forest products industries, is committed to delivering high-quality products...
FREE WEBINAR: Impact of coronavirus on steel supply chain, near-term market trends
Join Fastmarkets’ free webinar on how the steel supply chain in Asia has responded to the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak, and what the next moves could be for the steel industry and its upstream raw materials.
We have been closely monitoring the developments relating to the Covid-19 outbreak, including its impact on global travel plans and the likely attendance at events that were due to commence in the next...
The South African port authority is looking to reserve Durban port for the shipment of essential goods only, revoking a separate statement by the country’s maritime authority to allow processing of metals cargoes during the 21-day lockdown, Fastmarkets has learned.
South Africa will now allow metal cargoes to be shipped from the Port of Durban during the country's 21-day lockdown, after many suppliers failed to find alternative export routes over the past week.
Four producers that supplied most of the world's tin exports last year have suspended some or all production until at least Tuesday March 31, in an effort to curb the spread of Covid-19. In Malaysia, where the...
MAP: Coronavirus impact on cobalt supply, demand
The spread of the Covid-19 virus is forcing shutdowns and a reassessment of consumers’ cobalt requirements.Prices of cobalt - metal, intermediates and salts - have so far taken...
The London Metal Exchange has developed procedures to manage the temporary unavailability of one of its approved warehouses or delivery points that might stem from the Covid-19....
Copper market participants should have been gathering in Santiago, Chile, for the annual CESCO dinner on Wednesday March 25. Instead, the country’s mining industry was nervously eyeing the spread of the Covid-19 virus pandemic...
Australian exploration company Infinity Lithium has signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) for a multi-staged investment and assistance package to secure funding for its San Jose lithium project in Spain...
Prices for bulk cargoes of ferrous scrap imported to Bangladesh sank on Thursday as scrap-heavy steel mills showed less appetite for material, market sources told Fastmarkets...
The Ministry of Transport & Communication in Zambia has recommended the all cross-border cargo shipments be suspended to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus...
South African state transport operator Transnet has confirmed that all the country’s bulk terminals will be closed to minerals shipments under a three-week government-ordered lockdown amid...
The spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) is causing disruption to immediate supply chains and future demand forecasts across the technology and consumer electronics sector...
Five ways the coronavirus is affecting the minors, ores and alloys markets
The spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outside China has brought with it logistical restrictions, a reconsideration of raw material requirements and concerns over possible disruptions to supply in the coming weeks...
Argentina’s lithium brine industry have announced that they will suspend their on-site project works until the end of March after the Argentinian government imposed a nationwide lockdown to stem the spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in the country...
COKING COAL DAILY: Coronavirus spread grips ex-China markets, India in focus
Seaborne coking coal prices retreated on Monday March 23, with fears of a global economic downturn taking hold due to the spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), even though sentiment among Chinese participants was starting to become more optimistic...
The 2019-nCoV pandemic is definitely a black swan event, one which nobody saw coming.
Silver's decade-low price crash adds to zinc, lead mining woes
Zinc and lead miners have had their silver lining taken out.
Prices in Southeast Asia’s steel billet market were unchanged despite a slump in emerging market currencies following investors’ preference for haven assets in uncertain economic conditions, Fastmarkets heard...
Nexa Resources curbs Peruvian mining, smelting ops due to state of emergency
Multi-metals producer Nexa Resources has suspended mining and limited smelting operations in Peru after the local government declared a state of emergency and closed its borders due to the coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pandemic, the company said on Thursday March 19...
Norwegian aluminium producer Norsk Hydro has announced a number of measures to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) across its global operations but maintains that the operational...
LIVE FUTURES REPORT 20/03: Relief rally underway in SHFE base metals; Cu up 2%
Base metals prices on the Shanghai Futures Exchange were up across the board at the close of the morning trading session on Friday March 20, with the complex benefiting from the...
Cleveland-Cliffs is temporarily ceasing construction activities at its hot-briquetted iron (HBI) plant in Toledo, Ohio, due to the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pandemic, the company said on Thursday March 19...
Market panic freezes copper physical trades in China; fabricators running higher rates
Physical trading for copper in China has ground to a halt after the tumbling copper price on the Shanghai Futures Exchange (SHFE) startled the market, Fastmarkets heard...
Chilean copper miner Codelco will reduce its operations to comply with a state of emergency announced by the government in an attempt to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), the state-owned company...
MMG temporarily reduced productions at its Peruvian copper mine-Las Bambas following the local governments' declaration of a 15-day state of national emergency to contain the coronavirus (2019-nCoV), the Australian-Chinese miner...
MORNING VIEW: Risk-off dominated in Asian trading, but some rebound being seen as Europe opens
While risk-off dominates and even though governments are prepared to throw money at the financial system and into economies and households, the likelihood is that more factories will close...
FOCUS: Steep declines for LME base metals prices amid coronavirus pandemic; copper down 22% since Jan [CORRECTED]
LIVE FUTURES REPORT 19/03: SHFE base metals prices down heavily again; Sn plunges 7.8%
Base metals prices on the Shanghai Futures Exchange were down across the board at the close of morning trading on Thursday March 19 amid continued broad-based risk aversion, with tin leading the complex lower with a drop of 7.8%...
Nexa Resources curbs Peruvian mining, smelting ops due to state of emergency
Multi-metals producer Nexa Resources has suspended mining and limited smelting operations in Peru after the local government declared a state of emergency and closed its borders due to the coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pandemic, the company said on Thursday March 19...
Automobile manufacturers General Motors (GM) and Mercedes-Benz have enforced “collective holidays” at their Brazilian operations starting from March 30, in response...
Reductions to shipping and port fees comprise the latest weapon for Chinese steel exporters amid their country’s efforts to cushion the effects of the 2019-nCoV coronavirus outbreak...
Follow-through selling pressure on Thursday March 19 has pushed LME tin to a fresh 2020 low of $13,000 per tonne. The price has broken past the January 2016 low of $13,085 per tonne. Some short-covering...
Long-products mills in the United States have begun formally notifying customers of their Covid-19 precautions and contingency plans, with at least three specifying that production and shipping have not been disrupted as of Wednesday March 18...
The Metals Service Center Institute (MSCI) has canceled its annual meeting, scheduled to take place in May, because of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pandemic...
Cobalt sulfate prices fell below 50,000 yuan ($7,131) per tonne on Wednesday March 18, with the rapid spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outside China exacerbating concerns over slower growth in global electric vehicle (EV) production...
China will raise the export rebate to 13% from 10% for a large number of steel products from March 20, according to a notice released by the Ministry of Finance late on Tuesday March 17...
IN CASE YOU MISSED IT: 5 key stories from March 16
Here are five Fastmarkets stories you might have missed on Monday March 16 that are worth another look...
Brazilian miner Vale has said it may have to implement contingency measures or eventually suspend operations due to the global spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pandemic...
The Institute of Scrap Recycling Institutes (ISRI) has decided to cancel the annual recycling event in Las Vegas next month, the biggest of its kind in the scrap industry, citing concerns over...
Two more Italian steel mills shut down, further closures possible, sources say
Two more steel producers in Italy have stopped operations following the recent nationwide extension of the country’s coronavirus-related quarantine area, and more stoppages...
Market sentiment in the Chinese domestic rebar market was optimistic on Thursday March 12 after the National Health Commission (NHC) announced the peak of the novel coronavirus...
Opportunistic Chinese billet importers seeking to profit from an open arbitrage window are likely to cushion the blow to Southeast Asian prices caused by extensive measures imposed in the Philippines to stem the spread...
Chinese hot-rolled coil exporters expressed growing concern over thin trading caused by the global spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) on Thursday March 12, despite improved...
Strong competition from exporters has propped up brass scrap prices in the United States, despite the Comex copper price falling around $2.50 per lb, Fastmarkets understands...
US HRC hovers near $29/cwt; Q2 plunge feared
US hot-rolled coil prices continue to bob around $29 per hundredweight despite mounting fears that prices could plunge in the second quarter on an oil market crash and fallout from the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pandemic...
The Dow Jones Industrial Average Index (DJIA) closed down by 5.9% on Wednesday, and in the pre-market this morning, Thursday March 12, the DJIA futures are down by around 4.4%...
Italy's long steel output hit by coronavirus lockdown, flats production steady
The enlargement of the quarantine zone in Italy to a nationwide reach has already started to affect steel output, with at least two long steel mills announcing production...
Prices for hot-rolled coil in the United States fell slightly on Wednesday March 11 as fears about the impact of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) on global economies deepened, market participants said. Fastmarkets’ daily...
FREE WEBINAR: Impact of coronavirus on steel supply chain, near-term market trends
Join us for a free webinar on how the steel supply chain in Asia has responded to the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak, and what the next moves could be for the steel industry...
The UG2 chrome ore price fell for the third consecutive week on Friday March 6 after suppliers cut their offer prices sharply amid weak demand, high inventories and a weaker South African rand...
The recent extension of the health quarantine area in the north of Italy will not affect steel production or deliveries, sources told Fastmarkets on Monday March 9...
Vanadium prices continued to trade under pressure while fears of a global economic slowdown -amid the coronavirus (2019-nCov) outbreak - weighed on...
Market sources have been puzzled by the gradual upward trend in China’s steel prices after the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) broke out in a big way after the Lunar New Year holiday.
Car production in Brazil is at risk of suffering stoppages by April, if supply constraints affecting Chinese auto parts providers do not improve amid the outbreak of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), according to Brazilian national car association Anfavea.
While hot-rolled coil prices in the United States remain mostly steady, market participants are increasingly unsettled over what the spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) may portend for the domestic steel market.
Market participants expect to see a decline in the monthly tender price offered by major Chinese stainless mills for March delivery of domestic high-carbon ferro-chrome...
Shindachi - a Japanese grade of busheling - is one of the cleanest and highest-yield materials in the scrap sector, but a sharp drop in prices over the last year has made the product increasingly...
Global gross domestic product (GDP) growth and dry bulk trade are both facing uncertainty due to the spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), though Chinese...
The Düsseldorf wire and tube fair has been postponed due to the spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), the fair organizer, Messe Düsseldorf, said on Saturday February 29......
A shortage of shipping containers resulting from the control measures put in place in China to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) is slowing global...
The novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) that originated in China but has since spread to more than 40 countries poses a serious threat to the Chinese nickel market, with demand, and therefore prices, said to be at considerable risk in the short term.
The steel export trade from Iran has been hurt by neighboring countries closing their borders due to the appearance of coronavirus infection in the Middle Eastern country, Fastmarkets learnt on Friday February 28...
GLOBAL LITHIUM WRAP: Market wary of virus spread in South Korea, Europe; participants diverge on supply-demand effects on price
Battery-grade lithium prices were unchanged in Asia, Europe and the United States in the...
The novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak in South Korea, the largest export market for Chinese stainless steel, is likely to apply additional pressure on stainless steel prices in Asia, sources told Fastmarkets this week...
Metal and ferro-alloy suppliers in Europe are reporting strong call-offs on sales to European consumers, some of which are stocking up in preparation for any disruptions that might be caused by the spread of the novel coronavirus infection (2019-nCoV)...
Manganese ore producer Consolidated Minerals (Consmin) has had to delay shipments to China from Port Hedland in Western Australia as a result of disruption caused by the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov) outbreak...
Executives at BlueScope warned that the escalating spread of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) could delay the $700-million expansion of its electric-arc furnace (EAF) operations in Ohio, in the United States, due to supply chain disruptions...
SHFE metals inventories to more than double following virus outbreak, JP Morgan says
China’s metals inventories could more than double in the first quarter of 2020, according to a JP Morgan research note published on Thursday February 27...
Cesco Santiago, one of the biggest annual events for the copper industry, has been canceled, organisers confirmed to Fastmarkets...
The novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) is set to accelerate what the trade wars started: the diversification of global supply chains...
As the effects of novel coronavirus are being felt around the world, Fastmarkets has taken the difficult decision to postpone several forthcoming events in both China and Singapore until the situation has...
Magnesia producers in the production hub of Liaoning province in China, are beginning to ramp up operations after the local government...
The Shanxi provincial government in China has reduced its public health emergency status to Level Two from Level One (the highest), based on the situation for control of...
Chinese mining disruption supports refractory-grade bauxite uptick; fused alumina flat
The price of refractory-grade bauxite rose in the two weeks to Thursday February 20 due to a low production recovery rate and limited logistics in...
China’s stainless steel market saw some activity over the past week following several weeks of stagnation as a result of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak in the country...
Chinese steelmakers are rushing to export their products due to stagnant domestic demand caused by downstream industries struggling to return to work amid the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak in China...
Supply glut, coronavirus put upward pressure on 2020 zinc, lead TC benchmarks
This year’s annual benchmark treatment charges (TCs) for zinc and lead concentrates are expected to rise due to high supply and the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak in China and beyond affecting the raw materials market...
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), intra-year demand volatility and seaborne supply uncertainty are likely to contribute to iron ore price volatility in the coming year, Australia miner BHP said...
Chrome factories in China's Hubei and Sichuan provinces have gradually returned to operation since February 10 but demand for chemical-grade chromite will be hit been hit by the coronavirus outbreak, market sources warned...
Mineral sand miner Iluka expects the consequences of the novel coronavirus infection to weigh on the already sluggish zircon market in 2020...
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) and the subsequent slowdown in China, one of the world’s largest iodine consumers, is yet to have an impact on the iodine spot market, as the price held firm this week...
Logistics disruptions across China have paralysed many of the country’s supply chains since the outbreak of a novel coronavirus infection forced authorities to clamp down on...
China’s race to contain the coronavirus (2019-nCov), combined with its financial stimulus, are providing the markets with more than enough hope...
Graphite production in the Chinese city of Qingdao, in Shandong province, one of the country’s production hubs for flake graphite, has begun to resume gradually but with...
Chinese mineral producers trying to return to work amid the coronavirus disruptions are being hampered by the continuing shortage of land freight options...
China’s battery-grade lithium hydroxide price was supported at current levels this week after some producers announced plans to increase prices to cover higher transport and production costs resulting from containment policies for the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in China.
A recovery of China’s bauxite and fused alumina production remained uncertain in the major production hubs of Henan and Shanxi provinces due to the coronavirus outbreak, creating concern about supply and delivery of the refractory material in the short term.
INTERVIEW: Norsk Hydro resumes China ops but virus uncertainty remains, CEO say
Norsk Hydro has resumed operations at its plants in China following their extended closure due to the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) but whether all staff will return and what this and other logistical issues might mean for its business is unclear, the company’s chief executive officer said.
NEWSBREAK: LME Week Asia 2020 seminar postponed, dinner canceled
The LME Week Asia 2020 seminar has been postponed and the LME Asia Dinner has been canceled, due to the coronavirus outbreak, the London Metal Exchange said on Friday February 14.
China’s magnesia production begins to recover, prices unchanged
China’s magnesia producers began gradually to resume production this week, with magnesia export prices steady over the past seven days on a limited number of new...
The broad-based rally across markets that started on Monday finally halted this morning and consolidation is setting on. And, given there is still...
LME Week Asia 2020 could be in doubt due to the coronavirus outbreak, with Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing evaluating all their events taking place over the next few months.
Shutdowns in China's Hubei province have stymied the region's large pulp and paper industry. Nationwide impacts include a looming shortage of recycled paper and board.
Coronavirus impact on key parts of the steel supply chain: Iron ore
Expectations of robust steel mill restocking have been tempered by demand fears that have knocked iron ore prices by over 10% since before the holiday, but big questions remain about...
The coronavirus outbreak in China has severely disrupted logistics in the country, creating a shortage of available lorry drivers and rail freight cars, with transport between provinces severely disrupted.
Business activity in the mineral sands markets was seen to be idling in the week to Friday February 7, with worries about the fallout from the coronavirus outbreak in China leading to a cautious outlook, as Declan Conway reports.
Participants active in the bauxite and fused alumina markets expect short-term supply shortages to affect consuming destinations in areas including Europe, while sellers take stock of the shipping disruptions arising from measures taken to contain the coronavirus outbreak in China.
Coronavirus impact on battery raw materials: Cobalt
Weak demand for new energy vehicles (NEVs) in China is expected to hit domestic Chinese cobalt prices and could see Chinese demand for imported hydroxide fall...
Coronavirus impact on battery raw materials: Lithium
Expectations for a rebound in new energy vehicle (NEV) sales after the Lunar New Year holiday have been put on hold due to the impact the Wuhan coronavirus is expected...
Coronavirus impact on key parts of the steel supply chain: Coking coal
Prices are steady so far since domestic supply constraints and disruptions to seaborne availability have been counterbalanced by demand-side weakness from lower steel output.
Coronavirus impact on key parts of the steel supply chain: Manganese ore and alloy
Restricted access to ore already in ports presents the threat of alloy shutdowns, both of which could provide short-term price support for ore and alloy, but the accompanying ore stockbuild...
Coronavirus impact on key parts of the steel supply chain: Steel
Chinese domestic prices suffer heavy falls on building steel inventory levels and persistent first-quarter demand worries, with rebar facing the toughest challenge.
Coronavirus impact on key parts of the steel supply chain: Chrome ore and alloy
Most ferro-chrome smelters had covered their ore needs for this week and logistics disruptions are minimal between ports and many major smelters.
GLOBAL GRAPHITE SNAPSHOT: 194 cif Europe price rises, coronavirus heightens seasonal shortage
Key data from the graphite pricing sessions in Asia and Europe for the week ended Thursday February 6.
China’s demand for imported alumina remains firm despite virus; freight rates drop
The coronavirus outbreak has not yet affected buying demand in China for imported alumina, with material from Western Australia still being shipped to China and fresh deals concluded, market participants...
China's copper smelters face limited scope to slash production even as diminished demand on virus-related lockdowns raises concerns refined inventories could grow.
The impact of the coronavirus outbreak from Wuhan city, China, is positively affecting antimony prices in Europe, with low stocks in Rotterdam and the market heavily dependent on supply from China.
Port of Shanghai, the world’s biggest port by container throughput, and other major ports in China will waive the extra storage fees incurred during the logistics lockdown imposed in relation...
China's magnesia enterprises in Liaoning province, a major production hub, have suspended operations on government instructions in a bid to stop the spread of the coronavirus outbreak that was first detected in Wuhan city.
History shows that crises such as the Wuhan coronavirus have a relatively short-lived impact on global financial markets. Commodities such as soybeans, metals and paper have longer-term issues to worry...
The sell-off of Chinese steel futures this morning is a sign that “worse is to come” for global steel prices, market sources told Fastmarkets on Monday February 3.
Base metals prices have reacted quite aggressively to the spread of the coronavirus, more so than most equity markets, leaving markets sending out different signals.
What are likely short-term effects of Wuhan virus on steel, iron ore markets?
Just as China and the United States started to reach a deal and trade tensions eased, providing some longed-for certainty, the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov) has again increased fear and uncertainty...
Shipments of magnesia that were due to leave China's Liaoning province next week will likely experience delays following an extension of the holiday period in the region, as authorities seek to contain the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak.
Mounting concern over the effects of the coronavirus outbreak in China are putting pressure on the value of the country's yuan in global markets, reversing a trend that supported commodity prices earlier this month.
An outbreak of a SARS-like coronavirus in China has begun to hit certain commodity markets worldwide, but questions remain about the potential impact on the steel sector in the United...
Manganese flake rallies on virus fears; Europe traders seize momentum
A mixture of fears over supply disruptions amid the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak and low stocks in Rotterdam are giving European traders enough leverage to increase their offers substantially, which has...
FOCUS: Virus jitters will affect China's steel exports, sources say
The Wuhan coronavirus will likely influence fundamentals in China’s steel market and Chinese export trends in the near future, sources told Fastmarkets this week.
Trade disputes and geopolitical uncertainties had already made the prospects for global economic growth uncertain. A coronavirus has now added to the challenges facing financial markets.
The China Council for the Promotion of International Trade is offering "force majeure certificates" to businesses in China affected by the outbreak of the Wuhan novel coronavirus.
FOCUS: Wuhan virus likely to dent Q2 demand for steel, iron ore in Asia
Sentiment in the seaborne iron ore and Asian steel markets have deteriorated amid a rapid spread of the 2019-nCoV - or Wuhan novel coronavirus - in China, which appears to...
Titanium dioxide and ilmenite traders are closely watching the rapid spread of a coronavirus infection in central China, with cases reported in many of the industry's production centers.
We provide price assessments and indices for a wide range of commodities across many regions, delivered to you online, via data feeds, or through third-party platforms such as Bloomberg, Morningstar and Refinitiv. Backed by accredited pricing methodologies from our legacy brands such as Metal Bulletin (now Fastmarkets MB), American Metal Market (now Fastmarkets AMM), and RISI (now Fastmarkets RISI), you can trust our market-reflective prices as others have for 130+ years. Whether you buy, sell or produce materials, we have the tools to give you a comprehensive view of the markets and prices that drive strategic business decisions.
Short-term price forecasts and analysis for aluminium, steel, scrap, battery raw materials and other markets can help you mitigate risk.
Our experts are embedded in the markets, ensuring regular global coverage of the latest market news and price drivers.
Access details on company output, revenue, expansion and project details all in one place, to save time and maximize resources and growth.
