After making the executive decision to move from his hometown of Seattle to Los Angeles to pursue his career, he released one of his first singles accompanied by a music video, “Pull Up” (which, ironically, is tagged as an age-restricted video on YouTube). Though the visual was simple - only cutting between two locations - it intrigued Interscope’s SVP of A&R, Tim Glover.
“It caught my attention because it was a young kid and a wild video,” Glover said. “The fact that he had melodies and he knew his sound, and to do that at such a young age, I immediately went to Joie [Manda, EVP at Interscope] and was like we gotta sign this asap.”
Since then, the team has made it their mission to turn Mosey, now 18, into a global phenom. Mosey’s 2018 debut, Northsbest, spawned a double-platinum single in “Noticed,” and set him up to produce his own festival, Northsbest Fest, in Seattle the following year.
Still, Marshall and Glover set out to accrue even more accolades with Mosey’s sophomore effort, Certified Hitmaker. Since its November 2019 release, the album totaled more than 1.3 billion combined global audio and video streams, peaked at No. 12 on the Billboard 200, and birthed the now-platinum single “Blueberry Faygo” - currently sitting at over 250 million U.S. streams, according to his team.
From right to left - Josh Marshall, Lil Mosey
“It was a process,” Glover said of the creation of the album. “He records so many songs […] Obviously, I want to make every project better than the last and what do we do to take his brand to the next level.”
Moving forward, Marshall is focused on elevating his client’s brand as an approachable hip-hop artist with the potential to crossover into various genres.
“My approach [as a manager] wasn’t really so much ‘this is a kid,’ Marshall explained. “My approach was ‘this is a potential brand that we can build. No matter what his age was at the time, I didn’t really look at it like let me figure out how to manage this ‘kid.’ If I looked at him as a kid artist, I don’t think I would’ve been as attracted to managing him.”
Aspiring rappers Mosey’s age might romanticize what life would be like with the number of feats he’s accomplished in such a short amount of time. But as an insider-looking-out, Mosey sees beyond the glitz that may have originally attracted him to life as a rapper.
“When you come from nothing, you’re looking at this like it’s the best thing in the world and that you can do whatever you want,” Mosey said. “But really, it’s just like working a job or something. You just gotta put in work because if you start getting lazy, if you think everything’s sweet, then you’re going to start losing it.”
Nonetheless, Mosey is set on achieving just as much success in his business life. As someone who “wants to do everything,” he’s begun to think about parking his money in investment properties and has been researching where he can find the best sources of water.
Even though retirement is likely half-a-century away, he can already summarize how he wants others to remember his legacy:
“Lil Mosey lived a long, great life. He gave back, changed the world, and did things that nobody else has done before. He found a wife, had some kids, and has 10 different houses, inside and outside America.”
