Breakage, brassiness, dullness—she’s learned how to fix them all.
Going platinum is one of those hair dreams that we think everyone should explore at least once in their lives. Sure, it’s finicky and time-consuming, and lord knows you will need to be back in your colorist’s chair a few times per year to maintain your shade, but the end result can be nothing short of magical. It’s a hair color that says “I am both fearless and radiant” because, let’s be honest, shockingly white hair isn’t exactly subtle.
Some people, however, don’t just go back to their natural color after a few months of dabbling in platinum—instead, it becomes a signature part of their beauty look. Heather Andersen , the founder of New York Pilates , is one of those people. With her waist-skimming white locks, which she’s had for nearly nine years (!!), you might be wondering, How exactly does she keep her hair healthy ? or What tips does she have for maintaining the perfect tone between touch-ups? Don’t worry—we were wondering the same thing, which is why we decided to ask the fitness guru herself. More on her platinum hair-care routine, her tips for first-time blondies, and all the products she swears by for daily maintenance, below.
First of all, who does your hair color?
“My amazing friend Amy Lindwall always has and always will do my hair color. She doesn’t let anyone else touch me! She’s incredible. She makes house calls in the city since she lives out on a farm upstate with her family. When I’m lucky, I’ll convince her to squeeze me in as her last appointment of the day so we can have a glass of wine and catch up once she finishes my hair.”
How long do you usually like your hair to be?
“I love wearing my hair long. It’s sat just above my butt for the past few years. I would be totally fine with my hair growing way longer if Amy didn’t remind me to cut it. I get my hair trimmed twice a year. I would never cut it, but she always trims a little off when I’m not looking so I don’t end up looking like a total creep. Thanks, Amy.”
How often do you get your color touched up?
“I don’t mind a bit of root, so I touch them up every 8 to 12 weeks.”
What products do you use in and out of the shower to help with hair health and tone?
“I try to wash my hair only once a week. I wash with PHYTO Phytoargent No Yellow Shampoo and condition with DevaCurl One Condition , which is incredible for color-treated hair. I discovered it by being the worst roommate ever—I don’t have curly hair, but once upon a time, I had a roommate who did. I ran out of conditioner once and ‘borrowed’ this from her. I’ve been using it ever since.
“I swear by Pureology’s Hydrate Shine Max Weightless Serum —it’s the best and keeps my hair from getting tangled. I particularly appreciate it during the winter with all the sweaters I wear. It stops the little sweater particles from tangling up my hair!
“My favorite trick is Brilliant Tone Violet Smoothing Foam from Joico . It’s amazing at keeping your blond bright and getting rid of yellow tones. The brassy thing is just something that happens, especially if you tend to wait too long between touch-ups (me). This product really helps.”
