So they had the chance to question it during her appearance on the morning magazine show, Holly shared a video tutorial on her Instagram.
The mother-of-three joked that she also knew people would tell her she was 'doing it wrong', however she insisted it's the way she always does her own hair.
How to guide: Holly anticipated that people would question how she managed to get her locks dyed during lockdown, while all hairdressers have been forced to shut down
Holly, who promotes Garnier Nutrisse dye, told her fans she only wanted a root top up after her children told her she had a 'brown streak' in her hair.
She then proceeded to mix up the dye and apply to to each layer of her roots and her hairline, before waiting 25 minutes for the colour to lift.
During the tutorial Holly insisted that she rarely visits salons because it's too time consuming and opts to dye her hair with Garnier Nutrisse at home.
Safety first! So before giving them a chance to question it during her appearance on the morning magazine show, Holly shared a video tutorial on her Instagram
She admitted to 'occasionally' going to the salon for highlights to break it up, however 'nine times out of ten' she will dye it herself at home.
Revealing the impressive finished product once she had finished, Holly exclaimed: 'No roots, no disasters.'
Giving her followers some background to the clip, she penned: 'Tomorrow morning on @thismorning I know I will get an awful lot of questions asking how come I've managed to get my hair colour done whilst we are in lockdown (roots were getting out of control!)...
Here's how: Holly, who promotes Garnier Nutrisse dye, told her fans she only wanted a root top up after her children told her she had a 'brown streak' in her hair
'I thought it's a good opportunity to answer that question and a few others...
'Do I really use @garnieruk to tint my own hair and if so how do I do it?...
Lovely: Revealing the impressive finished product once she had finished, Holly exclaimed: 'No roots, no disasters'
Giving her followers some background to the clip, she penned: 'Tomorrow morning on @thismorning I know I will get an awful lot of questions asking how come I've managed to get my hair colour done whilst we are in lockdown'
Flirt with florals like Holly in a must-have midi by L.K. Bennett
