With lockdowns easing around the world and the UK government’s intention to open non-essential retail in June , certain shares have burst into life. There are some rich pickings out there. And the following are a few of the names I like the look of right now.
One clear beneficiary of increased public activity is the housing market. You could go for marketplace provider Rightmove, but I’m keen on the housebuilding companies. You can choose between several on the London stock market, but I’d analyse the smaller operators, such as Redrow and Bellway.
Outdoor markets in England will open from the first day of June, along with vehicle showrooms. And shopaholics will be delighted that the non-essential retail sector will be back open for business from 15 June. Shares have been responding well to the news.
You’ve plenty of choice in this sector, but I’d go for Kingfisher, Next and Fraser right now.
The healthcare sector’s been popular with investors throughout the crisis, and we’ve seen some delightful up-thrusts from firms such as AstraZeneca and Avacta. But I’d turn to the wider healthcare sector now and focus on Emis.
The company provides software and support services to GP practices, hospitals pharmacies, satellite healthcare centres and “across every major UK healthcare setting.”
There’s plenty of choice in the industrial sector. But, for now, I’d zero in on stocks such as TI Fluid Systems, Mondi, XP Power and Howden Joinery. All should see their underlying businesses boosted by a resumption of general economic activity.
I’m reluctant to flirt with bank shares, such as Lloyds and Barclays, because they’ve been disappointing investors for so long. However, there are some interesting companies in the wider financial sector, such as spread-bet and CFD-provider IG.
Many sectors are warming up right now. For example, in agriculture, Ros Agro looks interesting. In the world of distribution, I reckon Bunzl is a great company. In infrastructure and construction, Keller has grabbed my attention recently. And, in the resources sector, I like the look of Sylvania Platinum.
These ideas are mere starting points and represent my own thoughts about the stock market right now. If you think these shares look interesting, it’s important you do your own thorough analysis and research before buying any shares.
And they’re not the only stocks that may be worth buying now. Why not trawl the market for yourself and see if you like the look of any other names? After thorough research, you may even be tempted to buy some of them.
For me, the best way of generating decent overall returns is to hold shares with a long-term horizon in mind. And I’d maximize my gains by holding them in a tax-efficient wrapper, such as a SIPP or an ISA.
Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all fired up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the pandemic!).
But its capital-light, highly scalable business model has previously helped it deliver consistently high sales, astounding near-70% margins, and rising shareholder returns … in fact, in 2019 it returned a whopping £150m+ to shareholders in dividends and buybacks!
While COVID-19 may have thrown the company a curveball, management have acted swiftly to ensure this business is as well placed as it can be to ride out the current period of uncertainty… in fact, our analyst believes it should come roaring back to life, just as soon as normal economic activity resumes.
That’s why we think now could be the perfect time for you to start building your own stake in this exceptional business – especially given the shares look to be trading on a fairly undemanding valuation for the year to March 2021.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Growth Share… free of charge!
Kevin Godbold has no position in any share mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has recommended Barclays, Emis Group, Howden Joinery Group, Lloyds Banking Group, Redrow, Rightmove, and XP Power. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
