If You Had Bought Eastern Platinum (TSE:ELR) Stock Five Years Ago, You’d Be Sitting On A 62% Loss, Today
Simply Wall St September 5, 2019
Eastern Platinum Limited ( TSE:ELR ) shareholders will doubtless be very grateful to see the share price up 52% in the last quarter. But that doesn’t change the fact that the returns over the last half decade have been disappointing. In fact, the share price has declined rather badly, down some 62% in that time. So we’re not so sure if the recent bounce should be celebrated. However, in the best case scenario (far from fait accompli), this improved performance might be sustained.
Eastern Platinum isn’t currently profitable, so most analysts would look to revenue growth to get an idea of how fast the underlying business is growing. Shareholders of unprofitable companies usually expect strong revenue growth. Some companies are willing to postpone profitability to grow revenue faster, but in that case one does expect good top-line growth.
In the last half decade, Eastern Platinum saw its revenue increase by 30% per year. That’s better than most loss-making companies. In contrast, the share price is has averaged a loss of 18% per year – that’s quite disappointing. This could mean high expectations have been tempered, potentially because investors are looking to the bottom line. If you think the company can keep up its revenue growth, you’d have to consider the possibility that there’s an opportunity here.
Balance sheet strength is crucial. It might be well worthwhile taking a look at our free report on how its financial position has changed over time .
We’re pleased to report that Eastern Platinum shareholders have received a total shareholder return of 28% over one year. There’s no doubt those recent returns are much better than the TSR loss of 18% per year over five years. We generally put more weight on the long term performance over the short term, but the recent improvement could hint at a (positive) inflection point within the business. You might want to assess this data-rich visualization of its earnings, revenue and cash flow.
But note: Eastern Platinum may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with past earnings growth (and further growth forecast).
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on CA exchanges.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
