BMO Capital Markets has provided a fairness opinion to the board of directors of NAP in connection with the Transaction. Stikeman Elliott LLP and Webber Wentzel are acting as NAP’s legal advisors in connection with the Transaction.
Macquarie Capital Markets Canada Ltd. and Macquarie Advisory and Capital Markets South Africa (Pty) Ltd are acting as financial advisors to Implats and its Board of Directors. Baker McKenzie is acting as Implats’ legal advisors in connection with the Transaction.
NAP is a Canadian company with 25 years of production at the Lac des Iles Mine in a low-risk jurisdiction northwest of Thunder Bay, Ontario. North American Palladium is the world’s only pure play palladium producer. With over 700 employees, the Lac des Iles Mine features a unique, world-class ore body and modern infrastructure, including both an underground mine and surface operations.
Impala is one of the world’s foremost producers of platinum and associated platinum group metals. Impala is currently structured around five main operations with a total of 20 underground shafts. Its operations are located within the Bushveld Complex in South Africa and the Great Dyke in Zimbabwe, the two most significant platinum group metal bearing ore bodies in the world.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS:
Certain information in this news release constitutes forward-looking statements under applicable securities laws. Any statements that are contained in this news release that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. Forward looking statements are often identified by terms such as "may", "should", "anticipate", "expect", "potential", "believe", "intend", “estimate” or the negative of these terms and similar expressions. Forward-looking statements in this news release include, but are not limited to: statements with respect to the completion of the Transaction and the timing for its completion; the satisfaction of closing conditions which include, without limitation (i) required NAP shareholder approval, (ii) necessary court approval in connection with the plan of arrangement, (iii) receipt of any required approvals under and/or from the Competition Act (Canada), Investment Canada Act (Canada), German Federal Cartel Office (Bundeskartellamt) and Financial Surveillance Department of the South African Reserve Bank  , (iv) certain termination rights available to the parties under the Arrangement Agreement, and (vi) other closing conditions, including compliance by Implats and NAP with various covenants contained in the Arrangement Agreement; statements with respect to the effect of the Transaction on Implats and its strategy going forward; statements with respect to the anticipated benefits associated with the acquisition of NAP; and NAP’s financial outlook for estimated net and gross revenues from the sale of palladium for fiscal 2020.
Forward-looking statements are based on certain assumptions regarding Implats and NAP, including the completion of the Transaction, anticipated benefits from the Transaction, and expected growth, results of operations, performance, industry trends and growth opportunities. While Implats and NAP consider these assumptions to be reasonable, based on information currently available, they may prove to be incorrect. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements.
The factors and assumptions contained in this news release, which may prove to be incorrect, include, but are not limited to: the completion of the Transaction on the terms detailed above; NAP will be able to continue normal business operations at Lac des Iles Mine; palladium prices and exchange rates between the Canadian and United States dollar will be consistent with NAP's expectations; there will be no significant disruptions affecting operations; and that prices for key mining and construction supplies, including labour, will remain consistent with NAP's expectations. The forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance. NAP disclaims any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, events or otherwise, except as expressly required by law. Readers are cautioned not to put undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.
The assumptions of Implats and NAP, although considered reasonable by them at the time of preparation, may prove to be incorrect. In addition, forward-looking statements necessarily involve known and unknown risks, including, without limitation, risks associated with general economic conditions; adverse industry events; future legislative, tax and regulatory developments; inability to access sufficient capital from internal and external sources, and/or inability to access sufficient capital on favourable terms; the ability of NAP to implement its business strategies; competition; currency and interest rate fluctuations and other risks. Among other things, there can be no assurance that the Transaction will be completed or that the anticipated benefits from the Transaction will be achieved.
Readers are cautioned that the foregoing list is not exhaustive. Readers are further cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements as there can be no assurance that the plans, intentions or expectations upon which they are placed will occur. Such information, although considered reasonable by management at the time of preparation, may prove to be incorrect and actual results may differ materially from those anticipated. For more information on the risk, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause anticipated opportunities and actual results to differ materially, please refer to the public filings of NAP which are available on SEDAR at www.sedar.com , including the “Risk Factors” section in NAP’s Annual Information Form dated March 22, 2019 and the most recent management’s discussion and analysis filed by NAP.
Forward-looking statements contained in this news release are expressly qualified by this cautionary statement and reflect our expectations as of the date hereof, and thus are subject to change thereafter. Implats and NAP disclaim any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
Notice to U.S. Holders. Both Implats and NAP have been formed outside of the United States. The Transaction will be subject to disclosure requirements of Canada that are different from those of the United States. Financial statements included in the documents, if any, will be prepared in accordance with Canadian accounting standards and may not be comparable to the financial statements of United States companies. It may be difficult for a securityholder in the United States to enforce his/her/its rights and any claim a securityholder may have arising under U.S. federal securities laws, since the companies are located in Canada, and some or all of their officers or directors may be residents of Canada or another country outside of the United States. A securityholder may not be able to sue a Canadian company or its officers or directors in a court in Canada or elsewhere outside of the United States for violations of U.S. securities laws. It may be difficult to compel a Canadian company and its affiliates to subject themselves to a U.S. court's judgment.
Neither the TSX nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in the policies of the TSX) accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release.
