Is The Card For You?
For those with suboptimal credit looking to improve their score, make purchases online or pay bills, there are many options, including secured credit cards, unsecured credit cards and prepaid debit cards. Many of these come loaded with fees. In contrast, the Indigo Platinum MasterCard is a refreshingly simple product with no purchase fees.
The Indigo Platinum MasterCard is a credit card that offers a version with no annual fee for qualified applicants, a $300 credit line and a foreign transaction fee of 1% of each transaction. It is a Platinum MasterCard, which provides access to MasterCard Global Services and Platinum MasterCard Rewards and Experiences and offers $0 liability for unauthorized transactions.
This card is generally meant for those looking to establish or reestablish credit. For those who qualify for the version with no annual fee, it is a reasonable option.
1% Foreign Transaction Fee: Using this card outside the United States will incur a foreign transaction fee of 1% of each transaction. This is charged regardless of which currency the purchase is made in.
$0 fee on cash advances during the first year: The card offers a 0$ fee on cash advances for the first year — after the first year, either $5 or 5% of the amount of each transaction, whichever is greater (not to exceed $100). Bear in mind that, while there may not be a cash advance fee, cardmembers will still be charged interest on cash advances from the date of the transaction.
MasterCard Global Services: Get emergency assistance virtually anytime, anywhere, and in any language for card replacements, cash advances, locating an ATM or reporting a lost or stolen card.
Cash Advance: $0 during the first year; after the first year, either $5 or 5% of the amount of each transaction, whichever is greater (not to exceed $100)
The Indigo Platinum MasterCard is an unsecured credit card, which means it does not require a deposit to open. In contrast, the First Progress Platinum Elite Mastercard® Secured Credit Card requires a minimum refundable deposit of $200. While the card from First Progress offers credit lines of up to $2,000 (vs. the $300 of the Indigo Platinum MasterCard), the credit line must be secured by a deposit of the same amount.
Additionally, if you do not qualify for the version of the Indigo Platinum Mastercard with no annual fee, the card from First Progress has a lower annual fee of just $29.
Both cards are Platinum MasterCards, which offer the same fraud protection and MasterCard Global Services benefits.
The Surge Mastercard® , also issued by Celtic Bank, targets those establishing or re-establishing credit. Like the Indigo Platinum MasterCard, the Surge MasterCard reports to all three credit bureaus and offers a pre-approval process with no impact to your credit score.
The Surge MasterCard’s annual fee is higher, starting at $75, and the card charges a monthly maintenance fee of up to $10, but it also offers the opportunity to receive credit line increases automatically. Credit lines start out at $300 to $750.
The Surge MasterCard’s annual fees likely make the Indigo Platinum MasterCard a better option for those who can tolerate a $300 credit limit.
For those simply looking to make purchases online and not establish credit, the Netspend® Visa® Prepaid Card may be worth considering. Since the Netspend Visa is a prepaid card, it does not require a credit check and doesn’t charge interest. Your spending ability is limited only by the amount of money deposited on the card.
If you do not have a bank account, one advantage of the Netspend card is that it can receive direct deposits from both employers and the IRS. Additionally, the Netspend Mobile App can help you manage your account on the go.
The Netspend card offers two versions: a monthly plan with fees of Up-to $9.95 monthly* or a pay-as-you-go plan with per-transaction fees. The monthly plan fees drop to $5 per month with direct deposits of $500 or more.
For those not seeking to build credit and who do not qualify for the no annual fee version of the Indigo Platinum MasterCard, the Netspend Visa Prepaid card may be a better option, especially if your expected fees are lower.
