Supply and demand will always be the primary drivers for platinum prices. Experts believe that, similar to 2018, there will be also a surplus of platinum in 2019. However, the surplus will be smaller and the demand will be greater.
Despite the accelerating operations at South African mines, the reduced platinum production in Russia and Zimbabwe resulted in a 1% decrease in platinum supply in 2018. According to WPIC’s estimates, the operational disruption continues in 2019.
However, a growth in platinum recycling and increased output from North American and South African mines will boost platinum supply by 2% in 2019. Platinum recycling supply will also contribute to platinum growth, due to a bump in autocatalyst supply, which will offset the decline in jewelry industry.
Analysts believe the demand for platinum will continue growing in several sectors for the rest of 2019.
Paul Wilson, the WPIC CEO, shares the view that investment in platinum will continue to rebound this year. What is the trigger that will spur investors' interest in platinum? While the precious metal still experiences a little surplus and the price is relatively low, if compared to palladium and gold, investors may hurry up to add platinum to their investment portfolio.
A rebound in platinum demand can also come from the jewelry sector. After a 2% pullback in 2018, the WPIC predicts a 1% rise for platinum demand this year.
Occupying a strong position in the industrial sector and the array of different applications,platinum has good chances to move forward among the precious metal commodities, as the usage of platinum should increase.
There are a lot of talks within the automotive industry about switching from palladium to platinum in the production of catalytic converters for petroleum vehicles, due to a significant price difference between the two precious metals.
Petroleum refining and glass manufacturing will also contribute to the growing demand for platinum, as refining capacity in America and China increases.
Relatively low prices for platinum can make it a commodity of choice for many investors. Buying an asset when the price is relatively low can serve as a good investment strategy, especially in the case of the assets with fundamental market support. Believing in step-by-step recovery for platinum’s price for the rest of 2019, experts predict significant price growth in 2020 and beyond. It means that it may be a good time to diversify your portfolio with platinum before the price breaks out.
