Platinum Asset Management Limited (ASX: PTM)
Platinum Asset Management Ltd (ASX: PTM) has released its June 2019 funds under management (FUM) update, is it a buy?
Platinum Asset Management was founded in 1994, one of the co-founders was leading investor Kerr Neilson. Platinum is a fund manager that aims to provide investors exposure to international shares using a contrarian, long-term and bottom-up investment process. Platinum’s International Fund has delivered a 12.1% per year compound return since 30 April 1995.
The Asian focused fund manager revealed that its June 2019 funds under management (FUM), before annual distributions, grew by around $650 million to $25.83 billion.
However, we can’t forget about the cash distributions that are paid to unit holders net of re-investment. Platinum revealed that the distributions total $814.2 million, leaving the FUM at $24.77 billion after distributions.
In June 2019 Platinum experienced net outflows of $228 million, which included net outflows from the Platinum Trust Funds of approximately $151 million. The net outflows excluded the impact of distribution re-investment of $487 million.
Is The Platinum Share Price A Buy?
Between February 2019 and today, the Platinum share price has been at a high of $9.15, it dropped to $4.34 by May 2017, rose to $8.72 in February 2018 and has since fallen to $5.08 today. Quite the rollercoaster.
Platinum’s FUM has suffered from concerns about the Asian sharemarket ever since US President Donald Trump started his campaign to try to get China to play on an equal playing field in terms of technology and IP. A truce may be agreed in the shorter term, but I think this issue will be ongoing for a long time.
Most fund managers are also finding it difficult to increase FUM because of the increase of low cost index investing compared to the relatively higher costs of active investing.
I’m just now sure if Platinum can succeed in this environment, which is why I’ve put it in my ‘too hard’ basket. I find it much easier to evaluate the reliable businesses in the free report below instead.
Here are 3 stocks I own in April 2020...
Amidst the COVID-19 confusion, there are some companies still growing FAST (think: online meetings through Zoom, streaming companies like Netflix and eHealth services provided by Teledoc).
While the world grapples with COVID-19, some companies are still growing rapidly. The entire cloud computing market is valued around $US210 billion but if you ask me, it seems clear as day that this market is only going to get bigger in 2020 and beyond.
That's why our top investment analyst has just identified 3 growth stocks in a net cash position, with strong competitive forces... and obvious tailwinds at their back. He owns all three of them right now!
Claim a FREE investing report on our analyst's "3 best share ideas for the cloud revolution" when you create a free Rask Australia account.
Our report is 100% free and unlocks hundreds of hours of bonus content.
Simply click here to access the report.
Disclaimer and warning: This information is published by The Rask Group Pty Ltd and contains general financial advice and information. That means, the information/advice does not take into account your objectives, financial situation or needs. Because of that, you should consider if the advice is appropriate to you and your needs, before acting on the information. In addition, you should obtain and read the product disclosure statement (PDS) before making a decision to acquire a financial product. If you don’t know what your needs are, you should consult a trusted and licensed financial adviser who can provide you with personal financial product advice. Please read our Terms of Service and Financial Services Guide before using this website.
At the time of publishing, Jaz does not have a financial interest in any of the companies mentioned.
Jaz is a keen investor who loves to thoroughly poke holes in an investment idea before it has a chance of making it into her portfolio. Jaz invests for the long-term and doesn't sweat the small stuff. She strongly believes that empowering people with knowledge is the best way for them to take charge of their finances, which is exactly the approach she takes with her own money and investments.
