Todd 'Bubba' Horwitz Friday May 08, 2020 07:55
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
The metals markets have been as ugly as they can get without breaking  down. For the last week or two, major support levels have been holding but the  pattern could be changing, which could lead to a big sell-off. We have not  reversed and remain long but understand that the risk to the downside has  increased.
Gold is back at $1,700 this morning based on the June futures, and  it looks like a little short covering. However, the big picture shows us either  a forced liquidation or margin selling. Almost every day, a big seller shows up  for a few minutes, hammers gold and then goes away until the next day. That is  a major concern, but the buyers have defended support, which brings the  question: who will win this battle?
Silver and platinum look almost identical, both turning in bearish  action with just enough buyers to defend the support line. Silver and platinum  are in an ugly pattern, which has a high probability of breaking down. However,  we will stay long until the pattern confirms a reversal.
The bottom line is simple – our algorithms are long, which is all  we care about. When trading anything, emotions should not be a part of the  decision-making process unless you like being on the wrong side of the market.  All trading decisions should be made on a mechanical basis with no regard for  news or opinions.
We are now offering a comprehensive commodity report that  complements our other services. The Technomental Commodity Report comes out on  Wednesday evenings and provides comprehensive fundamental and technical  coverage of most commodities that trade on the futures markets in the U.S. and  U.K., as well as stocks, bonds and digital currencies. There is a summary  report on Friday after the markets close, and robust quarterly reports on each  of the six commodity sectors and a general overview that recaps the past three  months and offers projections and suggestions for the next quarter. Andy Hecht,  the author of the report, has been a commodity trader since the early 1980s and  has vast experience in markets across all asset classes.
