Shares in Jubilee have almost doubled over the past year, as revenues begin to build
Jubilee Metals PLC ( LON:JLP ) is exclusive partner to recover Platinum Group Metals (PGMs) at Hernic in South Africa, the world’s fourth-largest integrated ferrochrome producer with an estimated 3.2mln tonnes of Platinum rich material at surface, and an additional 17 000 tonnes being added.
At DCM in South Africa, Jubilee also holds exclusive right to all PGMs currently at surface and from future mine production plus a 50% profit share on all chrome recovered. There is an estimated 700 000 tonnes of Platinum and chrome rich material at surface.
Meanwhile at PlatCro also in South Africa there is some 1.45mln tonnes of Platinum rich material at surface, and that is rising by an estimated 12,000 tonnes per month. The target is for a 60,000 tonnes per month processing rate. Northam is to fund the refurbishment of Platinum recovery circuit at PlatCro.
In Zambia, the Kabwe lead, zinc and vanadium project has about 6.4mln tonnes of surface material containing an estimated 356 843 tonnes of zinc and 351 386 tonnes of lead.
In the second half of the 2019 financial year, to end December, Jubilee Metals boosted revenues to £25mln. The rise came as new production from Windsor came on stream.
The growth in revenue translated to a 47% increase in second half operational earnings, which rose to £8mln.
Cash generated rose to £4.89mln during the second half of the year.
In November 2019 the company also produced its first copper from the Kabwe project in Zambia.
That set the company up well for 2020, although operations were temporarily shut down during the coronavirus crisis, with restart commencing in late April.
Leon Coetzer, Jubilee’s chief executive officer said: "We are consistently delivering on our strategy of diversifying earnings across multiple commodities and jurisdictions and I look forward to updating shareholders as we head into a new year and continue to advance our rapid growth strategy."
