Every item on this page was chosen by an ELLE editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.
Quarantine has led to many celebrities to try drastically different looks, from Hilary Duff dyeing her blonde hair aqua to Miley Cyrus getting a pixie mullet . Cindy Crawford's daughter Kaia Gerber joined the bunch this weekend, dyeing her signature brown hair platinum. Gerber was photographed out with her new blonde locks, wearing a mask, leggings, and a sports bra while grabbing a juice to go.
The model hasn't unveiled the hair change on her social media yet. But she spoke to The Kit this April about her time in quarantine and the lessons she hopes she holds onto when the pandemic is over.
“I think it’s having us all do some self-reflecting," she said. "We’re always very busy in our everyday lives and we don’t always have the time to stop and ask ourselves if we’re happy. So I think having the time to really ask ourselves that and what we want to do will be really good for all of us in the long run.”
She also spoke about her routine. She's been reading, fostering dogs, and keeping up with her skincare regimen.
“I’ve tried to keep up with my routine just to feel like life isn’t so out of balance," she said. "I try to work out every day because it’s just good for me mentally and for me, how I feel on the inside really shows through my skin. I’m trying to eat super healthy and cooking for once. I’ve been using Touche Éclat by YSL beauty, which I swear by. I haven’t been sleeping a lot lately. I think a lot of people are experiencing that same issue of getting to bed and all of a sudden, you start worrying and talking yourself into this crazed state of ‘What’s going on?’ because none of us really know. So I’ve been using that under my eyes to wake myself back up in the morning. I’ve also been putting on Daisy by Marc Jacobs every morning like I do in my everyday life.”
Alyssa Bailey News and Strategy Editor Alyssa Bailey is the news and strategy editor at ELLE.com, where she oversees coverage of celebrities and royals (particularly Meghan Markle and Kate Middleton).
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
