While we’ve been sitting out in the sun with our roots doused in lemon juice , Kaia Gerber has also been gradually lightening her hair over the past few months in quarantine. Back in April, the 18-year-old supermodel copped to coating her brunette bob in hydrogen peroxide to lift it a few shades blonder , to subtle, bleached-by-the-California-sun results. Apparently Gerber’s DIY days are behind her, because she just upgraded her at-home highlights to a full-blown platinum dye job.
Proof of the new, very blonde hair color comes courtesy of the most recent paparazzi photos, captured while the model was out to lunch in Malibu over the weekend — virtually unrecognizable with the new hue.
Initially, Gerber’s blonde hair-color experiment was a reaction to the boredom of isolation. “I got to the point in quarantine where I was like, I’m either going to cut my hair or dye it,” Gerber told us in an interview back in April, adding that her process for the latter was best described as winging it. “I don’t know if I’d recommend this, but I just used hydrogen peroxide,” she said. “I literally put the straight peroxide on my hair and then dried it with a blowdryer — just to hit it with heat — and it definitely lightened my color a shade or two, just a subtle change.”
Based on this next-level blonde update, Gerber’s strands have clearly seen some heavier peroxide over the past week or so. Whether it was another at-home project or a whole day spent in a socially-distanced salon, Kaia Gerber has finally reached peak blonde.
Like what you see? How about some more R29 goodness, right here?
While she slays a new song, naturally.
Looks like we’re not the only ones itching for a post-quarantine makeover. Princess Beatrice debuted a new lighter ’do this week while appearing on her mother’s YouTube channel for a segment called Storytime...
Go blonde or go home — but without damage.
Can't deal with juicing a ton of lemons? Throw a whole one in the blender and you'll see that laziness has its own rewards.
Quarantine hasn't stopped her from experimenting with different hairstyles.
Here's exactly how to cover grays or grown out highlights from home—without messing up.
States are opening back up, but some still require or recommend visitors self-quarantine for two weeks. Find out where.
Life didn't just give us lemons in 2020, it pelted us with them. And, coincidentally, the sour-fruit print has been trending across more than a few of this season's top-carted items — from lemon-printed inflatable pools to face masks and more.    Whether Refinery29 readers decided to make a big ol' batch of figurative lemonade by shopping patterned versions of the stuff OR the sunny hue simply reminds them of summer, lemons are having a moment. So, we rounded up the most wanted of these buys along with some other fresh finds to help sweeten the sour moments. A preview of what's ahead: lemon-infused beauty products, lemony snacks, lemon fashion, lemon-scented bug repellents, actual lemons, etc.     At Refinery29, we’re here to help you navigate this overwhelming world of stuff. All of our market picks are independently selected and curated by the editorial team. All product details reflect the price and availability at the time of publication. If you buy something we link to on our site, Refinery29 may earn commission.Like what you see? How about some more R29 goodness, right here?Society6's New Face Masks Support Black ArtThe Best Inflatable Pools For Your Backyard SummerUpgrade Your Bedroom Decor With This Design Hack
We don’t need to remind anyone that July 4th celebrations are going to look a little different this year. In lieu of crowded backyard barbecues, we'll be searing hot dogs on individual mini grills from a safe social distance of six feet. And, instead of pouring rosé out of a shared cooler while not really keeping track of whose glass is whose, we'll be sipping bottled to-go cocktails beneath the cover of face masks. But, despite all of these time-honored traditions being in a state of flux, there is a holiday staple that we can still expect: the sales.     As sure as the sun rising in the east, the annual influx of 4th of July sales is business as usual with many of the deals already in full swing — and they don’t disappoint. Click through to see what scores we rustled up this year. No matter how you end up celebrating the long weekend ahead, don’t forget to don your mask!    At Refinery29, we’re here to help you navigate this overwhelming world of stuff. All of our market picks are independently selected and curated by the editorial team. If you buy something we link to on our site, Refinery29 may earn commission.Like what you see? How about some more R29 goodness, right here?Wayfair's July 4th Sale Is Up To 70% OffThe Black One-Pieces Online Shoppers Swear By23 Red Swimsuits For Every 4th Of July Pool Party
After spending many, many months indoors recently, it's very possible that you already know your way around a good cyber sale. But just when you thought you'd be swapping screen time for sunshine in honor of one star-spangled holiday this weekend, let us remind you that the 4th of July is also a major moment for some of the year's biggest markdowns on everything furniture, decor, rugs, and more.     And while we're on the topic of that stay-at-home life we've grown accustomed to as of late, we'd like to point out that many of our R29 readers' favorite finds over lockdown (fire pits, desk chairs, and breathable bedding, to name a few) are having their prices slashed, all in the name of patriotism as July 4 draws near. So we're breaking down the top holiday deals by category featuring the season's most-loved home items so you're well-prepared to ride the wave of promotions that's on its way. With discounts of up to 70% off from popular retailers like Wayfair and Lulu and Georgia, it'll be worth the extra few minutes at your computer. The more efficient your sale shopping, the more time you've got to soak up that all-too-precious vitamin D, so click through our roundup of unmissable steals ahead and keep checking back — we'll be updating this list as long as the markdowns are marching in.     At Refinery29, we’re here to help you navigate this overwhelming world of stuff. All of our market picks are independently selected and curated by the editorial team. If you buy something we link to on our site, Refinery29 may earn commission.Like what you see? How about some more R29 goodness, right here?All The Home Sales You May As Well Shop While WFHUpgrade Your Bedroom Decor With This Design HackWayfair's July 4th Sale Is Up To 70% Off
I’m going to kick this off with two statements that are likely beyond obvious to you (unless you’ve spent the first half of 2020 living off the land in the desolate wilderness with nothing but a penknife and a ball of cord to keep you company, à la My Side of The Mountain). You should be wearing a mask. And it’s freaking hot outside. What do these two things have to do with other? Well, wearing a mask in the heat is a pain. Masks can get sweaty, feel stuffy, and can even leave us with a heat rash.“It’s worth acknowledging that masks are uncomfortable, especially when it’s hot and humid,” says Nate Favini, MD, medical lead at Forward, a concierge medical service. “They’re annoying, and I don’t think we should pretend that’s not true. I’m empathetic — but it doesn’t mean that wearing a mask isn’t crucial.” Because the fact is, face masks work. They reduce transmission, helping to curb the spread of coronavirus and to quite literally save lives. “The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have an increasing number of cases, so it’s more important than ever to wear a mask,” says Natasha Bhuyan, MD, One Medical’s regional medical director. “Until we have a vaccine, widespread masks are our best defense against this virus.”But when it’s hot and sticky outside, and the humid air you’re exhaling is getting trapped by your mask, things might get a little stifling, admits Dr. Bhuyan. (To be clear: While there’s a myth circulating that wearing a mask can lower oxygen levels, it’s not true. Doctors and nurses wear them all day long, and they’re doing okay. “Even though we are exhaling carbon dioxide, it already exists in the environment… Wearing the mask does not increase this risk,” Dr. Bhuyan says.)So, yes, wearing a face mask on a 100-degree day is still worth it. And to make it easier on you, we asked doctors for their best tips for staying comfortable while doing your civic duty and covering your face in steamy temps. Get a more breathable mask. Choose one that has more structure than those that lie flat against your mouth. But Dr. Favini cautions that the more breathable a mask is, the less protection it may offer to the people around you. “There’s the tension of wanting people to have masks that are more comfortable versus wanting them to have ones that are more effective.” So if you’re going to be indoors and/or around others, wear a more effective mask, even if it makes you feel hotter. (Or layer up. Which brings us to…)Choose the right material. This is especially important if you’re getting heat rashes from your mask. “Consider fabrics that are either natural, like cotton, or synthetic fabrics that wick away sweat, such as fabric found in exercise clothing,” says Ted Lain, MD, dermatologist and chief medical officer at Sanova Dermatology. “The latest recommendation is to use multiple layers of fabric to produce the most effective protective barrier to the virus, so instead of using a thick cotton, consider a thinner cotton fabric but layering it.”Bring backups. A sweaty mask stinks — literally and figuratively. So have a few fresh ones in your bag. That way if you sweat through one, you’ll have another at the ready. This can make you more comfortable, and prevent breakouts. “Sweating and the humidity in the mask area certainly can lead to a dermatitis, or even an acne breakout,” says Dr. Lain. Pack each extra in a clean, sealable plastic baggie so it won’t be exposed to any germs before you slip it on your face.Time your “chin strap” moments. Sure, if you’re totally alone, then it’s fine to pull your mask down and take a few deep breaths. But then pull it back up, Dr. Favini says: “Wearing your mask down around your chin is like having a condom and leaving it on the nightstand while you have sex.” Like what you see? How about some more R29 goodness, right here?
This weekend, we’ll be experiencing a lunar eclipse; specifically, a penumbral lunar eclipse. We’ve already talked a little bit about what that means for you astrologically, but… what exactly is the event, astronomically speaking? A regular ol’ lunar eclipse occurs when the Earth blocks the sun’s light as it reflects off the moon. This can only happen during a full moon, and there are three kinds of lunar eclipses: total, partial, and penumbral.A total lunar eclipse occurs when the Earth completely blocks the sun’s light from the moon. During a partial lunar eclipse, the Earth partially blocks the sun from the moon. A penumbral lunar eclipse is a little more subtle. “During a penumbral lunar eclipse, the sun, Earth, and the moon are imperfectly aligned in a row,” astrologer Lisa Stardust tells Refinery29. “The Earth blocks some of the sun’s light from directly reaching the moon’s surface, and covers all or part of the moon with the outer part of its shadow, also known as the penumbra.” What this looks like: You might notice a faint shadow cast over part of the moon’s surface. Like we said — subtle. Lunar eclipses are cool astronomical events, full stop. But the reason they get so many attention in the astrology world is because they involve the two luminaries that affect our lives the most — the sun and the moon, Narayana Montúfar, senior astrologer for Astrology.com and Horoscope.com, tells Refinery29. “Eclipses are turbo-charged lunations and the way the Universe creates change in our lives,” she says.Similar to a full moon, a penumbral lunar eclipse brings along endings — sometimes in a way that makes them feel almost like destiny, Montúfar says. “What’s tricky about these eclipses is that those endings will not happen immediately, as they develop over the course of the next six months,” she explains. “And when they end something, they also begin something new, too.” Think of a penumbral lunar eclipse as the celestial version of the famous saying, “When one door closes, another one opens.”Eclipses affect us individually, bringing positive or negative events, depending on what the particular eclipse does in our personal chart, according to Leslie Hale, psychic astrologer at Keen.com. “Sometimes an eclipse is dramatic, or reveals important information if it aspects a significant point in your own chart,” she says. “An eclipse often brings news pertaining to life’s biggest events, and our most significant life happenings often occur close to an eclipse.”Eclipses are often described as wild cards. Montúfar says that the best way to handle their arrival is to be aware that anything’s possible, and to focus on going with the flow, since many of the changes they bring to our lives are non-negotiable. “It’s not rare to feel very emotional during the days surrounding a lunar eclipse, since the energy of the moon is at its highest,” Montúfar notes. During the days leading up to a penumbral lunar eclipse, simplify your schedules. Figure out where your energy and attention is most needed, and let go of anything holding you back. Also, give yourself a lot of time to rest and relax.Ultimately, penumbral eclipses can bring along much-needed change, or shine light on new and exciting opportunities. Pay attention, and take the time during this kind of eclipse to put you and your needs first.Like what you see? How about some more R29 goodness, right here?This Mercury Retrograde, Prepare To Fight
