The stock has appreciated 60% in the past three months in anticipation of a transaction.
HDFC Life replaces Vedanta in Nifty; SBI Card enters 5 indices
Mumbai: US private equity giant KKR has agreed to acquire about 54 per cent stake in Mumbai-based drug manufacturer JB Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals, one of the oldest pharma companies in India, for Rs 3,100 crore. This is the second KKR investment in India in the past two months. In May, it agreed to invest Rs 11,367 crore ($1.5 billion) in Reliance Industries’ digital assets subsidiary Jio Platforms for a 2.32 per cent stake — its largest investment in Asia till date. It lost out to rival private equity fund Carlyle to buy a minority stake in Piramal Pharma last week.
ET on June 15 reported that KKR had signed an exclusivity agreement to acquire the company, outbidding fellow private equity rivals PAG, Bain Capital and Apax in a keenly contested bidding war.
KKR has agreed to acquire 41.7 million shares of JB Chemicals from the promoters at Rs 745 each, a premium of 4 per cent to the closing price of Rs 715.40 on the BSE on Thursday. The deal will trigger an open offer for an additional 26 per cent stake, the company said in a statement. If fully subscribed, KKR will end up paying Rs 4,600 crore for 80 per cent of the company, making it arguably the largest PE buyout in Indian pharma sector.
However, KKR is not keen to own more than 65 per cent of the company and will accordingly adjust the stake from the promoters depending on the success of the open offer, which would then translate to a Rs 3,750 crore ($500 m) payout for the fund.
At present, JB has a market cap of Rs 5,740 crore. The stock has appreciated 60 per cent in the past three months in anticipation of a transaction.
The investment will be made through Tau Investment Holdings Pte, Tau Holdco Pte and KKR Asia III Fund Investments Pte. “We believe JB Chemicals has an opportunity to accelerate its growth and leverage its strengths to enter into new therapeutic areas,” KKR India partner and chief executive Sanjay Nayar said. “This investment underscores KKR’s ongoing commitment to India’s long-term economic prospects and the potential of its companies,” he added.
After the acquisition, the management under JB Mody, JB Chemicals’ chairman and managing director, will continue to run the company.
Avendus Capital and Moelis & Company served as financial advisors in the deal while Platinum Partners (Mumbai), Shardul Amarchand Mangaldas & Co and Simpson Thacher & Bartlett were the legal counsels. ICICI Securities will be the manager to the public tender offer.
Started as an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) and formulations manufacturer in 1976, JB Chemicals ranks number 36 in the Indian drug market, with revenue of Rs 1,501 crore and a net profit of Rs 182 crore in FY19, according to pharma consultancy firm AWACS.
JB Chemicals owns India’s top ranitidine brand Rantac, which reduces stomach acid production. Three brands — Cilacar (calcium channel blocker), Rantac (anti-peptic ulcerant) and Metrogyl (amebicides) — feature among the top 200 in the country. The company has a presence in 22 major therapeutic groups with 108 brands in the domestic market. In 2011, it divested its over-the-counter portfolio in Russia and other countries in the region to Johnson & Johnson. The company has a domestic sales force of 2,000 people.
KKR has been an active investor in the pharma and healthcare segment globally as well as in India, having backed Sydney-based GenesisCare and Laser Clinics; Metro Pacific Hospitals in the Philippines; China’s Kareway Health; Tokyo-based PHC and Radiant Life Care, which owns the Max chain of hospitals in India.
KKR has also invested in medical device companies such as AcuFocus and Ajax, biopharmaceutical platforms BridgeBio Pharma and Gamma Biosciences, and Slayback Pharma. In one of its most successful exits in the country, it had sold Gland Pharma in 2016 to Chinese company Fosun Pharmaceutical Group for $1.4 billion, after holding the stake for three years.
The JB deal would be the fourth buyout by the New York-based PE fund in India in the last two years and the first this year. Like several of its bulge bracket peers, KKR too has been busy allocating money over the past few months, investing $18 billion since the coronavirus pandemic took hold. The buyout group, which has been investing in India since 2006, has deployed more than $13 billion through its PE vehicles in infrastructure funds and corporate and real estate-focused nonbanking finance companies. KKR’s large investments include Bharti Infratel, Coffee Day Resorts, Emerald Media and Max Financial Services.
