The number of Lenovo DCG platinum partners has increased by 45% this year.
Lenovo DCG partners saw a successful rollout of a revamped partner program that included a reassigned coverage model and a more competitive stance to win new customers. That’s according to Steve Biondi, head of partnerships and channels, North America Data Center Group (DCG) at Lenovo. Next up is getting partners enablement for end-to-end virtual solution delivery.
Biondi is six months into his new position with Lenovo DCG . He was on board for the company’s most recent quarterly earnings, which were less than stellar. DCG revenue declined 8.7% year-on-year due to hyperscale demand and commodity price declines, the vendor said. Non-hyperscale revenue grew 5.3% year-on-year, driven by double-digit revenue growth in software defined infrastructure (SDI), storage, software and services.
“When I got here in January, the partner program was more behavior-based than I was anticipating. Meaning, whether you were a silver or platinum partner and acquired a new customer, you got the same bonuses, had the same level of requirements, same attributes, and so on. So, I fixed that,” Biondi told Channel Futures. “I want partners to see that growing and aspiring to go up levels in the program affords you better discounts, margins, support, and more.”
When Biondi replaced Stefan Bockhop , former executive director, DCG channel, North America, he had three top goals. They were fixing the partner program, accelerating growth, and getting more assertive with competitive bidding.
Today, the number of platinum-level Lenovo DCG partners is up 45% from the beginning of the most recent quarter. Biondi bases success on changes to the coverage model, meaning a more dedicated focus on partners who move the needle.
“We have dedicated teams for our national solution providers and distribution, for example. That translates into more traction with those partners. Distribution partners are really good at acquiring partners on your behalf if you give them the targets and scope — and we’ve enabled that,” he said.
Biondi isn’t referring to bringing on a broad swath of partners; instead, he means being surgical about attracting new partners in particular, vertical markets, or product sets. In fact, Lenovo is attracting partners who are new to selling its products.
The NA channel lead also said Lenovo and partners show up more.
“We’re less inclined to shy away from fights, and as a result, we’re satisfying a lot more customer solutions and opportunities. And, partners are gravitating toward it,” he said.
Biondi says Lenovo’s supply chain performance in the midst of the global pandemic has been healthy. Biondi chalks that up a supply chain spread around the globe; also, being able to weave and dodge impacted geographies. This allows the vendor to stay on track with shipping and delivery schedules .
Keep up with the latest developments in how the channel is supporting partners and customers during the COVID-19 crisis.
“A lot of partners gravitate to us because of that. And we continue to satisfy what partners and customers are looking for,” said Bondi.
Lenovo is a channel-first company. Every opportunity Lenovo finds goes to a partner.
“We also have a channel-neutral compensation model. That, and having a partner program that rewards activity with our partners, having proper coverage of those partners, and having …
