Given how much of the project’s first week sales were made up of streaming equivalent albums (SEAs), it stands to reason that Eternal Atake and these seven songs earned their RIAA awards off of very few traditional sales. As Billboard reported at the time, all but 10,000 of that first week figure came from SEAs. Then, of course, there was the release of a second Lil Uzi Vert full-length effort a week later, Lil Uzi Vert Vs. The World 2, which was tacked onto and thus treated as a “deluxe edition” of Eternal Atake. (”Myron” became the opening track in this scenario.) This strategic move made the new 14 track project part of the original 18 track one, and Billboard combined the performances of the respective releases as one. That kept Eternal Atake at No. 1 for a second straight week with 247,000 album equivalent units, which theoretically made it eligible for RIAA gold then.
Here are some other artists who earned RIAA certifications this week:
Kevin Gates: Two songs off of the Baton Rouge rapper’s 2019 album I’m Him earn gold awards, “Facts” and “Walls Talking.” The album reaches gold status earlier this month.
Lizzo: Her Grammy-winning Cuz I Love You’s title track claims gold. “Good As Hell,” an older single that found new life via an Ariana Grande featured remix on the album’s deluxe edition, rises to 3x platinum status.
Machine Gun Kelly: The Bad Boy signee sees sales awards for three of his singles, as “Bad Things” with Camila Cabello goes 4x platinum, “At My Best” with Haile Steinfield takes platinum and “The Break Up” lands a gold certification.
Young Thug: The hugely influential Atlanta rapper secures a platinum plaque for his Billboard 200 chart topping 2019 album So Much Fun. Additionally, two of its singles find fresh certifications, with “What’s The Move” with Lil Uzi Vert claiming gold and “The London” with Travis Scott and J Cole making 3x platinum.
I am a freelance writer, music critic, content creator, and marketing professional born and raised in New York City. In addition to Forbes, my work on music,
I am a freelance writer, music critic, content creator, and marketing professional born and raised in New York City. In addition to Forbes, my work on music, entertainment, and popular culture has appeared in various outlets including Billboard, Complex, Deadspin, The Guardian, High Times, The New York Times, Pitchfork, Remezcla, Rolling Stone, Vibe, and Vice. I began writing on these topics in 1999 and have done so more or less continuously since then, extensively covering musical genres such as heavy metal, hip-hop, punk rock, and electronic music. Apart from this, I’ve also held marketing and social media positions in both the publishing and hospitality industries since 2001.
