If you subscribe to the Daily Independent, but do not yet have an online account, click here to create one.
Click here to see your options for becoming a subscriber.
Airman 1st Class Carlos Rodriguez, 56th Operational Medical Readiness Squadron public health technician, helped open the Virtual Healthy Arizona Worksite Awards ceremony with a group stretch June 11, 2020, at Luke Air Force Base. Luke earned the Healthy Arizona Worksite Program award by having programs in place to help promote healthy lifestyles and worksites.
Luke Air Force Base's Platinum Healthy Arizona Worksite Program award.
By Airman 1st Class Brooke Moeder, Special to Independent Newsmedia
Luke Air Force Base earned the Platinum Healthy Arizona Worksite Program award through their implementation of programs that help promote healthy lifestyles and worksites.
Arizona Department of Health Services presented the award to 130 corporations statewide, Luke won two Platinum awards back-to-back. Corporations and businesses that have worksite wellness programs in place are eligible for the award.
“When we apply for the award, we complete the Centers for Disease Control Worksite Health Scorecard that assesses how evidence-based health promotion strategies are implemented at a worksite,” said Esther Bustamante, 56th Operational Medical Readiness Squadron health promotion dietitian. “In our case, the worksite is Luke as a whole because our programs touch everyone base-wide.”
The strategies include health-promoting programs, policies, environmental supports, health plan benefits and other worksite programs shown to be effective in improving health and well-being, Ms. Bustamante said.
Luke AFB was graded on organizational support, tobacco control, nutrition control, stress management, physical activity and more.
Based on the score earned, Luke qualified for the Gold award, but set itself apart by working with Project Search for a community wellness project and earned the Platinum award – two years in a row.
Luke earned the Gold award in 2017 and the Platinum award in 2018 and 2019.
“It’s a positive reflection on our community,” said Tech Sgt. Michael Price, 56th OMRS force health management element noncommissioned officer in charge. “Winning three years in a row shows our continued efforts working with Airmen across Luke AFB and improving programs based on areas that need more focus. It also shows that our most important asset is our people and we are providing programs to continuously support them.”
The health programs in place aim to affect Luke AFB members in a positive way.
“Our health promotion programs provide knowledge, insight and useful tools for our Airmen to improve healthy living and lifestyle choices,” Mr. Price said. “This directly translates to a healthier Airman being able to produce at a higher level in the work center and towards the mission.”
Luke is an example of how healthy worksites produce healthy environments.
“We’re just continuing the health programs that have been in place,” Ms. Bustamante said. “We’re going to continue to strive for this and see where we can make some improvements, because you can always improve.”
Editor’s note: Airman 1st Class is with the 56th Fighter Wing Public Affairs office at Luke Air Force Base.
