David Erfle Friday March 06, 2020 09:19
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
With the GDX  set to break out of a 7-year base coming into the week, miner  frustration has continued for gold bulls with the safe-haven metal remaining  above $1600. As mentioned in this column last week , the global miner ETF was  technically set to break out of a 3-year cup & handle pattern while gold  was trading at 7-year highs. Precious metal stock speculators have been  patiently waiting for this breakout, as bullion has been soaring out of its own  6-year basing pattern since last summer.
However,  more patience will be required while the sudden “sell anything with a bid”  mentality has investors fretting over the spread of the COVID-19 epidemic  outside of China continuing to spark selling in global equity markets. Panic  selling coming into the marketplace this week has investors taking profits in  precious metals stocks in order to meet margin calls and offset losses  elsewhere.
Moreover,  the riskier micro and small-cap juniors have seen even more selling, as the TSX  Venture (CDNX) exchange has been hit with a nearly 11% loss this week. The exchange appeared to  be forming a technically bullish 6-month inverse head & shoulders bottoming pattern into this week, which  has been quickly negated during just four trading sessions. Unless we see a  bounce today back above $525, the TSX-V will make a multi-year closing low on the  monthly chart that is also in danger of reaching its 2016 low in the near-term.
The  dichotomy of the GDX being close to breaking out of a 7-year base, while the  CDNX is trading near bear market lows from late 2015, has junior resource stock  speculators frustrated to say the least. Although there has been more than a  handful of junior success stories, much of the sector has not been able to  catch many bids even as gold continues to climb.
Meanwhile, gold  has been in consolidation since Monday’s spike to nearly $1700 and support at  $1620 is being tested early this morning. When yields on 10-year U.S.  treasury bonds dropped to 1.235% earlier this week, which is the lowest in more  than 100-years, gold came within $9 of the $1700 mark. But yesterday, risk  aversion resulted in a market panic that has investors finding cash and very  liquid assets attractive.
On a closing  basis, the S&P 500 has now lost -12% from its February high which puts it  in correction territory (more than -10%) and yesterday marked the Dow’s largest  single-day decline in history after it plummeted 1,190.95 points (-4.42%). This  sharp decline has the CME FedWatch Tool pricing in a 73% probability of a .25  basis point rate-cut during the next FOMC meeting in 19 days and trimming an  extraordinary three-fourths of a percentage point by September.
The Federal  Reserve may need to move aggressively to cut borrowing costs to cushion the  economy from the rapid spread of the new coronavirus, in part because interest  rates are already low and so is inflation. The 2-year yield is at 1.11%,  putting the Fed 2+ rate cuts behind the market. When Fed Chairman Jerome Powell  addressed Congress two weeks ago, he declared “…policymakers have the space to  use fiscal policy to assist in stabilizing the economy during a downturn.”
Furthermore,  Chicago Federal Reserve Bank President Charles Evans stated on Thursday that  the Fed “must be prepared to rely on unconventional tools” in the event of a  recession. Evans believes that the Fed should employ Quantitative Easing (QE)  and forward guidance if conditions permit. In regards to inflation, the bank  president notes that the 2% objective is attainable, but stated that “periods  with above-target inflation are essential to achieving the dual mandate goals  over the long run.”
The  increased volatility in the resource space will make for an interesting Prospectors  & Developers Association of Canada (PDAC) convention next week, which I  will be attending. Each year, the world of mining and metals converges on  Toronto for the world's most comprehensive exhibition of the industry. In 2019,  the PDAC featured more than 25,000 attendees and 2,500 investors from more than  130 countries.
However, I  expect attendance to be down this year due to the COVID-19 virus fears and each  email I have received from the organizers has included the following  disclaimer: We are paying close attention to direction from the World Health  Organization, Public Health Agency of Canada and Toronto Public Health. The  Government of Canada has expanded its travel health notices. Please ensure you  have the latest information and advice before departing your country of origin.  We will provide further updates to attendees and participants  accordingly. Learn more
On Sunday  afternoon, I sent out a profit-taking alert to my subscribers, along with a  warning of imminent danger coming into the marketplace. With global central  banks still trying to gauge the ultimate impact of the illness on the world  economy, this uncertainty will likely see trader and investor fears continue to  rise into the weekend.
With the GDX  beginning its breakout during the Monday gold surge, forced margin call induced  selling began to reverse its breakout and the global miner ETF has now created  a nasty reversal candle on the weekly chart. In order for the possibility of a  near-term breakout to remain valid in the short to medium term, the $26 level  of support must hold on a weekly closing basis.
The daily  Volatility Index (VIX) closed at 39 yesterday, which is its highest reading in  two years. That puts the "fear gauge" higher than its peak reached at  the end of 2018 when stocks were down nearly 20%. While gold consolidates  recent gains above $1600 support, holding some cash and physical gold is strongly  advised until we see how this global equity panic plays out.
My goal for the past few years has been to carefully construct  a concentrated portfolio of  exceptional junior resource stocks, in the context of an investment time  horizon at least as long as one cycle, which I feel has just begun. If you  require assistance in choosing the best quality juniors to invest, please stop  by my website and check out the subscription service at https://juniorminerjunky.com/subscribe
