As Trophy lists go, the list for Iron Man VR is fairly straightforward. There are one or two bumps on the road to the Platinum, but you can get most or all the Trophies in one playthrough. A lot of the Trophies come simply by playing each story mission, but there are some extra tasks you'll need to do to get everything.
Difficulty Trophies stand in your way; if you want the Platinum, you'll need to beat all missions on the hardest setting. You'll also need to complete all the optional challenge missions.
There are 42 Trophies to collect in Marvel's Iron Man VR, including the Platinum. Here's a complete list of every Trophy in the game, their descriptions, and how to obtain them all.
Platinum: Fill every slot on Tony's trophy shelf.
You need to earn all other Trophies to bag the Platinum, as per usual.
It's basically impossible not to get this Trophy, as it unlocks for finishing the prologue.
Suit up! Again, this one pops as you play through the game's early stages.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Find all the drawings in the cave.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Unlocked as you progress through the story.
Earned once you beat this chapter of the game.
Bronze: Complete all story missions on Heroic difficulty.
Unlocked when you beat the game on this difficulty. Also unlocks if you beat the game on Super Heroic or Invincible.
Silver: Complete all story missions on Super Heroic difficulty.
Unlocked when you beat the game on this difficulty. Also unlocks if you beat the game on Invincible.
Gold: Complete all story missions on Invincible difficulty.
Unlocked when you beat the game on this difficulty.
You'll earn this as part of your progression through the story.
Craft all nine auxiliary weapons. You'll need 45 points in total to do this.
Craft all the other upgrades for the suit. Time consuming, as you'll need a lot of points to afford this.
Bronze: Unlock and view all Drone Research.
A nice and easy one. Once you've fought a drone type, it'll be available to view in the Garage. Just look at all of them.
Silver: Complete all of FRIDAY's Flight Challenges.
Complete all the optional flight challenges. You don't need to get a certain time -- just play through them all.
Silver: Complete all of Gunsmith's Combat Challenges.
Complete all the optional combat challenges. You don't need to get a certain time -- just play through them all.
Silver: Help a hero on one last mission.
Play through the post-game mission.
Play through every mission in the game.
Bronze: Destroy two enemies with Repulsors simultaneously—one with each hand.
Easy to do. Just aim at two targets simultaneously and fire until they're both destroyed.
Bronze: Destroy six enemies with a single Auxiliary weapon shot.
Either use the smart missiles and tag six targets before firing, or equip the cluster bombs or something with a wide blast radius. Should unlock in the heat of a fight.
Bronze: Destroy 12 enemies with a single Unibeam attack.
Again, easy to do. Use your Unibeam when there are lots of enemies about.
Bronze: Destroy two enemies with a single Rocket Punch.
When you rocket punch an enemy, it'll fly back and may crash into another enemy. Likely to unlock during regular play.
Bronze: Achieve a 5-Star rating on a mission.
Get five stars on one mission.
Gold: Achieve a 5-Star rating on five missions.
Get five stars on five missions. Might be a tough one on higher difficulties.
Bronze: Destroy a total of 250 enemies with Repulsors.
This will probably pop during regular play.
Bronze: Destroy a total of 250 enemies with Auxiliary weapons.
If you want this one, be sure to make use of your auxiliary weapons instead of just relying on the repulsors.
Bronze: Destroy a total of 50 enemies with the Unibeam.
Another easy unlock that should pop as you progress.
Bronze: Destroy a total of 50 enemies with melee.
Rocket punch you way to victory.
Bronze: Set a new pull-ups record.
In the garage, go upstairs to find a pull-up bar on the right. Simply do some pull-ups until this unlocks.
Bronze: Set a new basketball record.
Beat the high score at the basketball arcade machine.
Bronze: Catch a grape in your mouth.
There are two bunches of grapes -- one in Tony's bedroom and another upstairs in the garage. You may have to catch multiple grapes in order for this to pop.
Bronze: Salute the staff who keep Stark Industries running.
Are you aiming to get the Platinum in Marvel's Iron Man VR? Let us know in the comments section below.
