Upstart investment outfit Mayfair 101 has ticked off legendary funds giant Platinum Asset Management for poor performance as the two legally tussle over the right to use the “platinum” brand.
Mayfair 101 has filed a cross claim against Platinum Asset, after the $25 billion fund founded by billionaire Kerr Neilson alleged Mayfair 101 group’s use of “Platinum” in its products encroached on trademarks and led people to think they were connected.
James Mawhinney, managing director of Mayfair 101, argues that "platinum" is a generic term and “descriptive of the quality of service” his customers receive.
Referring to its Federal Court cross claim, Mayfair 101 said it would seek to “revoke the word platinum” from the trademark register, maintaining that “platinum is a laudatory and descriptive term which is commonly used, including in the financial industry”.
“Platinum Asset Management should never have been allowed to trademark the word platinum in the financial services category,” Mayfair 101 said.
“The cross claim highlights the fact that other companies, including Visa Platinum, had already registered their trademarks in the same category prior to Platinum Asset Management.”
Mayfair 101’s managing director James Mawhinney argued that platinum was a generic term and “descriptive of the quality of service” his customers receive.
The controversial investment outfit, which advertises itself as an alternative to bank deposits and burst onto the public consciousness last year by buying Dunk Island for $31 million , said Platinum Asset had been “facing its own challenges since [founder] Kerr Neilson stepped down as chief executive officer in February, with the company’s value falling significantly and outflows increasing”.
Platinum Asset, founded 26 years ago, last year told investors its investment returns for most of its managed funds and portfolios had been underperforming the broader market. Its portfolios have a higher weighting to emerging markets than the runaway US sharemarket. Platinum Asset also saw a dip in funds under management last financial year.
Platinum was contacted for comment.
Mayfair 101 l ast year made headlines with its Dunk Island move , part of a wider plan to spend $180 million to create a tourist mecca in North Queensland. But its operations have attracted concern from investment specialists.
Mayfair has raised more than $180 million from investors via two main brands, IPO Wealth, which started in 2017, and Mayfair Platinum, which started last year. It has made investments in companies ranging from a restaurants payments platform to an Indian software accounting company.
But its boasts about cryptocurrencies have fallen short while Mr Mawhinney himself has previously had a private company wound up by the tax office, which he blamed on fallout from the collapse of a sharemarket listed outfit.
Investment experts raised concerns about disclosure of Mayfair products - which raises funds from people who qualify as “sophisticated” investors. Companies are not obliged to provide the level of disclosure to such investors as it would everyday “retail" investors.
Jonathan Shapiro writes about banking and finance, specialising in hedge funds, corporate debt, private equity and investment banking. He is based in Sydney. Connect with Jonathan on Twitter . Email Jonathan at jonathan.shapiro@afr.com
