Ripon Advance News Service |  July 2, 2020
U.S. Reps. Pete Stauber (R-MN) and Tom Emmer (R-MN) applauded action this week by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to begin an environmental impact review of the proposed Twin Metals underground mine and mineral lease project in northeastern Minnesota.
“I am very pleased to hear that Twin Metals will be allowed to move forward with this first significant step in the environmental review process, and I thank the White House, Interior Department, and Agriculture Department for leading the way on this critical issue,” Rep. Stauber said.
Twin Metals Minnesota LLC submitted a proposed operations plan for a mine to produce copper, nickel, cobalt, and precious metals, according to the BLM, which is now coordinating with the U.S. Forest Service to prepare a detailed Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) to thoroughly analyze the potential environmental impacts of the proposed mine.
Northern Minnesota has the potential to lead the world in producing critical nonferrous minerals needed for renewable energy and national security, said Rep. Stauber. “Like we have for centuries with iron, we can source copper, nickel, cobalt, and platinum-group elements under the highest environmental and labor standards in the world, instead of relying on child labor-driven supply chains or rival nations like China and Russia that lack our best national interest,” he said.
Completion of the Twin Metals EIS also will prove “that they can safely build and operate this modern, underground mine in an environmentally friendly way while employing our local, labor-protected workforce,” said Rep. Stauber.
Rep. Emmer agreed and said the bureau’s planned EIS for the proposed Twin Metals project is “an important step forward” to establish that copper and nickel may be safely mined in northern Minnesota.
“This project stands to bring significant jobs and opportunities to the state, and revitalize the Iron Range,” said Rep. Emmer. “I am grateful that this process is moving forward so we can get one step closer to safely mining in Minnesota, bolstering the economy of our entire state.”
Please review our Privacy Policy before submitting.
Check your inbox or spam folder now to confirm your subscription.
