NASHVILLE, Tenn.--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Nashville businesswoman and Vanderbilt University lecturer Leonora Zilkha Williamson has announced the launch of her new talent coaching and consulting business, Platinum Rule Advisors . The company exists to bring out the best in people and teams and delivers on this promise through The Predictive Index® analytics, facilitation and executive coaching.
“The Golden Rule is treating others as you want to be treated. The Platinum Rule updates that thinking to focus on treating others the way they need to be treated,” Williamson said. This philosophy is at the heart of Platinum Rule Advisors. “Helping others reach their potential has always been my true calling, and I couldn’t be more excited about this new venture.” Williamson and her team have decades of experience serving and working in companies ranging from startups to Fortune 500.
Platinum Rule Advisors consultants use The Predictive Index® suite of human capital analytics to help clients understand human drives and how those drives influence behavior. As a PI Certified Partner, the company leverages the platform’s five assessments to help clients hire the best talent, manage those people effectively and build teams that allow employees to thrive.
Platinum Rule Advisors consultants and coaches provide expert facilitation to teams. Facilitation services offered include leadership development training, offsite retreats, tough conversations, strategic planning and more. Every engagement is customized to the client’s needs and is designed to bring out the best in the team at work.
Platinum Rule Advisors partners with executive coaches who each have years of experience and put that wisdom to work for clients in one-to-one coaching engagements. All PRA coaches have attained International Coach Federation certification.
Williamson combines her years of business experience with her passion for helping others reach their potential. She holds a Master of Business Administration degree from Harvard Business School and a Bachelor of Arts degree in Russian literature from Princeton University. She completed her certified coach training at Newfield Network, holds an International Coach Federation Associate Certified Coach accreditation and is a Certified Partner of The Predictive Index®.
Her career includes leadership roles at J.P. Morgan, Boston Consulting Group and Estée Lauder. She was a founding partner of women’s angel investment group The JumpFund and currently serves as a board member of family-owned business Sabre Yachts. She is a lecturer at Vanderbilt University in the undergraduate managerial studies program teaching negotiation.
The Platinum Rule Advisors team also includes Morgan Morello, who joined the company as a marketing specialist. Morello graduated from Baylor University with a degree in public relations and a minor in business administration. Morello previously worked as a marketing specialist for Restoration Gateway Ministries and has experience working in the operations communication sector of Cracker Barrel. In her new role, Morello will spearhead all Platinum Rule Advisors marketing objectives.
Platinum Rule Advisors was founded in 2019 by Leonora Zilkha Williamson. The company, which aims to bring out the best in people and teams, uses three tools to deliver on its promise: The Predictive Index®, facilitation and coaching. All coaches are accredited through the International Coach Federation. Visit platinumruleadvisors.com to learn more.
Leonora Zilkha Williamson has announced the launch of her new talent coaching and consulting business, Platinum Rule Advisors.
