In addition, the business version of the Platinum card comes with some benefits that aren’t available on the personal card:
A 35% rebate when you Pay With Points for a first or business class ticket on any airline, or an economy ticket on one airline of your choice (up to 500,000 points per year)
Up to $200 in annual statement credits for Dell technology U.S. purchases , split into a $100 credit for January through June and another $100 credit for July through December
The Business Platinum Card from American Express , does have a $595 annual fee, but if you maximize the annual up to $200 airline fee credit and up to $200 Dell credit , you’ll effectively pay a net cost of only $195 a year for the card. Factor in the Global Entry/TSA Precheck credit along with lounge access benefits and this card can definitely be worth it.
At practically any airport in the world, this is the card that will get you into a lounge. At Hilton and Marriott hotels, this is the card that will get you elite status. And in the air, this is the card that will get you internet access. There is, quite frankly, no other credit card on the market with as many travel benefits as this one and this welcome bonus is a solid one.
Don’t miss out on this bonus! Here’s the official application link: The Business Platinum Card from American Express with a 75,000-point welcome bonus .
Additional reporting by Madison Blancaflor. Featured image by Isabelle Raphael/The Points Guy.
Editorial Disclaimer: Opinions expressed here are the author's alone, not those of any bank, credit card issuer, airlines or hotel chain, and have not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities.
Brian Kelly is the founder and CEO of The Points Guy (TPG), the preeminent voice in the industry of points, miles and everything travel-related. Kelly launched TPG in
Brian Kelly is the founder and CEO of The Points Guy (TPG), the preeminent voice in the industry of points, miles and everything travel-related. Kelly launched TPG in 2010 during his time as a Wall Street road warrior, where he developed his keen sense for maximizing travel experiences while minimizing spending. Since then, Kelly has grown the company into a powerhouse travel and lifestyle media platform, and through a team of distinguished editors and freelancers that span the globe, has expanded its editorial content to include flight and hotel reviews, curated travel guides, immersive video reviews, as well as global event activations. Voted Forbes #1 travel influencer in 2017, Kelly is the industry leader, shaping the way consumers and brands approach travel. Today, TPG has a dedicated fan base, receiving 10 million unique monthly visitors and more than 3 million followers on social media.
