Amex is also introducing a new wireless credit on the Platinum Card to use towards your cell phone bill. This $20 credit applies towards monthly wireless telephone service charges made directly to U.S.-based wireless service providers. These merchants include (but are not limited to):
Unfortunately, accessories, repairs, bundled purchases, etc. won’t qualify which makes this credit slightly more limiting. However, there should be plenty of cardholders that will appreciate the $20 towards offsetting their monthly wireless bill.
In a time of social distancing, you can order a meal and get it delivered to your front door. Amex Platinum cardholders get $15 in Uber credit each month , plus an extra $20 in December. And that credit doesn’t just work for rides — it also works for food delivery and pickup through Uber Eats.
With most restaurants closed for sit-down dining, the only way to support some of them is through pick-up or delivery. Uber Eats has announced it is waiving delivery fees for local restaurants (you do still have to pay a service fee), helping you extend your credit even further.
The Amex Platinum’s Saks credit is available in the form of two $50 statement credits per year. The first $50 credit is available from Jan. 1 through June 30 and the second credit is valid from July 1 through Dec. 31.
Anything that you purchase from Saks will automatically trigger the credit. And if you use an online shopping portal to shop at Saks, you’ll double-dip on earnings from your purchase.
Saks is known for luxury apparel or accessories, but you can still score a great deal on everyday essentials, especially when there’s a sale. From scented candles to hand wash (and we’re all washing our hands diligently nowadays), you can complete your shopping list using the Amex Platinum credit.
While this isn’t a credit, this benefit can still prove to be valuable. With millions of Americans under orders to stay home and nonessential businesses shuttered, online shopping is in full swing.
ShopRunner is an Amazon Prime-like program that offers free two-day shipping at dozens of retailers . Even Saks is in the program, which means you can triple-dip: Use your Platinum card Saks credit, get free two-day shipping from ShopRunner and maximize your rewards with an online shopping portal.
From flowers to food and everything in between, ShopRunner has a wide variety of merchants where you can shop and get your items shipped pronto and free of charge.
Many credit cards offer purchase protection and extended warranty, and they’re worth highlighting during tough economic times for the reassurance they offer cardholders.
The Amex Platinum Card , purchases of up to $10,000 per incident are protected against damage, loss or theft. A limit of $50,000 in total claims per card applies. Purchase protection benefits are now limited to 90 days from the date of purchase, down from the 120 days previously offered . Still, this is a fantastic benefit to have in case of loss, theft or accidental damage. Terms apply.
The Platinum card also offers 90 days of return protection . If a retailer does not accept a return, Amex will refund the entire purchase price up to $300 per item, excluding shipping and handling fees. This particular benefit is limited to $1,000 per calendar year.
Finally, the Amex Platinum’s extended warranty coverage offers one full year of coverage at $10,000 per item and up to $50,000 per calendar year.
The key to these Amex Platinum changes is being able to use all of the credits. However, if you have the Platinum in-hand and can make use of them, you’ll come out ahead compared to the $550 annual fee on this card (see rates and fees ).
