While the US dollar traded almost unchanged against other major currencies, the NZD/USD pair closed for the fourth trading day in a row higher, reaching a new three-weeks high. The Kiwi rebounded despite earlier caution by the RBNZ that it could intervene by purchasing foreign assets and lowering interest rates below zero. Besides investors dismissing these ‘threats’, some analysts see chart technical factors as also responsible for the recovery.
Gold prices settled somewhat higher on Thursday after the retracement seen in the previous day. Other precious metals like platinum and palladium however, remained under pressure. Oil prices meanwhile managed to close higher after trading for the previous two days almost unchanged, despite the reports of a significant decline of crude oil in storage. With this in mind, crude oil is on track to close higher after the drop seen last week and on track for weekly gains in 8 out of the 10 past weeks.
Major stock market indices continued to rally for the fourth day in a row on Thursday. The positive sentiment is highlighted by the successful IPOs, especially the highly successful IPO of insurance technology company Lemonade on Thursday, with the prices rising by more than 140 per cent of the IPO price in the first trading day, making it the best IPO in the US for 2020.
Due to the Independence Day Holiday on Friday, many US markets will either not open or close earlier than usual. Also, very little in terms of fundamental data can be expected today after already plenty of significant data points were published on Thursday.
The EUR/USD pair started rising during the morning hours of Thursday, briefly touching above the 1.13 mark. However, later in the afternoon when multiple data points from the US economy were released the dollar rebounded, pushing the EUR/USD pair marginally lower towards the end of the trading day.
Non-Farm Payrolls (NFP) were again good for a surprise with 4.8 million new payrolls reported in June, compared to the 3 million expected. However, average hourly earnings declined at an even faster pace of 1.2 per cent compared to the previous month and factory orders were up in May by only 8 per cent after the 13 per cent drop in the previous month.
Mixed data was also seen in the EU with the unemployment rate only marginally increasing in May to 7.4 per cent, while producer price deflation continued, bringing the annualized PPI down by 5 per cent in May.
On Friday the European, French, Italian and German Composite and Services PMI will be published.
Gold prices managed to recover from the retracement that started on Wednesday and briefly pushed the spot price of gold as low as $1,758 per troy ounce. Other precious metals like silver or platinum however fast another day of lower prices with both by now still restricted to a relatively tight range, compared to the volatile movements during February and March.
Gold prices could be affected by the current amount of market uncertainty. While the Federal Reserve Bank’s accommodative policies and close to zero interest rates could in theory be seen as positive for gold, which is sometimes hyped as the ultimate store of value, it remains to be seen how the coronavirus pandemic will in the end play out. Job market data released on Thursday indicated a much lower unemployment rate than expected at just 11.1 per cent in June (expected 12.4 percent), while weekly initial unemployment claims remained relatively high at 1.5 million. The FOMC minutes released earlier this week indicated their primary concern of the inflation target of 2 percent, while only some members are looking to tie interest rates to unemployment rate targets such as the 6.5 percent target set in 2012 in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.
Due to the Independence Day Holiday, data from the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) on speculative positions in the futures markets can now be expected on Monday, instead of the usual release schedule.
After stagnating for the two previous day, oil prices finally closed with a noticeable upside in as the overall market sentiment remained positive, despite fears of a renewed increase in coronavirus infections.
The US Baker Hughes Oil Rig Count continued to decline, albeit at a relatively slow pace of 3 oil rigs compared to the previous reporting week. Still, since oil prices started plummeting at the beginning of March with the discord between Russia and other OPEC+ countries and later the coronavirus pandemic, the number of operating oil rigs has been continuously falling.
While some analysts believe that too steep supply cuts could lead to higher oil prices over the near term, others believe that a further recovery can only be expected in the years to come. The Russian Energy Minister estimated that global investments in the oil industry could decline by one third over the course of this year.
It remains to be seen if the production capacity of US shale oil drillers could again increase, as given the difficult situation of the industry, reports indicate that it is also becoming increasingly difficult for those companies to obtain funding for their operations.
Stock market indices continued to rally for the fourth day in a row, with the US Tech 100 index settling at yet another all-time high.
While the overall market sentiment was relatively mixed, with a significant number of stocks also closing in the red, the traders were optimistic about certain specific companies like Lemonade, whose shares jumped significantly higher from the $29 per share IPO price. However, some analysts are sceptical if the surge in valuations for certain companies is also reflected in their fundamentals.
Tesla (+7.90%) stocks also continued to rally towards a new record, after already surpassing Toyota as the most valuable car maker in the world in terms of market capitalization. The surge comes as Tesla managed to positively surprise its investors in terms of deliveries in the past quarter with more than 90 thousand vehicles delivered. Investors seem to be betting on the future of vehicles, while critics see issues with the company’s accounting practices and also increased competition from established car manufacturers.
The materials contained on this document should not in any way be construed, either explicitly or implicitly, directly or indirectly, as investment advice, recommendation or suggestion of an investment strategy with respect to a financial instrument, in any manner whatsoever. Any indication of past performance or simulated past performance included in this document is not a reliable indicator of future results.
