Numark is making quarantine for DJs a bit more exciting today, launching two brand-new Serato DJ controllers: the Mixtrack Platinum FX and Mixtrack Pro FX.  Built to appeal to both beginner and advanced DJs alike, these controllers sit an affordable price point for anyone looking to learn, or as an upgrade for advanced DJs using Serato that may be interested in new features.
A few immediate upgrades that caught our eyes: larger, 6-inch jog wheels with high resolution and color displays, as well as six quick-launch effect triggers on both controllers. Keep reading for the details.
InMusic’s Chris Roman – the man driving force behind many, many DJ products over the years – shares some of the motivation:
With [these new] controllers, Numark has re-defined the performance feature set and ease of use for all DJs, whether they are just developing their skills, or are well-established, advanced users. The key here—as with all Numark DJ products—is fun. It’s fun to let your ideas and creativity flow with a controller whose features work with you instead of getting in your way. These new Mixtracks make you a better DJ, no matter where you are on the spectrum.
The Mixtrack Platinum FX offers four layered decks for artists interested in utilizing more than two channels of sound. Though there are only two jog wheels, you can switch to Decks 3 and 4 via the deck select button.
The Platinum offers new jog wheels that provide not only a cleaner, more controlled way of scratching – they also share some much-welcomed info for each track on a screen at the center of each, including the BPM, time remaining, platter position, and pitch adjustment.
Here’s the full list of features:
6 quick-launch effects with dual paddle triggers – including Echo, Reverb, Flanger, Phaser, and both High Pass and Low Pass filters
16 performance buttons – 8 on each deck – to access your samples, cues, loops, and fader cuts
The Mixtrack Pro is a slightly more dialed-down version with two decks, great for anyone dipping their toes into the world of Serato and beginner DJs who want to hone in on their skills. If you don’t need a full four-deck setup and you’re looking to pay a bit less, this controller’s probably more for you.
The jog wheels are also a bit different here – though they’re still 6 inches in size, they’re standard capacitive touch and don’t have the screens in the center like the Platinum does.
Both controllers are expected to ship starting this month. The Mixtrack Pro FX sits at $199 USB, and the Platinum FX at $249. It’s also worthwhile to note that Mixtrack users who purchase either controller will get a free, three-month membership to TIDAL (if you’re into that), and both controllers come with Serato DJ Lite.
