The University of Arkansas Department of Music is excited to offer an online course in Contemporary Commercial Songwriting for the summer 2020 first eight-week session.
The course is taught by U of A music instructor Jake Hertzog, and was co-authored by and features multi-platinum songwriter Kenny Lamb, a music industry professional and former Warner/Chappell New York and Nashville staff songwriter with over 20 years of experience working with major artists in a wide range of genres. The course successfully ran in the fall and is available to students in any major, with any level of musical background.
"Songwriting remains at the foundation of the industry, but it is key to have a broader understanding of what it means to be a professional songwriter in a new and evolving market," Lamb said, when discussing the offering. "This partnership connecting the U of A more directly to the professional songwriting world will encourage accelerated development and create more opportunities for aspiring talent. I'm excited to be working with the faculty and staff at the University of Arkansas to help develop these components in their music program."
In the eight-week course, now open for registration for the 2020 Summer first session, students will create a portfolio of original songs, explore the historical, commercial, and cultural aspects of successful songs and artists, and gain an understanding of aspects of the songwriting business. Other topics include music theory for songwriters, demo creation, marketing, and networking.
"Kenny is the real deal, he's got the experience, credits and industry relationships that are meaningful for our students, on or off campus," Hertzog said. "He's a wonderful teacher who is excited to share his knowledge of the craft and business of songwriting. We are thrilled to have him working with us on this course."
Students can now enroll in the course through UA Connect. The course number is MUTH 477V-901 (13981). For questions related to the course or registration, please contact Hertzog at jhertzog@uark.edu .
About Kenny Lamb: Lamb is a multi-platinum songwriter, producer and artist manager with credits in many genres of music. He began his career as a Warner/Chappell Nashville and New York staff songwriter and producer. His songwriting credits, artist development and collaborations include 'N SYNC, Justin Timberlake, Rhett Akins, Building 429, Little Big Town, Take 5, Barrett Baber, Marc Collie, Ashley Monroe, Adam Cunningham, Across The Sky, and many others, with songs reaching #1 on the Billboard Charts and BMI Song of the Year.
Lamb's songs in film and television have been featured on NBC, HBO, ABC, FOX Sports, MLB, and commercial campaigns for major brands including Coca-Cola. In 2016, Lamb was the recipient of a Global Peace Song Award, an honor given to songwriters who are making a positive impact in the world through music. Lamb currently splits his time between Nashville and Rogers, focusing on artist development, artist management, and music publishing.
