Terry McConnachie has been the CEO of Sylvania Platinum Limited ( LON:SLP ) since 2010. This report will, first, examine the CEO compensation levels in comparison to CEO compensation at companies of similar size. Then we'll look at a snap shot of the business growth. And finally we will reflect on how common stockholders have fared in the last few years, as a secondary measure of performance. The aim of all this is to consider the appropriateness of CEO pay levels.
How Does Terry McConnachie's Compensation Compare With Similar Sized Companies?
At the time of writing, our data says that Sylvania Platinum Limited has a market cap of UK£131m, and reported total annual CEO compensation of US$505k for the year to June 2019. It is worth noting that the CEO compensation consists almost entirely of the salary, worth US$505k. We looked at a group of companies with market capitalizations from US$100m to US$400m, and the median CEO total compensation was US$594k.
So Terry McConnachie receives a similar amount to the median CEO pay, amongst the companies we looked at. While this data point isn't particularly informative alone, it gains more meaning when considered with business performance.
You can see a visual representation of the CEO compensation at Sylvania Platinum, below.
Is Sylvania Platinum Limited Growing?
Sylvania Platinum Limited has increased its earnings per share (EPS) by an average of 37% a year, over the last three years (using a line of best fit). Its revenue is up 12% over last year.
Overall this is a positive result for shareholders, showing that the company has improved in recent years. It's a real positive to see this sort of growth in a single year. That suggests a healthy and growing business. Shareholders might be interested in this free visualization of analyst forecasts.
Has Sylvania Platinum Limited Been A Good Investment?
I think that the total shareholder return of 288%, over three years, would leave most Sylvania Platinum Limited shareholders smiling. So they may not be at all concerned if the CEO were to be paid more than is normal for companies around the same size.
Terry McConnachie is paid around the same as most CEOs of similar size companies.
Few would be critical of the leadership, since returns have been juicy and earnings per share are moving in the right direction. Although the pay is a normal amount, some shareholders probably consider it fair or modest, given the good performance of the stock. Whatever your view on compensation, you might want to check if insiders are buying or selling Sylvania Platinum shares (free trial).
If you want to buy a stock that is better than Sylvania Platinum, this free list of high return, low debt companies is a great place to look.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
