Digital media publication recognized for publishing work, social media campaign
NEW YORK--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Our Sunday Best, a digital media publication for millennial women, has earned Platinum and Gold Awards from the Hermes Creative Awards. The Hermes Creative Awards is an international competition for creative professionals involved in the concept, writing and design of traditional materials and emerging technologies.
Our Sunday Best was recognized for wins in the following categories:
Platinum Award: Interactive Media | Blog Single Post: “How Fashion Influencers Are Changing the Face of COVID-19 Relief”
Gold Award: Interactive Media | Social Media | Instagram: Our Sunday Best Blog #InfluencingTheImpact campaign
The publication’s recent article, “How Fashion Influencers Are Changing the Face of COVID-19 Relief,” was conceptualized to challenge notions of influencers and social responsibility in the era of COVID-19.
In addition, Our Sunday Best’s #InfluencingTheImpact campaign was conceptualized to further underscore the recent push for social responsibility from influencers. The campaign earned over half a million impressions and helped position Our Sunday Best as a purpose-driven media brand striving to amplify the positive voice of influencers in a time of crisis.
Commenting on the win, Sarah Morrison, Founder and Editor-in-Chief of Our Sunday Best said, "It’s an absolute privilege to receive this honor from the Hermes Creative Awards. Launching Our Sunday Best was the culmination of a long-nurtured dream and I am both humbled and grateful to receive this recognition.” The recognized article was published on Our Sunday Best’s website, while the brand’s campaign, #InfluencingTheImpact, was launched on Our Sunday Best’s Instagram account. The publication’s online presence has seen a 486 percent increase in new visitors on website traffic since early May.
The Hermes Creative Awards is administered by the Association of Marketing and Communication Professionals. Hermes Creative Awards has over 300 categories and entrants are from across the globe.
Our Sunday Best is a digital media publication for purpose-driven style and fashion career content that is shoppable, serviceable, and powered by the digital influencer network. Our Sunday Best was founded in New York, New York and currently has one full-time employee. To learn more about Our Sunday Best, visit us at www.oursundaybest.com .
Hermes Creative Awards is administered and judged by the Association of Marketing and Communication Professionals ( www.hermesawards.com ). The AMCP have coordinated and judged the awards for over 20 years. Entrants contend for Platinum and Gold statuettes — wings from the mythological Hermes cap and sandals, intricately etched to evoke the shape of the letter H.
