Amex Platinum and Amex Business Platinum cardmembers, including Platinum card additional cardmembers , can enroll in complimentary Marriott Bonvoy Gold Elite and Hilton Honors Gold status. Doing so allows you to enjoy status with Marriott and Hilton without needing to meet usual requirements such as obtaining a particular number of nights, stays or elite-qualifying points each year.
Related reading: Which card is right for you? Amex Platinum vs. Amex Business Platinum
To enroll in either or both elite status levels, call the number on the back of your card. You'll need to provide your Marriott Bonvoy and/or Hilton Honors loyalty program number to the agent. Once you request enrollment in either or both programs, American Express will share your enrollment information with Hilton and/or Marriott, which will then upgrade your status to Gold.
You'll maintain status without needing to meet otherwise required criteria as long as you keep your Amex Platinum or Amex Business Platinum account open and as long as American Express maintains the benefit for your card.
What are the benefits of Marriott Gold status?
Marriott Gold status can get you an upgrade to a room with better views, such as this lagoon view ... [+] room at the Fiji Marriott Resort Momi Bay.
Marriott Bonvoy Gold status usually requires you to stay at least 25 nights per year at Marriott properties. TPG Senior Editor Nick Ewen values Marriott Gold status at $840 , but his valuation assumes you stay enough nights each year to earn the status organically. So the value you'll obtain from the status will differ if you stay more or less frequently.
As a Marriott Gold Elite, you'll have access to the following benefits:
25% more bonus points on stays: Earn 25% more points than base-level members on every eligible hotel purchase with Marriott
Enhanced room upgrades: Based on availability at check-in, but may include rooms with desirable views, rooms on high floors, corner rooms, rooms with special amenities and rooms on executive floors (suite upgrades are excluded)
Ultimate reservation guarantee: If Marriott can’t honor your reservation for any reason, it will pay for you to stay nearby and compensate you for the inconvenience
In addition to the Amex Platinum and Amex Business Platinum , two other cards provide automatic Gold Elite status: the Marriott Bonvoy Brilliant™ American Express® Card and The Ritz-Carlton Rewards Credit Card ( no longer open to new applicants ). The Marriott Bonvoy Boundless Credit Card and the Marriott Bonvoy Business™ American Express® Card allow you to earn Gold Elite status when you spend $35,000 on purchases each account year on the Marriott Boundless and each calendar year on the Marriott Bonvoy Business card.
