A recent discovery of palladium and platinum north of Timmins could mean a very bright future and a big boost to the electric vehicle industry.
This core sample, taken during Canada Nickel Company’s recent drilling program on its Crawford Project, 40 kilometres north of Timmins, shows indications of palladium and platinum. The discovery has officials excited about the project’s potential. SUBMITTED PHOTO
A recent discovery of palladium and platinum north of Timmins could mean a very bright future and a big boost to the electric vehicle industry.
Base metal explorer Canada Nickel Company conducted a drilling program at its Crawford Project, approximately 40 kilometres north of the city, where the company already has the 11th largest nickel sulphide deposit in the world and the results showed some very interesting findings.
“When you make one great discovery on a property, that’s always pretty remarkable, but when you’re able to get an entirely separate mineralized structure, with some pretty interesting grades and widths, you’re pretty lucky,” said Mark Selby, chair and CEO of Canada Nickel Company, which was created by Noble Mineral Exploration last fall to focus on the development of the Crawford Project.
The company went live on the TSX Ventures Exchange on Feb. 27.
Running parallel to the nickel resource, 100 to 150 metres away, is a structure that runs 1.5 to 2-plus grams per tonne of palladium plus platinum.
Mark Selby, chair and CEO of Canada Nickel Company, holds a core sample from a recent drilling program at its Crawford Project, 40 kilometres north of Timmins. The program revealed significant deposits of palladium and platinum. SUBMITTED PHOTO
“We hit it for more than 600 metres and based on where it sits, and how it sits, we think there’s pretty good potential,” Selby said.
“We’ve got eight kilometres of structure that we’ve got to drill, so there’s a good chance it could continue right around the ring there and be a pretty sizable amount of palladium plus platinum.”
Another huge plus is that it’s sitting just below the overburden cover at surface, which gives it potential for an open pit operation.
Selby indicated the company was “90% surprised” by the findings.
“It was a totally accidental discovery,” he said.
“We were just drilling throughout the surrounding rock deposit, so we were able to characterize what that rock looked like. We drilled through some of the layers, we were assaying them to see exactly what they were, and then boom.
“We hit it once and then hit it again. It showed up in this very consistent place.
Selby noted with the relative proximity to Glencore’s Kidd Creek mine complex, there is also potential for a “small-toll operation,” where the material could be shipped to a nearby mill for processing.
Palladium is currently worth more than $3,000 Canadian per ounce, and it’s not exactly a ubiquitous commodity.
“There’s only a handful of palladium/platinum mines outside of South Africa,” Selby said.
Less than 20% of the Crawford property has been drilled to date, so there is still plenty of intrigue left.
“They are pretty rare minerals and are only found in a few locations, so we’re quite happy to have it show up fairly consistently along the edge of the ore body,” Selby said.
With very few active nickel projects outside of Indonesia, Selby suggested there is huge potential for the Crawford Project.
“The world is going to need not just hundreds of thousands of tonnes of nickel for electric vehicles, but you know, a million plus tonnes of nickel for electric vehicle batteries,” he said.
“So, all of the North American and European auto manufacturers and their supply chains want to have a source that’s not in Indonesia, or not in China.
Selby acknowledged while it’s “very early” in the grand scheme of things, it’s encouraging news for the entire region, as potential for a “very, very large base metal operation” exists.
While mining and supporting industries have been deemed essential, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted Canada Nickel Company, as well.
“Things have slowed down a little bit, but we’re basically still able to do the drilling, get the assays, do the mineralogy work we need to be able to keep the project on track,” Selby said.
“So I’m very happy on that front and thankful our suppliers have continued to find a way to work safely, so we can continue to advance the project.”
