The price for an ounce of palladium has topped gold, as well as platinum
Palladium started the year on a positive note, with futures prices already up by more than 10% after hefty gains in the last three years and topping the value of gold for the first time in more than a decade.
And analysts are upbeat about the long-term prospects for the metal.
“The biggest driver for palladium’s recent success comes from the ongoing supply deficit, creating a very tight physical market,” said Maxwell Gold, director of investment strategy at Aberdeen Standard Investments.
The metal had record automotive demand of 8.5 million ounces last year, up from 5.8 million in 2010, and “coupled with constrained mine production growth, this has resulted in palladium demand outpacing global supply over much of this decade,” according to a recent report from precious metals consulting firm Metals Focus. Palladium is mostly used in pollution-controlling catalytic converters on gasoline-powered vehicles.
The March futures contract for palladium US:PAH9 settled at a record $1,348.20 an ounce on Thursday, its ninth record settlement in 10 sessions. In 2018, futures prices climbed nearly 13%. As of Wednesday, the metal became more valuable than gold for the first time in over 16 years. On Thursday, palladium futures settled with a nearly $56 premium over gold futures US:GCG9 at $1,292.30 an ounce. Palladium spot prices topped spot prices for gold on Dec. 4 for the first time since Oct. 23, 2002, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
“Palladium and gold are both rare and therefore valuable,” said R. Michael Jones, chief executive of Platinum Group Metals PLG,
. But “palladium is more valuable than gold as it is rarer,” he noted.
A 20-year chart of the most-active palladium, platinum and gold futures contracts
“There are dozens of gold mines around the world,” Jones said, while “there are only two primary palladium mines in the world and two new mines in South Africa in development.”
But as palladium trades a few dollars above gold, it now costs more than $500 an ounce above platinum, whose futures price settled at $812.30 on Thursday. Investors can access palladium via futures contracts, as well as the physical metal and exchange-traded funds such as the Aberdeen Standard Physical Palladium Shares exchange-traded fund PALL,
Platinum’s much cheaper price has raised the possibility that auto makers will start looking to replace palladium in catalytic converters with platinum. The opposite happened when palladium was the cheaper metal. Palladium prices were consistently lower than platinum’s from about 2001 to 2017.
“We are told by the makers and buyers of [automotive catalytic converters] that it would take a $500 spread in platinum and palladium for at least two years to have the beginnings of switching,” Jones said.
And in a recent report, John Ciampaglia, chief executive of Sprott Asset Management, said that while auto makers may return to using platinum if palladium’s price continues to outpace platinum’s, analysts have said it would take auto makers at least 18 to 24 months to make the change.
Switching isn’t quite as easy as it sounds. “There are manufacturing, engineering, and supply-chain costs involved in changing the chemistry of automotive catalytic converters from palladium back to platinum,” said Shree Kargutkar, portfolio manager at Sprott.
At the same time, automotive executives have to also consider global economic and trade uncertainties, he said. “If a global trade war breaks out, automotive sales would be significantly affected, potentially causing the current palladium deficit and resulting price premium to evaporate” so a switch “could well prove unnecessary and costly.”
That said, Kargutkar believes that a switch to platinum from palladium “will be driven more by the inability to secure palladium supply,” which is likely to cause original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to give platinum a “long, hard look.”
For now, palladium’s price in an autocatalyst is “a rounding error for most automobile OEMs despite the recent price appreciation of palladium,” Kargutkar said. A typical car is estimated to contain just three to seven grams of palladium or platinum.
All in all, “substituting palladium for other metals such as platinum or rhodium in catalytic converters remains a risk,” but it’s “not an immediate one,” said Aberdeen’s Gold, who remains bullish on palladium in the medium term, and also “cautious in the very near term.”
“As palladium’s momentum continues higher, it runs the risk of profit-taking and speculative activity weighing on prices,” Gold said. Given that the metal is “very volatile, I wouldn’t be surprised to see a significant pullback of 10% or more, but this would be an attractive entry point more than a reason to abandon ship.”
