Palladium has outdone itself with an extended run to record highs that began at the start of 2018 and is continuing, with prices up about 40% this year. The gains have come even as sister metal platinum’s recent rally to a more than one-year high failed to hold.
Palladium has climbed on “healthy demand, constrained supply, and challenging liquidity conditions,” says Steven Dunn, head of exchange- traded funds at Aberdeen Standard Investments, and “the environment exists for palladium to test new highs.” On Wednesday, futures prices notched a record settlement at $1,665.50 an ounce.
Palladium and platinum are used in catalytic converters, which help control harmful emissions from car exhausts. But palladium is primarily used in vehicles with gasoline engines, while platinum is used in those powered by diesels. Diesel represents a small portion of U.S. auto sales—only 2.9% of total vehicles sold in the second quarter, according to the Diesel Technology Forum.
“The continued shift away from diesel to gas-powered cars facilitated by the tightening emission standards in Europe and China, and supplies being kept in check within Russia and South Africa, have been major contributors to this upward price momentum” in palladium, says Ed Egilinsky, managing director and head of alternative investments at Direxion.
The palladium market is headed toward an eighth consecutive year of deficit in 2019, according to specialty-chemicals company Johnson Matthey ticker: (JMAT.U.K.). The story has been different for platinum. It saw global surpluses in each of the past two years, notes Johnson Matthey. Still, platinum futures enjoyed a rally that began in late August and lasted just over a week, with a roughly 15% spike in prices from Aug. 23 to Sept. 4, to $984.20 an ounce. That was the highest level since February 2018.
Egilinsky attributed platinum’s strength to expectations for stronger demand and a narrower surplus. The World Platinum Investment Council forecast a rise of 9% in demand this year, buoyed by solid interest from investors. For 2019, WPIC expects the surplus to narrow to 345,000 ounces, from a previous forecast of 375,000. Johnson Matthey, however, foresees a modest deficit this year.
“There is still value within platinum, but it doesn’t benefit from the same deficit issues that palladium currently has,” says Dunn. Platinum futures settled at $886.10 an ounce on Tuesday, their lowest level since Aug. 27. During September, platinum suffered a loss of nearly 5%. The move came on the heels of a “broader pullback with precious metals due to a risk-on environment and stronger U.S. dollar,” says Egilinsky.
This weekly email offers a full list of stories and other features in this week's magazine. Saturday mornings ET.
The platinum-to-gold ratio is near record lows, making the grayish metal “historically undervalued,” and raising the case that platinum could move higher longer-term, says Egilinsky. The metal could “once again cross $1,000,” he says. Futures prices saw an intraday high just above that in early September, but haven’t settled at that lofty level since February 2018.
The further divergence in price between palladium and platinum can make platinum more economical to use, Egilinsky adds, leading to a resurgence in its price, but that transition could take some time. Palladium faces some uncertainty, as well. A challenge to the metal’s testing new highs could come from a “sharper turndown in global growth, as that would have a significant impact to the auto industry,” says Dunn.
Palladium has outdone itself with an extended run to record highs that began at the start of 2018 and is continuing, with prices up about 40% this year.
