Neils Christensen Tuesday July 30, 2019 11:14
( Kitco News )  - Although platinum remains  the laggard within the precious-metals complex, it is starting to catch up as platinum  continues to see unprecedented investor demand.
In a recent interview with  Kitco News, Trevor Raymond, director of research with the World Platinum  Investment Council, said that the tide could be turning in platinum’s favor  with resurgent interest in platinum’s demand growth potential.
Investment demand has been  the critical factor behind the metal’s new bullish momentum. Raymond noted that  in the council’s quarterly supply demand publication, investment demand through  exchange-traded products totaled 690,000 ounces in the first three months of  the year.
“That was the largest increase  in ETF holdings in any three-month period since the launch of physically backed  platinum ETFs in 2007,” he said.
He added that the trend  has continued into through the second quarter. While quoting listings data,  Raymond said that EFT holdings have increased by more than 750,000 ounces as of  July.
“The magnitude and speed  of the buying indicate this is institutional money taking big positions in the  platinum market,” he said. “We haven’t seen this type of buying since 2014.”
Although institutional investors  very familiar with platinum are jumping back in, Raymond said that retail and  newer institutional investors remain on the sidelines. He added that he expects  the broader investment market to move back into platinum when the metal sees a  more published evidence of demand growth from more diesel cars on Europe’s  roads, traction in heavy-duty fuel-cell trucks and increased use of platinum in  gasoline cars to replace scarce and pricey palladium.
Platinum’s automotive  demand has suffered the last three years because of the 2015 diesel emissions  scandal. Platinum is the main component in diesel-engine emissions control.
Raymond noted that this  issue is starting to become less of a factor in the auto sector; however, he  added that a more significant factor for platinum is its potential  substitution, at a one-to-one ratio, for palladium.
Many analysts have noted  palladium’s meteoric rise in the precious-metals space as prices have risen in  the face of strong industrial demand in gasoline vehicles and unresponsive  supply. Although many companies have been hesitant to confirm that they will  substitute palladium with platinum, Raymond said that they might have already  done so due to availability and price concerns.
“Regardless of the price  difference, there is not enough palladium supply to meet automotive needs so  some companies will be forced to turn back to platinum,” he said. “Substitution  has happened before, and it can happen again.”
The WPIC sees a platinum  surplus of around 375,000 ounces for this year, but Raymond said that it  wouldn’t take a significant rise in demand to reduce the metal’s excess.
Tuesday, platinum is seeing some modest selling  pressure as some investors take profits after the metal posted a three-month  high last week. October platinum futures last traded at $878 an ounce, down  0.44% on the day.
