Platinum Group Metals Market report published by Value Market Research is an in-depth analysis of the market covering its size, share, value, growth and current trends for the period of 2019-2026 based on the historical data. This research report delivers recent developments of major players with their respective market share. In addition, it also delivers detailed analysis of regional and country market.
The research report also covers the comprehensive profiles of the key players in the market and an in-depth view of the competitive landscape worldwide. The major players in the platinum group metalsmarket include African Rainbow Minerals, Anglo American Platinum, Glencore, Impala Platinum, Johnson Matthey, Lonmin, Norilsk Nickel, North American Palladium, Northam Platinum Limited, Royal Bafokeng Platinum, Sibanye-Stillwater, and Vale.This section includes a holistic view of the competitive landscape that includes various strategic developments such as key mergers & acquisitions, future capacities, partnerships, financial overviews, collaborations, new product developments, new product launches, and other developments.
Rising automobile industry, increasing stringent government regulations regarding carbon emissions, technological advances in nuclear reactor based production, and demand for fuel cells are the key factors that drive the market demand. In addition to this, growing disposable income, modernization of healthcare infrastructure, changing lifestyle is expected to propel the market growth during the forecast period. Furthermore, increase in adoption of PGM for applications in newer industry vertical and emerging economies (China, India, and others)is expected to create lucrative opportunities for PMG market in the coming year. However, huge gap between supply and demand of the platinum group metals may hamper the market growth.
The report covers Porter’s Five Forces Model, Market Attractiveness Analysis and Value Chain analysis. These tools help to get a clear picture of the industry’s structure and evaluate the competition attractiveness at a global level.
Additionally, these tools also give inclusive assessment of each metal type, and application segment in the global market of platinum group metals.
The entire platinum group metals market has been sub-categorized into metal type, and application. The report provides an analysis of these subsets with respect to the geographical segmentation. This research study will keep marketer informed and helps to identify the target demographics for a product or service.
