For traders News and features Analysis Platinum price news: can the metal hedge the pandemic volatility?
The platinum price has stabilised so far in April, after recording its worst quarterly performance since 2008 as industrial shutdowns aimed at halting the spread of COVID-19 decimated physical demand for the precious metal.
The platinum market turned bearish in February and dropped by close to 30 per cent in mid-March to its lowest point since 2002. It has since turned higher along with the rest of the precious metals, racking up its biggest weekly gain on record at the end of the month on supply disruptions.
But unlike gold, silver and palladium, which have been rallying in recent weeks, platinum has been coming up against resistance that could limit its upside potential. Expectations of continued volatility in the commodities complex in the near term have investors wondering: “Will platinum prices rise and offer a viable hedge against a wobbling market?”
This article outlines what happened to platinum prices in recent weeks and what platinum price news indicates for the market going forward.
The latest platinum price news: supply constraints halt decline
The platinum price trend showed a significant plunge in late February and March, falling sharply from $1,016 per ounce on February 19 to $621 per ounce on March 19 in response to fears of a collapse in physical demand from the automotive industry. With automotive manufacturers – the main consumers of the metal for catalytic converters in diesel engines – shutting down around the world amid the coronavirus pandemic, consumption has dropped steeply.
Automotive manufacturers in China began restarting their factories in mid-February as the Chinese government eased restrictions with the spread of coronavirus starting to slow. But plants in Europe were just starting to shut down in mid-March as the outbreak escalated there, followed by factories in North America. It quickly became apparent that plans to resume production in early April would have to be deferred until the end of the month, and some plants have switched from producing vehicles to producing ventilators to help the overwhelmed healthcare supply chain.
The platinum price bottomed out on March 23, however, as news on platinum turned bullish with the world’s largest producers going into lockdown in South Africa, creating a short-term reduction in supply of the metal.
Miners in South Africa, which account for around 70 per cent of global primary supply of platinum, declared force majeure as the country went into lockdown from March 26 for an initial period of 21 days. Anglo American Platinum (Amplats) had already declared force majeure in February, after an explosion at one of its smelter units that will take until the second quarter of 2021 to repair. It has closed most of its production during the lockdown, running some of its mechanised mine capacity and a smelter at a reduced level. Sibanya-Stillwater had agreed with Amplats to provide spare processing capacity to offset the closure of the damaged smelter, but it too was forced to ramp down operations to comply with the government lockdown.
Impala Platinum (Implats) and Eastern Platinum (Eastplats) applied to operate limited smelting operations, and Eastplats said on Wednesday it has received permission from the South African government for an immediate phased restart of some of its smelting facilities.
The platinum price rose to $748 per ounce on March 27 from $623 per ounce on March 23, in response to the supply curtailment. It has consolidated above the $700 per ounce level since, largely trading in a tight range between $725 – $748 per ounce. With resistance forming around $750 per ounce, platinum could break out to the upside on the tide of other rising precious metals prices – particularly gold. But the drop in automotive demand is set to continue in the short term and could outweigh the gains from supply disruptions and safe-haven precious metals demand.
Analyst outlook: will platinum prices continue to rise?
The automotive industry was already under downward pressure before the outbreak of the virus, with vehicle sales slowing globally in 2019. The VW “dieselgate” emissions scandal that hit the industry in 2015 has been particularly devastating for the platinum market, as sales of diesel vehicles that use platinum-based catalytic converters have dropped sharply.
