An illustration of Vista Danau Kota.
KUALA LUMPUR (July 2): Platinum Victory Development Sdn Bhd will launch its latest Vista Essential Homes project, Vista Danau Kota, on July 4. Sprawled on a 3.721-acre (1.51ha) land in Setapak, Kuala Lumpur, Vista Danau Kota is a one-block development under an affordable housing scheme, Rumawip, comprising 910 units priced at RM300,000.
"As a seasoned property developer in the industry for over two decades, Platinum Victory understands the market needs, without compromising the fundamental elements that most consumers look for in a property — the location, value for money, convenience and accessibility,” said Platinum Victory executive director Gan Yee Hin in a press release.
“This affordably-priced development means many Malaysians are eligible to apply and potentially own a house in this much-anticipated development," said Gan.
"In the pipeline, we have other upcoming projects that cater to homebuyers under Platinum Victory's Vista Essential Homes segment. This particular category of homebuyers is one of Platinum Victory's key target markets," he added.
Vista Danau Kota offers facilities such as swimming pools for adults and kids, a multipurpose hall, laundry room, surau, community space, nursery, shoplots and 24-hour security.
"Similar to most of our Vista Essential Homes affordable development projects, Vista Danau Kota is located within Greater Kuala Lumpur. This is a value-added benefit many may not be aware of as the perception of affordable homes is that they tend to be in far-flung locations," said Gan.
Vista Danau Kota is within close proximity to a number of amenities, including AEON BiG, The Palette by Platinum Victory, Setapak Central Mall, Danau Kota Lake, the recently refurbished Taman Tasik Titiwangsa, Tasik Sri Rampai, Zoo Negara as well as several cultural hotspots such as Istana Budaya and Balai Seni. Also located nearby is Tunku Abdul Rahman (TAR) University College as well as healthcare amenities.
The project is a short drive away to a network of public transportation and has direct access to major expressways, such as the Middle Ring Road 2 (MRR2), Lebuhraya Duta-Ulu Kelang (DUKE) and Jalan Genting Klang.
