Announced during Ingram Micro’s Cloud Summit: The Digital Sessions
Australian IT services provider Platinum Technology has been named one of Ingram Micro’s top performing global partners.
The Sydney-based consultancy won the award for Cloud Partner of the Year during Ingram Micro’s Cloud Summit, The Digital Sessions, held virtually.
This award recognises partners that made significant inroads with Ingram Micro’s Cloud Marketplace and spurred digital transformation of their customers’ business.
“We are honoured and excited by this acknowledgement by Ingram Micro. Our staff and partners have put in a lot of hard work over the last few years to become an IT managed services partner of choice, and it is fantastic to be recognised on a global scale,” said  Joseph Girgis, director of Platinum Technology.
Platinum Technology was the only winner from Australia and New Zealand out of 11 winners in six categories.
Sign up to gain exclusive access to email subscriptions, event invitations, competitions, giveaways, and much more.
Membership is free, and your security and privacy remain protected. View our privacy policy before signing up.
Error: Please check your email address.
This year’s ARN 30 Under 30 Tech Awards were held as an integral part of the first entirely virtual Emerging Leaders forum, an annual event dedicated to identifying, educating and showcasing the Australian technology market’s rising stars. Judged by an Emerging Leaders panel, the 30 Under 30 Tech Awards 2020 recognised the outstanding achievements and business excellence of 30 talented individuals, across both young leaders and those just starting out. In this slideshow, ARN honours this year's winners and captures their thoughts about how their ideas of leadership have changed over time.
ARN kick-started its 2020 awards season with its annual Judges’ Lunch in Sydney on 13 March, welcoming current and new judges to the panel. The judges came together in recognition of their involvement in this year's ARN Innovation Awards and Women in ICT Awards programs, both of which honour outstanding achievements by individuals and organisations in the IT channel industry. Photos by Ashley Mar.​
Nextgen Distribution held its second Leadership Forum in conjunction with its latest annual Summer Party event on 13 February in Sydney. Drawing upon the theme, 'leading through adversity with diversity,' the Leadership Forum featured keynotes and panellists including NSW Rural Fire Service Commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons; former Governor-General and Chief of the Defence Force Peter Cosgrove; Micro Focus A/NZ managing director Peter Fuller; and Vocus CEO Kevin Russell, among others, discussing leadership in adversity and diversity leadership. Photos by Kwa Nguyen.​
