Platinum Games issues a statement to Kickstarter backers of The Wonderful 101 Remastered about the unexpected UK fees they got.
Back when Platinum Games released a Kickstarter for a remaster of The Wonderful 101, not everyone could predict the result. The game was niche, and had not been a commercial success on the Wii U. Its fanbase showed the love however, and Wonderful 101 Remastered's Kickstarter was a huge success .
The Wonderful 101 was an ambitious game both for Platinum and its platform. The game utilized the Wii U's touch screen for its unique Unite mechanic. Many players found this annoying, and it is not fully addressed in the remaster. Although no touch screen is necessary, the PC control scheme provides its own problems.
The controls were taken in stride by Wonderful 101's biggest fans, so the Remaster's lack of solution wasn't awful. What is causing fans, particularly the game's Kickstarter backers to get angry, are unexpected fees. UK backers of Wonderful 101 Remastered got unexpectedly charged for their copy of the physical game due to import fees. In a recent post on the Kickstarter campaign (available only to backers), Platinum has responded to these complaints. Platinum's response pointed out that its FAQ clearly states that physical copies were being shipped from the U.S., and they were honoring foreign tarifs.
This annoyance came on the heels of Wonderful 101 Remastered already being delayed , at least in terms of physical copies. So backers in the UK waited longer for a physical copy of the game than advertised, and then had to pay more on top of it. It's no wonder there is a lot of anger surrounding the once promising Kickstarter campaign. To make matters worse, many backers have pointed out that the FAQ section Platinum mentioned was only added a week after the campaigns launch. By that point, many backers had already pledged money. Since they were already committed, there was very little reason to check the FAQ for late additions, which meant no awareness of the fees.
Even more unfortunate is how little Platinum seems to have taken from the original Wonderful 101's shortcomings. Many issues or problems from the original have not been addressed, and this was a golden opporunity for The Wonderful 101 to improve .
All of this has led to many decrying the Kickstarter as dishonest and asking for refunds. The goodwill for Wonderful 101 Remastered has not completely disappeared, but a sour taste has been left in players' mouths. If Platinum still wants to make a Wonderful 101 sequel , it will have to promise real improvement and better inform their fans. Let's hope it still comes to fruition and that the third time's the charm.
The Wonderful 101 Remastered is available on PC, PS4, and Switch.
