To determine how much your points are worth, Amex provides a helpful points value calculator , which allows you to select how many points you have (1,000; 5,000; 10,000, then increasing by increments of 10,000) to check the value. The value of points varies based on redemption method, so here are some examples of what 60,000 points are worth, which is what you'd earn by meeting the welcome bonus requirements.
Pay with points at checkout: $300 (Ticketmaster), $420 (all other sites, such as Amazon and PayPal), $600 (NYC Taxi)
Transfer points to frequent traveler program partners: up to 60,000 points in the partners' program. Read more on how to transfer points to a loyalty program .
*Note that you have to pay for travel using your Platinum® Card through Amextravel.com to get these redemption rates. There are no blackout dates when travel is booked on this site. Plus points don't expire while your account is open.
Based on the annual spending budget from Esri, the average American can earn an estimated $818 in the first year of card membership, thanks to the welcome bonus, and $1,290 over five years with The Platinum® Card from American Express, net the annual fee. This assumes that cardholders are redeeming points for a typical maximum value of 1 cent per point. Extreme optimizers might be able to achieve more value, and you may earn a higher or lower return depending on your spending habits.
The Platinum® Card has over a dozen premium perks that can allow you to travel in luxury and benefit from insurance and protection. Here are the most notable benefits.
Up to $200 Uber credit: Receive Uber VIP status and a $15 credit each month for U.S. rides, plus a bonus of $20 in December.
Up to $200 airline fee credit: Receive up to $200 in statement credits annually for incidentals, such as checked bags, in-flight refreshments, and other fees after you select an eligible airline.
Up to $100 Saks credit: Get up to $50 in statement credits from January through June and up to $50 in statement credits from July through December for purchases at Saks Fifth Avenue or Saks.com. Enrollment required.
Up to $100 for Global Entry or TSA PreCheck fee: Receive a statement credit for Global Entry every 4 years or TSA PreCheck every 4.5 years. (Read how to apply for Global Entry .)
American Express Global Lounge Collection: Access to over 1,200 airport lounges in more than 130 countries around the world.
Fine Hotels & Resorts: Book hotel stays with Fine Hotels & Resorts to receive complimentary benefits including: room upgrades, free breakfast for two, late check-out, early check-in and up to a $100 hotel credit, when available.
Complimentary gold status in select travel programs: Cardholders can upgrade to gold status in the Marriott Bonvoy and Hilton Honors programs.
Amex Offers: Receive exclusive shopping discounts at select retailers through Amex Offers . These offers typically give you a set dollar amount of cash back, credited to your account within 90 days after you meet the requirements.
Global dining collection: Get special access to reservations and experiences at popular restaurants, and the opportunity to meet the chefs at exclusive events.
Entertainment access: Receive access to exclusive entertainment events , presales and preferred seating for concerts, sporting events, and more in select cities. (Check out the best credit cards for entertainment spending .)
By Invitation Only® events: Enjoy exclusive events from sporting and fashion to fine dining, art and performances.
Terms apply for all benefits.
This card has a steep $550 annual fee, but if you take advantage of the annual credit maximums including the $200 Uber credit, annual $200 airline fee credit and annual $100 Saks credit, you can offset the fee to an effective $50 ( see rates and fees ). Plus, the complimentary American Express Global Lounge Collection access, Marriott Bonvoy gold elite status and Hilton Honors gold status more than offset the remainder of the fee.
There is no regular purchase APR since this is a charge card, and you're required to pay your bill in full every month and you can't do balance transfers. However, AmEx provides a Pay Over Time feature where eligible purchases over $100 can benefit from payment flexibility, with interest. See rates and fees for the Pay Over Time APR.
The Platinum Card® from American Express is a top-notch travel credit card that can add comfort and convenience to your travels. Cardholders who take advantage of the numerous annual statement credits , travel perks and shopping features can easily offset the fee and maximize the card's benefits.
If you don't want to pay $550 for a credit card, consider the American Express® Gold Card , which has a lower $250 annual fee ( see rates and fees ). The fee is more manageable, and you can still benefit from many of the same perks, such as Amex Offers, ShopRunner and The Hotel Collection .
There are also travel credit cards with no annual fee , like the Wells Fargo Propel American Express® card . This card allows you to earn 3X points per dollar spent on travel reservations made anywhere — they don't have to be done through Amextravel.com.
To determine which credit cards offer the best value, CNBC Select analyzed 234 of the most popular credit cards available in the U.S. We compared each card on a range of features, including rewards, welcome bonus, introductory and standard APR, balance transfer fee and foreign transaction fees, as well as factors such as required credit and customer reviews when available. We also considered additional perks, the application process and how easy it is for the consumer to redeem points.
CNBC Select teamed up with location intelligence firm Esri . The company's data development team provided the most up-to-date and comprehensive consumer spending data based on the 2019 Consumer Expenditure Surveys from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. You can read more about their methodology here .
Esri's data team created a sample annual budget of approximately $22,126 in retail spending. The budget includes six main categories: groceries ($5,174), gas ($2,218), dining out ($3,675), travel ($2,244), utilities ($4,862) and general purchases ($3,953). General purchases include items such as housekeeping supplies, clothing, personal care products, prescription drugs and vitamins, and other vehicle expenses.
CNBC Select used this budget to estimate how much the average consumer would save over the course of a year, two years and five years, assuming they would attempt to maximize their rewards potential by earning all welcome bonuses offered and using the card for all applicable purchases. All rewards total estimations are net the annual fee.
While the five-year estimates we've included are derived from a budget similar to the average American's spending, you may earn a higher or lower return depending on your shopping habits.
Information about the Wells Fargo Propel American Express® card has been collected independently by CNBC and has not been reviewed or provided by the issuer of the card prior to publication.
For rates and fees of The Platinum® Card from American Express, click here .
For rates and fees of the American Express® Gold Card, click here .
Editorial Note: Opinions, analyses, reviews or recommendations expressed in this article are those of the CNBC Select editorial staff’s alone, and have not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any third party.
