For traders News and features Analysis Platinum news: what happens next in 2020?
Also known as "little silver", platinum was discovered by Spanish explorers in South America around 1735. Since then, it has become a premier jewellery metal as well as a vital industrial commodity. Platinum news tends to rapidly drive the price of the metal and investors, as well as speculators, often try to predict its next move.
Platinum is seen as a valuable investment asset, helping to diversify portfolios. The combination of high volatility and strong liquidity makes it popular with traders.
Like any commodity, platinum price news often relates to supply and demand. According to the World Platinum Investment Council, the 2020 forecast predicts a decline in the demand from the automotive and jewellery industries by 3 per cent and 2 per cent respectively. Supply, on the other hand, is expected to decline by 1 per cent, led by a 2 per cent fall in refined production and a 1 per cent increase in recycling.
Our platinum price analysis looks at what happened to platinum prices at the time when palladium rose significantly in 2019 and what factors are influencing the metal’s value today.
To start with, any fundamental trader should keep an eye on new related to the automotive industry. Because of the surge in the palladium price and new diesel and gasoline car emission control, platinum is set to replace palladium in the medium term in many vehicles.
The growing demand for fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEV) has the potential to strongly influence platinum's price too. Initially driven by heavy-duty applications, demand for platinum is expected to soar from the fuel cells industry.
A full platinum price analysis should consider the bigger picture as well as the short to medium-term ones. A top/down analysis like this is vital when trying to forecast the platinum prices.
The bigger picture reveals the importance of two psychological, or pivotal levels – $1,000 and $2,000. Right before the 2008 financial crisis, the price of platinum exceeded the $2,000 mark for a short period. What followed was an abrupt decline until support in the region of $1,000 held the bearish move. The same $1,000 level now acts as a resistance in the face of further upside.
However, when it comes to technical analysis on longer timeframes, it is best not to focus on an exact level, but on an area. Market volatility around psychological numbers usually increases, so traders need more than just a simple level break.
We can say that the last decade was not good for platinum bulls. Recent steep and constant decline is part of a bearish trend with its roots tracing back to 2008.
Bulls may argue that the bearish trendline has just been broken. After reaching a support level at $800, held three times in a row, platinum's price finally broke the downward trendline. However, while dynamic resistance may have been broken, the trendline did not hold the price anymore, so the series of lower highs remain in place.
This series of movements still represents a bearish trend and, until broken, many believe that the likelihood is for platinum prices to hit a new low. Still, in the shortterm, one can easily argue for a triangle as a reversal pattern, which has a horizontal base that has not yet been broken.
With no damage to the bearish long-term technical picture, bulls should be careful as the shorter  timeframes show platinum having a difficult time at the $1,000 level.
First, the $1,000 level acts as a horizontal support and pivotal level. Second, the price seems to form a double top formation there – a reversal pattern. To trade it, bears need confirmation.
A break below $880 opens the gates to potential short trade to cover the double top’s measured move. While the risk-reward ratio is not that appealing, we should keep in mind that the measured move’s target of $750 is only the minimum distance the price should travel as a result of a double top formation.
Secondly, the invalidation or stop-loss for the double top pattern requires a move above $1,040. The problem with double tops or bottoms is that traders must interpret them. Instead of seeing them as relative to a fixed level, they to look for an area, in the same way as when considering support and resistance,
Thirdly, a trendline connecting the 2016 and 2018 lows acts as dynamic resistance at current levels. It makes the price of $1,000 a confluence area, where platinum meets both horizontal and dynamic resistance and forms the start of a potential double top.
