Alston & Bird LLP and Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP provided legal counsel to Platinum Equity on the acquisitions of Deluxe and CineVizion. Moelis & Company LLC acted as financial advisor to Deluxe Entertainment Services Inc. and Stroock & Stroock & Lavan LLP acted as its legal counsel. Sklar Kirsh provided legal counsel to CineVizion.
Platinum Equity announced the acquisition of Deluxe Entertainment Services Inc.’s distribution business. Financial terms were not disclosed. Deluxe Entertainment’s creative businesses are not included in the acquisition.
Former Deluxe CEO Cyril Drabinsky, who left the company in 2016 to found CineVizion, will return to lead the business as CEO under Platinum Equity’s ownership. As part of the transition, CineVizion’s assets will be integrated into Deluxe. Mr. Drabinsky was an executive at Deluxe for nearly 20 years and led the company’s transformation from an analog film processing business into a leading digital post-production technology and distribution service provider.
Former Deluxe executive Mike Gunter is joining Drabinsky’s leadership team as Chief Financial Officer. Warren Stein, who served as Chief Operating Officer of Deluxe until 2016, is also returning as COO. Former Deluxe President of Post Production William Sherak advised Platinum Equity on the acquisition and will remain in an advisory role with the company going foward.
Founded as a film processing lab in 1915 as part of the Fox Film Corporation, Deluxe provides a full suite of solutions to the world’s leading content production studios and distributors. The company has approximately 3,400 employees globally with key hubs in Los Angeles, Bangalore, London, and Sydney. Deluxe comprises four segments: Localization (subtitling and dubbing), Digital Cinema (mastering, key generation and distribution to theaters), Home Entertainment (compression, encoding and authorizing) and Fulfillment (encryption, transcoding and distribution of movies and tv content).
The Stroock team included M&A partner Brian Kelly (Picture), along with associate James McDonough, and Debt Finance partner Alon Goldberger with associates Sal Perrotto, Nadia Bryan and Maria Grabis. It also included partner Austin Lilling, special counsel Elizabeth DiMichele, partner Jeff Mann, special counsel Debra Sapp, associate Ida Phair, special counsel Rusty Pomeroy.
