An 18-month position in a US biotech is reaping some serious paper gains for Australia's Platinum Asset Management.
Platinum is the biggest Australian owner of Nasdaq-listed tearaway Moderna, arguably the most topical stock in the world on Tuesday.
Platinum Asset Management portfolio manager Bianca Ogden.
Moderna sent markets worldwide higher when it said an experimental COVID-19 vaccine showed promising results in a small early-stage trial. Moderna's own shares closed up 20 per cent to $US80 on the news.
Platinum owned 1.54 million Moderna shares as at March 31, according to regulatory filings in the US, for a 0.46 per cent stake, and has sat on that stake while Moderna's shares rose in expectations that its vaccine technology may prove successful.
It's hard to spot another Australian-based equities fund with a meaningful Moderna position, based on Bloomberg data.
Platinum acquired its initial stake in December 2018 – the company listed at $US23 a share that month – and topped up its holding at $US19 a share at a capital raising in February, according to Platinum portfolio manager Bianca Ogden, who oversees the Platinum International Health Care Fund and the firm's healthcare sector coverage.
Moderna shares jumped to $US80 overnight, valuing Platinum's stake at $US123 million ($190 million). Moderna quickly moved to capitalise on the investor interest and raised another $US1.34 billion at $US76 on Tuesday morning. Platinum did not participate in Tuesday's raising, Ogden said, having tipped in fresh funds earlier this year.
Moderna has a vaccine technology that is very different to how vaccines have traditionally been made. The technology – messenger RNA or mRNA – has the potential for vaccines to be developed much more quickly and cheaply than in the past, and production scaled up to meet something like COVID-19.
It's a controversial stock. The bulls – like Platinum – believe it could be a big change for the vaccine industry. The bears believe it's a start-up and the technology is not yet proven and the company can be secretive about its intellectual property.
Ogden, a virologist before she entered investment management , said she's always found Moderna management to be accessible, and has also toured the company's manufacturing sites, labs, had access to its scientists and the like.
Moderna is not the only company using the mRNA platform. Another is Germany's BioNTech, whose US-listed securities jumped 21.6 per cent on Monday on the news. Platinum also owns BioNTech – and it is a bigger position in the firm's healthcare fund than Moderna.
Sarah Thompson has co-edited Street Talk since 2009, specialising in private equity, investment banking, M&A and equity capital markets stories. Prior to that, she spent 10 years in London as a markets and M&A reporter at Bloomberg and Dow Jones. Email Sarah at sarah.thompson@afr.com
Anthony Macdonald co-edits Street Talk, specialising in private equity, investment banking, M&A and equity capital markets. He has 10 years' experience as a business journalist and worked at PwC, auditing and advising financial services companies. Connect with Anthony on Twitter . Email Anthony at a.macdonald@afr.com
Tim Boyd is a journalist based in Sydney who writes for the Street Talk column. Connect with Tim on Twitter . Email Tim at tim.boyd@afr.com
