In response to reduced vehicle sales, pricing for palladium and rhodium have declined.
Demand and pricing for the platinum group metals (PGMs) palladium and rhodium have hit a roadblock in the form of declining auto sales because of the COVID-19 pandemic. The two metals are commonly used in manufacturing catalytic converters for vehicles with gasoline engines.
According to MarketWatch , palladium futures prices turned negative for the year in late April as prices settled at $1,892.20 per ounce April 22, down 0.9 percent from the end of 2019. The record settlement price of $2,711.70 was reached Feb. 27, when prices traded more than 42 percent higher for the year. Rhodium spot prices on April 23 stood at $8,200 per ounce, according to data from Johnson Matthey, having gained nearly 36 percent year to date. However, they had reached a record price of $13,800 as recently as March 12, the news outlet reports.
Platinum is more commonly used to control emissions from diesel engines, which have lost favor in many countries that have introduced tougher emissions standards. That metal’s futures settled at $788 per ounce, a 19 percent decline for the year.
, down 54 percent from a year ago when adjusted for the same number of selling days. This month’s seasonally adjusted annualized rate (SAAR) for total light-vehicle sales is an estimated 7.7 million units. Excluding fleet sales, ALG expects
retail deliveries of new cars and light trucks to be 577,280 units, a decrease of 49 percent from a year ago when adjusted for the same number of selling days.
Marnie Owen, New York City-based global head of technical analysis at Informa Global Markets, tells MarketWatch that three-way catalytic converters, which address hydrocarbon, carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides in gasoline-powered vehicles, “use more rhodium, which had boosted its demand in the face of declining auto sales even prior to COVID-19.”
Palladium is likely to rebound as China’s clean air standards lead to “more palladium into every tailpipe in that country,” R. Michael Jones, chief executive officer of Vancouver-based Platinum Group Metals, tells MarketWatch.
Ed Egilinsky, head of alternatives at New York City-based Direxion, tells MarketWatch that a shutdown of production in some areas related to COVID-19 has offered some support to palladium and rhodium prices.
Autocatalyst recycling is the second largest contributor to the world’s supply of PGMs, according to Cliff Hope of PMR Inc. who wrote the article “PGMs retain their sheen” for the January issue of Recycling Today. Hope, using Johnson Matthey’s supply-and-demand figures for the last six years, writes that autocatalyst recycling has contributed on average 23 percent of the world’s PGMs supply. Recycling of jewelry and electrical sources brings recycled PGMs’ contribution to world supply to just slightly more than 25 percent.
More than 82 percent of steel packaging was recycled.
Recycling of steel packaging hit a new all-time high of 82.5 percent in Europe in 2018, according to figures issued by APEAL, the Association of European Producers of Steel for Packaging , Brussels.
APEA says the methodology and data sources it used to calculate the recycling rate have been independently reviewed, audited and certified by energy and waste specialist consultancy, Eunomia.
This new record rate confirms steel as Europe’s most recycled primary[1] packaging material and means that more than 8 out of 10 steel items put on the EU market this year have been recycled into new steel products, APEAL says.
“A recycling increase of 2 percentage points sends a clear message to all stakeholders in the value chain that steel for packaging is a tried, tested and sustainable packaging solution, fit for a 21st century circular economy,” says Alexis Van Maercke, secretary general of APEAL.
“Steel is circular by design. Magnetic properties make steel easy to collect, and steel can be recycled over and over again without any loss of material quality. Today’s rise in recycling rates is largely the result of increased separate collection in countries such as Italy and Poland. As 100 percent of separately collected steel packaging is used to make new products, steel is clearly the best placed of all packaging materials to achieve the aims of the new Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP 2.0),” he adds.
Despite the increase, APEAL says the industry must continue to improve collection and recycling of steel packaging throughout the EU.
Van Maercke says, “Indeed, we welcomed the European Commission’s ambition to harmonize separate collection of packaging waste streams in the EU, demonstrated in the CEAP 2.0. Separate collection is the best way of guaranteeing high-quality input into recycling operations.”
In 2018, more than 4 million metric tons of CO2 were saved through recycling, the equivalent of taking 870,000 cars off the road for one year.
California governor issues executive order affecting plastic grocery bags, beverage container redemptions
Order suspends plastic bag ban and pauses redemption of beverage containers in stores.
California Gov. Gavin Newsom signed Executive Order N-54-20 Wednesday, April 22, which suspends the state’s plastic bag ban and also approves a 60-day suspension in the redemption of beverage containers in stores as well as a mandate for recycling centers to operate a minimum number of hours.
The executive order does not affect the more than 100 cities and counties that adopted their own ordinances banning or regulating single-use plastic bags that were in effect before Jan. 1, 2015.
According to the executive order, the suspensions have been issued “to protect the public health and safety and minimize the risk of COVID-19 exposure for workers engaged in essential activities, such as those handling reusable grocery bags or recyclable containers where recycling centers are not available; and whereas contact exposure at retail establishments, beverage dealers and recycling centers could spread COVID-19, necessitating precautions to reduce the risk of exposure to COVID-19.”
The state order is designed to maximize physical distancing while providing space for California businesses to adapt to rapidly evolving circumstances.
While California has temporarily suspended enforcement of bottle and can takeback requirements, local retailers and recycling centers may determine whether to close or stop redeeming CRVs. Consumers are asked to call ahead before bringing CRV containers, including aluminum cans and polyethylene terephthalate bottles, for redemption under the state's bottle bill.
The novel coronavirus that is responsible for COVID-19 has been found to be stable for several hours to days in aerosols and on surfaces, according to a study from National Institutes of Health, CDC, UCLA and Princeton University scientists in The New England Journal of Medicine. The study found that the coronavirus was detectable in aerosols for up to three hours, up to four hours on copper, up to 24 hours on cardboard and up to two to three days on plastic and stainless steel.
Wolfgang Steinwender has been announced as the new CEO of Austria-based plastics recycling machinery manufacturer NGR, effective May 1. His predecessor Josef Hochreiter says he will devote more time to the further development of parent firm Next Generation Holding.
NGR describes itself as offering a full range of postconsumer, postindustrial and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) recycling equipment. Despite uncertainties pertaining to the COVID-19 virus, NGR says it is “convinced it can continue [its] successful course supporting the plastics industry during its transition to the circular economy.”
Since joining the company in 2014, Steinwender has been serving as managing director of NGR’s North American office in Atlanta, where he spearheaded market penetration and customer support in the Americas.
“Together with Chief Technology Officer Thomas Pichler and Chief Operating Officer Gerold Barth, Wolfgang Steinwender will focus on the further development of the circular economy,” states NGR.
“About 400 million tons of plastics are being produced per year worldwide; it is key to put an emphasis on end-of-life plastics,” Steinwender says. “Mechanical plastics recycling conserves resources, protects the environment and improves the CO2 balance. It is the key to sustainability. Therefore, it is crucial to achieve the highest possible quality of recycled materials by using innovative technologies and thus continuously increase the amount of recycled material in end products.”
Josef Hochreiter had been heading NGR for 12 years. He says his work with Next Generation Holding will involve continuing to develop the firm “to support the transformation from a linear to a circular economy in plastics.”
NGR is a €47 million ($51 million) company that employs 140 people at its headquarters in Feldkirchen, Austria, and at three sales and service locations in the United States, China and Malaysia.
Less plastic scrap is being processed in Asia, where many COVID-19-related lockdowns continue.
Market report from Chinese association indicates COVID-19 restrictions, container shortage among problems.
COVID-19 virus-related restrictions in Asia and around the world have greatly reduced plastic recycling activities on that continent, according to Steve Wong, president of the China Sustainable Plastics Association (CSPA).
Wong, also CEO of Hong Kong-based Fukutomi Recycling Ltd. , writes in a late April report that government actions, including lockdowns and suspended economic activities, have “severely affected global manufacturing industries and the use of raw materials, causing dramatic effects on the plastic recycling industry.”
He writes, “The extended city lockdowns [in] many of the main recycling countries in Asia, such as Malaysia, Vietnam and India—along with social distancing restrictions in many Asian cities—has resulted in only 30 percent of recyclers continuing operations." Of the companies still running, Wong says many are “only running at 50 percent of their processing capacities.”
Wong indicates “financial distress” has ensued for many companies, while a second form of stress has come from the “scaling down of carrier operations by shipping companies.” Globally, says Wong,  “insufficient container forwarding capacities, longer transit times due to blank sailings, and drastic increases in freight rates” have all been observed.
The combination of increased transportation costs and a slower flow of goods means “the global plastic scrap trade is now facing a very difficult time,” writes Wong, who also serves on two committees for the Brussels-based Bureau of International Recycling (BIR).
Providing one more challenge, a severe decline in the price of oil has driven down the value of primary plastics, “causing a disastrous trend in recycled plastic material prices,” adds Wong. “In the absence of normal market liquidities, buyers now lack interest in purchasing materials and remain on the sidelines.”
Imposed lockdowns and suspended factory operations have reduced supplies of industrial scrap, “while the shortfall cannot be covered by other sources,” says Wong. Safety concerns are one reason for that.  “The fear that the COVID-19 virus can live on solid materials for up to four days and for at least four hours has scared away [some] upstream sorting operations and severely affected mixed rigid plastic supplies.”
In the longer term, plastic recyclers continue to monitor how environmental concerns about plastic’s use as a packaging material will impact their prospects. “A reducing trend in plastic scrap supplies is not only a short-term phenomenon but a persistent one, given the global consensus to reduce and restrict the use of plastics. On the other hand, the use of recycled content in products or packaging may become a global policy, as directed by the United Nations. The price correlation between prime materials and recycled materials may be distanced in the future, depending on supply and demand.”
Predicts Wong, “As the tendency of using more recycled content prevails, recyclers who are able to meet the quality specifications of brand owners in product applications are going to be more successful in the future.” He adds, though, “The current range of qualified scrap items as demanded by brand owners is not wide enough, and many recyclers find it difficult to satisfy their needs. This results in a long-term technical issue on our industry to be solved by R&D in raising more recyclables that can meet the desired standards of brand owners. This is undoubtedly our long-term direction.”
A preview to the rest of the world on how reopened economies will affect plastic prices may be available in the People’s Republic of China. “As China has gradually lifted city lockdowns and factories resume productions, prime material prices of polypropylene and certain styrenics have gone up by between $30 to $80 per ton within the last two weeks,” writes Wong in late April.
Additionally, he says, the restart of factories “may be helpful in the collection of receivables by recyclers.” Concludes Wong, “Nevertheless, the light at the end of the tunnel is yet to be seen as city lockdowns in China’s export markets are still in effect due to COVID-19.”
