Qatar status match delivers Platinum, Gold to Virgin Australia flyers
Qatar status match delivers Platinum, Gold to Virgin Australia flyers
Qatar Airways is now bestowing the fruits of its recent status match promo onto Virgin Australia frequent flyers.
Receive up to 200,000 bonus Amplify Points when you apply, are approved and spend $12k on eligible purchases each year for two years - St.George Amplify Signature card with Amplify Points. Convert your points into Singapore Airlines KrisFlyer miles, and more. Enjoy a reduced annual card fee of $139 in the first year (normally $279). New Amplify Signature cards only. Offer ends 30th September 2020. Click
It's been a good weekend for many Virgin Australia frequent flyers who applied for last month's status match with Qatar Airways, with emails bestowing Platinum or Gold status in the airline's Privilege Club now hitting inboxes.
Many Executive Traveller readers are reporting a successful match against their own Virgin Australia Velocity status, despite the offer seemingly being withdrawn a day ahead of its publicised May 21 timeframe.
That Qatar Airways Privilege Club status may well come in handy for domestic Qantas flights as of July, when the airline begins to reopen its Qantas Club and Qantas Business lounges – which will admit QRPC Gold and Platinum members due to Qatar and Qantas both being members of the Oneworld alliance.
Qatar Airways Privilege Club status unlocks access to domestic Qantas Clubs and Qantas Business lounges.
The rare chance to obtain Qatar Airways status was also extended to a handful of the Gulf carrier's heavy-hitting global competitors – Emirates, Etihad Airways, Turkish Airlines and Singapore Airlines – and Executive Traveller understands the promotion proved popular beyond all expectation.
Here's how the Qatar Airways Privilege Club status match tiers lined up against their equivalents for Virgin Australia Velocity, Emirates Skywards, Etihad Guest, Singapore Airlines KrisFlyer and Turkish Airlines Miles&Smiles.
Most newly-minted Qatar Airways Privilege Club Platinums and Golds will find their status lasts through to the middle of 2021, by which time international flying in some form is expected to be back on the menu.
And keeping that shiny card through to the middle of 2022 will be made much easier than usual, too.
Status match recipients need to earn only half as many Qpoints – the airline's 'status currency' – during the 12 months of their complimentary gratis status period to retain their Privilege Club tier status for the next 12 months:
In general, the more you spend on your ticket, the more Qpoints you’ll earn. This applies to both the class of travel you book and the distance you fly.
As a yardstick, a return Sydney-London business class booking will net you between 170 Qpoints and 272 Qpoints depending on the type of fare selected (from Business Saver to Business Flexi) – so that one trip will lock in another year of Gold all on its own, and could get you within easy reach of Platinum.
However, only 20% of the Qpoints target needs to be earned on Qatar Airways flights – the remainder can be collected when travelling with other Oneworld member airlines, including Qantas, although domestic Qantas flights only count for Qpoints if they're part of an international Qantas or Qatar Airways flight on the same ticket.
Alternatively, you could take "four sectors" on Qatar Airways flights, but that's do-able with a return flight between Australia and any other Qatar Airways destination apart from its Doha hub: for example, that Sydney-London return trip counts as four sectors, as Sydney-Doha and Doha-London are individual sectors.
David Flynn is the Editor-in-Chief of Executive Traveller and a bit of a travel tragic with a weakness for good coffee, shopping and lychee martinis.
