Worried about the global recession? If you’re thinking of buying shares then the threat of significant turbulence on financial markets over the next few years is something you need to factor into your investment decisions.
You can protect yourself from this massive economic uncertainty by buying some choice safe-haven stocks. And you don’t need to search the ends of the earth to find them. There are a number of sectors that are less cyclical in nature and are thus equipped to weather any severe macroeconomic volatility. Utilities operators, fixed-line and mobile telecoms companies, defence contractors and food and medicine manufacturers are just a few of these more-resilient segments of the share market.
Getting exposure to safe-haven precious metals is one grand idea for cautious investors to pursue. A perfect storm is bubbling: severe social, macroeconomic and geopolitical anxiety; a resumption of US dollar weakness; and rising scepticism over the true value of fiat currencies as central banks embark on increasingly-generous monetary policy. No wonder prices of gold and other traditional ‘hard currencies’ are increasing.
But you don’t just have to play the yellow metal to try and make big returns. Why not get exposure to platinum group metals (PGMs) instead?  Like their big brother gold, these assets are also enjoying rocketing demand from the investment community. Latest data from UBS in fact shows that the Nymex platinum and palladium books have continued growing. As a consequence, net positions here now sit at their highest for nine weeks and 10 weeks respectively.
You can ride this trend by buying shares in Sylvania Platinum (LSE: SLP) . I’d rather buy this share that the metals themselves or metal-backed financial instruments like ETFs. Why? Well at current prices it offers the sort of value that’s too good to miss.
Firstly, Sylvania offers trades on a rock-bottom forward P/E ratio of around 4 times. It also carries a monster dividend yield north of 10%. Don’t forget that buying PGMs or metal-related investment vehicles doesn’t offer investors the chance to receive dividends, of course.
Okay, those readings might make Sylvania appear too good to be true. Low earnings multiples and gigantic yields inevitably lead to claims of dividend traps. And investors do indeed need to be careful trading with such shares. But this mining stock doesn’t fall into this category, in my opinion.
Its profits outlook is quite brilliant and not just for fiscal 2020. The economic and political fallout of Covid-19 is likely to keep demand for safe-haven assets like precious metals well bought over the next few years at least. Besides, Sylvania has a strong balance sheet to support chunky dividends, illustrated by its decision to buy back more of its shares in recent days. This is one income share I think’s a terrific pick for these times of great economic uncertainty.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Royston Wild has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
