Therefore, making dietary changes in order to reduce your intake of omega-6 rich foods including fast food and refined oils and increase consumption of omega-3 rich foods like fatty fish is best for overall health.
Some studies have specifically linked soybean oil to negative health outcomes. However, most research exploring soybean oil’s potential negative effects on health has been conducted in animals.
For example, a study in mice demonstrated that a diet high in soybean oil led to adverse metabolic changes, including increased body fat, high blood sugar, and fatty liver compared to diets high in coconut oil or fructose, a type of sugar (
Additionally, animal studies have also shown that interesterified soybean oil, which is used in products like margarine, impairs blood sugar management and leads to abdominal fat accumulation (
Although high-quality human research is needed to study the long-term health effects of soybean-rich diets, it’s best to limit intake of omega-6 rich oils like soybean oil and not to rely on soybean oil as your only fat source.
Soybean oil is high in omega-6 fats, which can have negative effects on health when consumed in excess.
For this reason, it’s best to limit your soybean oil intake and instead consume a variety of healthy fats on a daily basis.
Soybean oil is a common type of cooking oil that’s been associated with several health benefits.
What’s more, it has a high smoke point and neutral flavor, making it easy to incorporate into a variety of recipes as part of a healthy diet.
However, keep in mind that soybean oil is high in omega-6 fats and may have negative effects on health when consumed in large amounts.
For this reason, it’s best not to rely on soybean oil as your only source of fat. Instead, include a variety of healthy fats in your diet, including fatty fish, nuts, seeds, avocado, and coconut, for the right balance.
Last medically reviewed on  June 9, 2020
Written by Rachael Link, MS, RD — Medically reviewed by Jillian Kubala, MS, RD — Updated on June 9, 2020
