Weekly Export Sales Report shows strong corn demand.
INDIANOLA, Iowa -- On Thursday, the CME Group’s farm markets use strong demand numbers, lower world crop estimate to move up.
At the close, the May corn futures finished 1 3/4¢ higher at $3.31 1/4. July corn futures ended 1 3/4¢ higher at $3.36 1/2.
May soybean futures finished 9¢ higher at $8.63 1/4. July soybean futures closed 9 1/4¢ higher at $8.71.
May wheat futures closed 8 1/2¢ higher at $5.56 3/4.
May soymeal futures closed $0.30 per short ton lower at $292.50. May soy oil futures finished $0.23 cents higher at 27.41¢ per pound.
In the outside markets, the NYMEX crude oil market is $1.99 per barrel lower, the U.S. dollar is lower, and the Dow Jones Industrials are 139 points higher.
On Thursday, the Federal Reserve announced another $2.3 trillion in funding for COVID-19  economic relief.
Meanwhile, Americans are losing their jobs at a historic pace.
On Thursday, the U.S. Jobless Claims Report showed 6.6 million people filed for unemployment in the last week. When combined with the last two week’s reports, a total of 16.7 million Americans have filed for unemployment since March.
Separately, the USDA’s Weekly Export Sales Report Thursday shows strong corn demand figures.
Corn: 2.45 million metric tons (mmt) vs. the trade’s expectations of between 1.2 and 1.7 mmt
Al Kluis, Kluis Advisors, says the grain markets face a number of issues that block any rally attempts.
“U.S. grain prices have settled in a very low volume and tight trading range. We are waiting to turn the corner on COVID-19. When will people be able to go back to work? Demand continues to be stagnant. Until we see that pick up, grain prices will be limited on the upside,” Kluis told customers in a daily note.
Kluis added, “Demand destruction from ethanol scaling back will take several months to bounce back. Corn exports alone cannot pick up that lost demand.”
On Wednesday, the CME Group’s farm markets close lower.
At the close, May corn futures finished 1½¢ lower at $3.30; July corn futures finished 1¾¢ lower at $3.35½.
May soybean futures closed ¼¢ lower at $8.54; July soybean futures ended ¾¢ higher at $8.61.
May wheat futures settled 1¢ lower at $5.48¾.
May soy meal futures closed $1 per short ton higher at $292.80. May soy oil futures closed 0.30¢ lower at 27.18¢ per pound.
In the outside markets, the NYMEX crude oil market is $2.58 per barrel higher, the U.S. dollar is higher, and the Dow Jones Industrials are 779 points higher.
Al Kluis, Kluis Advisors, says the corn charts are trying to carve out a spring low as we quickly approach U.S. planting season.
“Soybean bulls are in need of some bullish headlines or we could see prices slip further. The current prices for new-crop corn and soybeans are pushing farming operations to once again evaluate crop rotation. Current estimates for U.S. acreage and normal trendline yields could push the U.S. balance sheets to levels that many will consider bearish, especially if China is slow to fulfill our Phase One agreement,” Kluis told customers in a daily note.
Kluis added, “Thursday will be a big day for the markets. The monthly USDA WASDE Report is slated for release at 11 a.m. CDT, at the same time the big global players in the oil world will be meeting to discuss mutual cuts to production. Many analysts expect to see countries take advantage of this dip in grain prices ahead of U.S. planting season to secure a portion of import needs.”
On Tuesday, the CME Group’s farm markets trade mostly higher.
At the close, May corn futures finished 3¼¢ higher at $3.31½; July corn futures finished 3¾¢ higher at $3.37¾.
May soybean futures closed ¾¢ lower at $8.54½; July soybean futures finished ¼¢ lower at $8.61.
May wheat futures finished 6½¢ lower at $5.49¾.
May soy meal futures closed $2.80 per short ton lower at $294.20. May soy oil futures finished 0.65¢ higher at 27.48¢ per pound.
In the outside markets, the NYMEX crude oil market is $1.87 per barrel lower, the U.S. dollar is lower, and the Dow Jones Industrials are 471 points higher.
Britt O'Connell, cash advisor for Commodity Risk Management Group, says fundamentally there hasn't been a dramatic change in the corn or bean markets. “Corn has both a supply and demand issue, particularly as new crops is concerned. It has been very difficult for the market setup to find anyone who wants to be long corn. With continued news of ethanol plants slowing grind or idling, I do not expect that to change anytime soon. As goes oil, as goes ethanol, as goes corn – at least in the setup that we have today. Both of those markets are seeing a pop, there's continued strength in the stock market, and strong exports for last week,” O'Connell says.
Corn sales was reported at 1,271,4812 tons for the week ending April 2nd. This is stronger than last week and 209,100 tons higher than this time a year ago. Buyers were mainly Mexico and Japan. U.S. corn is competitively priced in the global market right now.
"Soybeans continue to be the feel good story in commodities. While we haven't seen incredibly robust price movement, we do have strong domestic demand as soybean crush plants continue to grind a max capacity.  On a daily basis, the month of February processing rates were record large for a second consecutive month. Should this continue and we can attract exports, prices on soybeans should be well supported," she says.
Something worth watching as we move forward: China is less than impressed with Argentina (who refers to COVID-19 as the Chinese Flu). The South American country has also been circulating theories that this was an intentional act from China as a move towards world domination, she says.
"Should slander continue to be thrown around, maybe China does come to the U.S. to source some soybeans. After all, it is effectively solely reliant on South America right now for soybeans."
Al Kluis, Kluis Advisors, says traders will be watching to see what this week’s USDA report says about corn ending stocks.
“The trade expectation is that ending stocks of corn will only increase by 112 million bushels in the Thursday report. However, this is very questionable. Exports are way below the pace needed, and now we also have to factor in – sooner or later – the slowdown in ethanol consumption and ethanol corn crush,” Kluis told customers in a daily note.
Kluis added, “Watch weather forecasts for the Delta, where many states have an April 15 planting deadline on their corn acres. For many farmers with a high actual production history (APH), prevent plant may be a good alternative.”
On Monday, the CME Group’s farm markets lean on the wheat market to climb higher.
At the close, May corn futures ended 3¼¢ lower at $3.27½; July corn futures closed 3½¢ lower at $3.33.
May soybean futures finished 1¼¢ higher at $8.55½; July soybean futures closed 1¾¢ higher at $8.61½.
May wheat futures settled 6½¢ higher at $5.55¾.
May soy meal futures finished $6.20 per short ton lower at $297.00. May soy oil futures closed 0.40¢ higher at 26.83¢ per pound.
In the outside markets, the NYMEX crude oil market is $1.83 per barrel lower, the U.S. dollar is higher, and the Dow Jones Industrials are 1,209 points higher.
Al Kluis, Kluis Advisors, says traders see this week’s USDA report as bringing negative corn news.
“The USDA report coming this Thursday is likely to show less corn used for ethanol but more corn used for feed. The trade is building in some negative expectations ahead of the report,” Kluis told customers in a daily note.
Kluis added, “Will the delayed meeting of OPEC (it will be later this week) result in an agreement to cut back on global oil production? That, plus the large rally in the stock markets around the world, would help stabilize the commodity markets.”
