This mobile trading platform is easy to use and navigate, trades are easy to execute and close and traders have the option to trade a variety of financial instruments.
Traders using the Plus 500 mobile app have access to a wide range of financial instruments in which they can trade at a competitive cost with low spreads and zero commissions charged on trades.
The mobile app makes opening and closing positions easy and the execution speed is above average when compared to that of other brokers.
Traders have various options when it comes to charting along with an array of technical indicators that can be added to charts along with a variety of time frames in which charts can be viewed.
The Naga Trader app is a very minimalistic and amazingly simple app to use. It allows traders to trade most asset classes and it provides ample opportunity for both social trading and robo-advisor capabilities.
This caters specifically for traders who want to elevate their trading by making use of automatic trading strategies.
Traders can trade stocks, CFDs, ETFs, Cryptocurrency, Indices, and commodities with an array of forex pairs. The average spread on the EUR/USD currency pair is 1.9 pips and traders have access to leverage up to 1:30.
Signing up for an account using the mobile app is a quick and straight forward procedure. The app features a user-friendly and minimalistic interface that has quick options to switch between the live quotes of several financial instruments.
The mobile app allows traders to set up price alerts, access the forum and reports and in addition has training videos which can be accessed from the menu.
Open positions can easily be monitored by selecting the graph tab at the bottom of the screen and the app also features robo-trading and a built in economic calendar.
There is a great variety of forex trading applications available and it comes down to which one will better cater for the needs of the trader. Each trading app has distinctive features and provides traders with access to a variety of offerings.
When choosing a mobile app through which to trade forex, it is imperative that traders narrow down the list, download the app, open a demo account, and test out the features hands-on in a risk free trading environment.
This article is sponsored by SA Shares , a portal for JSE-listed shares.
