11 reasons why forex trading is exploding in Africa, and why it matters
months, with the emergence and spread of Covid-19 on a global scale, the Forex
Market has seen a surge in new African traders joining the trading environment.
uncertainty pertaining to employment and security of income, strict lockdown
measures confining people to their homes, and more.
to not only occupy their time, but to provide an additional, and/or
alternative, income in such trying times.
Why is Forex Trading exploding in Africa?
As more traders join the Forex Market, it is important
to look at why this may be, what exactly it is about the Forex Market that is
drawing in more traders on a daily basis.
There are quite a few financial markets, and while each accounts for its
own traders, the Forex Market is still the largest, with trading transactions
to the value of over $5 trillion occurring on a daily basis.
to constantly be exchanged to conduct foreign business, amidst various other
Due to the vast amount of transactions that occur, the Forex Market is
highly liquid and due to this, transactions can be executed at high speeds,
resulting in the lowering of transaction costs.
Should the Forex Market have been less liquid, the opposite would apply.
that have been greatly impacted by the virus, Africa is not excluded from this
currencies such as the US Dollar.
But with a slow and phased reopening of various economies, and
businesses being able to open their doors once more, a lot of currencies are
growing in strength against the major global currencies.
The Forex Market is one of the easiest to access through a Forex broker,
markets are always open, as soon as one closes, there are a few others that are
seated in front of their desktop computers for the greater part of the day,
trades can easily be executed from anywhere, at any time, by making use of
With various lockdown and quarantine procedures in place, a lot more
a lot of traders with the opportunity to explore, learn and apply new trading
There is no given time during which African traders can execute trades,
as long as it is done between when the trading day of markets open or close,
longer than the trading day.
For traders who work remotely, or those on the move, trading can be done
at any time, which leaves a lot of possibilities open.
the broker that they choose.
and African traders can open an account with a broker from as little as $0, it
Regardless of the trader's level of knowledge, skill and experience,
their trading plan and the outlining of finances, limitations, time
does not require substantial capital, and leverage is a useful tool
trading without a substantial amount of capital.
the trading account balance of the trader, providing traders with the chance at
through which they are authorized and regulated.
the risks associated with using leverage to trade financial instruments.
Brokers offer leverage of between 1:1 and even up to 1:2000. Brokers who
are regulated and authorized by the FCA, for instance, can only offer traders
with leverage of 1:30 when trading Forex major pairs.
orders placed in opposite directions in which a price is moving, in an attempt
occurring, but a lot of traders have started investing in safe haven assets.
movements are not as severe or volatile.
started trading Forex, and it correlates with previously mentioned reasons.
It does not cost a fortune, although traders need to compensate for fees
and possible losses that may exceed their initial capital.
other educational sources, anyone can learn how to trade Forex.
their trades from a variety of devices such as desktop computers, tablets,
approach the Forex Market are endless. There are numerous brokers, trading
platforms, currencies to trade and strategies to use when trading Forex.
No two traders are the same, and whether traders qualify in the
differences as different strategies work for different traders.
explosion in trading specifically where Africa is concerned, varying from
reason for the sudden influx, and these are but a few reasons.
reflects on a global scale, and in addition to this, with influxes in the Forex
changes in price movements of currencies.
This article was submitted by SA Shares.
