For small and midsize businesses, those fees are more likely to have significant impacts. For example, American Express was recently forced to refund $1.6 million to customers in the wake of a probe into its forex department for international payments. The probe revealed that the department would attract customers with low currency conversion rates, only to secretly raise those rates once they signed up.
Without a clearly defined currency management strategy , any business is open to errors and oversights. It isn’t a big enough job for one person, so someone has to carve time from his or her core job to manage it. Given the sensitive nature of transferring funds, senior financial leaders such as CFOs, controllers, or VPs of finance are usually left in charge, and it’s not a task that maximizes their time or skill sets.
If your company exports or imports anything, or owns assets abroad, it needs a strategy to mitigate forex transaction risks. Even if “business abroad” merely means cross-border wires , they can be subject to numerous explicit and implicit fees, as well as handling by several intermediaries. A clear strategy will allow you to plan, especially if you keep these tips in mind when structuring it:
When the market is neutral, it’s easy to develop a policy that’s easier to navigate. However, in the next few weeks or months, conditions will change, and a calm market strategy won’t be enough to account for fluctuations. Your strategy should protect your business from unforeseen, unavoidable international events, such as natural disasters or tumultuous governments.
Dealing with multiple currencies means managing numerous currency risks, which makes it even more critical to ensure that discipline is the driving factor of your strategy. When your decisions aren’t solely reactive, you can quickly and adeptly respond to rate changes.
Meeting regulatory requirements and proving that you’ve met them is essential for any business. Every international transaction is governed by many laws, regulations, and reporting requirements from different countries. When building your strategy, it’s important to research and understand all legalities for every country that will be involved.
Small and midsize businesses may not have the in-house capabilities to do this effectively, so consider hiring a specialist or implementing the right tools. Several payment-processing platforms can automatically handle these and other functions for you, and most come with global currency management capabilities.
Whether it’s regulatory or not, efficient cash flow should be the theme of your payment-processing system. Any invoicing and payment system you use should automatically include the correct fees and regional identifiers, lock in forex rates, and track fund transfers for each individual transaction.
An automated mass payments solution can also help you manage large volumes of currencies, complicated payment processes, and tight schedules across the globe. Once implemented, and guided by your strategy, the solution can automate back-office tasks, help you efficiently mitigate transaction risks, and streamline your global AP process.
By automating and streamlining payment processes for companies that operate globally, fintech has made it easier to centralize operations. For example, you can leverage storage and in-memory software to create a single nerve center for your global payables process, with management and analysis all in one place.
Any data you receive at any point across the globe will be collected in-memory, making it immediately accessible. This creates a foundation that allows your company to view all of its assets and subsidiaries in real time, and to gain valuable insight into what factors might impact your foreign currency management strategy in both the short and long term.
Your company doesn’t have to be as large as Nu Skin or operate as widely as Unilever to feel the effects of foreign currency mismanagement. The regulations and costs of foreign transactions and the factors that make it volatile can be successfully managed only if you have a clear and disciplined strategy for tackling them. No matter the size of your business, investing in the right processes and solutions is an essential first step.
