There are times when seasonals are a valuable part of the forex toolbox. This isn't one of those times.
News on the economy and coronavirus is going to overwhelm any seasonal tendencies. That said, April is generally one of the strongest months for patterns.
Here are 4 of them:
Sterling is the king of April, or at least it was until recently. In the past decade, cable has averaged a 1.97% gain in the month. It's gained in 13 of the past 15 Aprils. The one problem? The past two Aprils featured declines of 1.8% and 0.02%, respectively.
The other side of the cable trade is also in focus in April. The US dollar index tends to struggle in April. In fact, it's the worst month over the past decade with a 1.1% decline. That may be related to repatriation flows.
The ice melts in April and the loons return to the lakes. It traditionally marks a very strong month for the Canadian dollar with an average gain of 1.77% over the past decade -- the most of any month.  That coincides with a jump in oil demand and prices in April. I wouldn't bet on that part of the trend holding up this year.
Natural gas is a highly seasonal commodity and it's a very interesting one right now. It held up much better than oil in the past two months but is at long-term lows. Where it gets interesting is in the long term. US energy companies are going to go bankrupt at a breathtaking pace in the months ahead and that's going to mean much less gas production. If you look out the curve, there is a huge contango in natty. What does that mean for the front month in April? Not much but it's more valuable information than you're going to get from any of the seasonals.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
