Arbitrage represents an opportunity for low-risk profit. However, to make the most of an arbitrage trading strategy, there are various technical points that you should know. Find out more about arbitrage and how it works.
Callum Cliffe | Financial writer, London
Before talking about arbitrage in forex trading, it is important to define arbitrage in general. Simply put, arbitrage is a form of trading in which a trader seeks to profit from discrepancies in the prices of identical or related financial instruments.
These discrepancies occur when an asset – such as EUR/USD – is being differently priced by multiple financial institutions. This means that arbitrage involves buying an asset at one price from the first financial institution and then almost instantly selling it to a different institution to profit from the difference in quotes.
The speed at which transactions are carried out means that the risk for the trader can be very low. However, there is always some risk with trading, particularly if prices are moving quickly or liquidity is low.
Arbitrage trading works due to inherent inefficiencies in the financial markets. Supply and demand are the primary driving factors behind the markets, and a change in either of them can affect an asset’s price.
Arbitrage traders seek to exploit momentary glitches in the financial markets. They aim to spot the differences in price that can occur when there are discrepancies in the levels of supply and demand across exchanges. As a result, a trader could realise a quick and low-risk profit.
Traders can use an automated trading system to their advantage as part of an arbitrage trading strategy. Automated trading systems rely on algorithms to spot price discrepancies and, as a result, they enable a trader to jump on an exploit in the markets before it becomes common knowledge and the markets adjust.
There are three main types of forex arbitrage:
Covered interest arbitrage is a trading strategy in which a trader exploits the interest rate differential between two countries, while using a forward contract as a hedge to cover their exchange rate risk
We’ll give three examples of arbitrage, each explaining the previous bullet points in greater detail:
Let’s first look at an example of two-currency arbitrage. Most often, currency arbitrage involves trading the same two currencies with two different brokers in order to exploit any difference in price.
As an example of currency arbitrage, let’s suppose that two different banks – bank A and bank B – have set different rates on EUR/USD:
In this example, a trader could buy euros from bank A, which is selling at $1.6200, and then immediately sell those euros to bank A, which is buying for $1.6300. If the trader does this with an initial investment of $100,000, they could net a quick profit of $1000.
However, the trader would need to act fast after spotting this discrepancy in pricing because as soon as a few traders notice, the forces of supply and demand will cause the banks to adjust their pricings and the opportunity for arbitrage would be lost.
Covered interest arbitrage is a trading strategy in which a trader can exploit the interest rate differential between two currencies. They do this by using a forward contract to control their exposure to risk.
The forward contract enables the trader to lock in an exchange rate in the future, while at the same time buying currency at the spot price in the present.
In a covered interest arbitrage strategy for EUR/USD a trader could do the following:
Convert the dollars into euros at the spot price and invest in the eurozone. At the same time, organise a forward contract with a fixed exchange rate on EUR/USD to hedge against any shifts in the exchange rate over the investment period
To explain covered interest arbitrage in greater deal, here is a step by step example of how it works:
To protect against exchange rate risk, take out a forward contract that locks in a 1.2845 exchange rate on EUR/USD for a year’s time
Invest €2,327,385 at 4.8% interest rate for a year to get €111,714 in profit from interest payments, giving you a total of €2,439,099
Change this back into dollars at the exchange rate guaranteed by your forward contract (1.2845) for $3,133,022. This is more than the $3,102,000 you would have had if you had invested in the US at 3.4% over the year instead
Triangular arbitrage involves a forex trader exchanging three currency pairs – at three different banks – with the hope of realising a profit through differences in the various prices quoted.
This strategy won’t work if all the currencies are exchanged at the same bank because one bank would ensure that they were running an efficient pricing system in order to cut out any opportunities for arbitrage.
As an example, let’s take three of the most commonly traded forex pairs in the market: EUR/USD , EUR/GBP and GBP/USD The exchange rate for EUR/USD at ‘bank A’ is currently 1.1500, for EUR/GBP at ‘bank B’ it is 1.2000 and for GBP/USD at ‘bank C’, the exchange rate is 1.2500.
The graphic below highlights the process that a trader would go through in order to carry out a triangular arbitrage forex trade.
In this scenario, a trader could do the following:
This is an extreme example, designed to clearly highlight the process through which traders exploit exchange rate differentials by deploying a triangular arbitrage strategy. It also does not account for any transaction costs that might be incurred by transferring currencies three times as part of a triangular arbitrage strategy.
Popular forex arbitrage trading strategies include currency arbitrage, covered interest arbitrage and triangular arbitrage
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Discover the range of markets and learn how they work - with IG Academy's online course.
