A close under .7019 will form a potentially bearish closing price reversal top.
The Australian Dollar surged earlier in the session on the back of a steep rise in the U.S. NASDAQ Composite. However, prices reversed suddenly as the currency neared its July 19, 2019 main top at .7082.
It may have been position-squaring ahead of the U.S. Federal Reserve’s monetary policy announcement on Wednesday , or it could have been renewed concerns over Australia’s tense relationship with China that triggered the dramatic reversal to the downside.
At 20:04 GMT, the AUD/USD is trading .6963, down 0.0056 or -0.80%.
Long positions are 9.38% lower than yesterday and 10.19% lower from last week. Short positions are 0.39% lower than yesterday and 9.24% higher from last week.
The data could mean that traders are getting progressively shorter, or if you’re a contrarian, you could take it as a bullish sign.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. The uptrend was reaffirmed early in the session when buyers took out yesterday’s high.
A trade through .6402 will change the main trend to down. This is highly unlikely, but there is room for a near-term pullback into 50% to 61.8% territory.
The minor trend is also up. A trade through .6506 will change the minor trend to down. This will shift momentum to the downside.
The minor range is .6506 to .7043. Its 50% level at .6774 is the first downside target.
The main range is .6402 to .7043. Its 50% level at .6722 is the second downside target.
A close under .7019 will form a potentially bearish closing price reversal top. If confirmed on Wednesday, it could trigger the start of a 2 to 3 day correction with potential downside targets coming in at .6774 and .6722.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
