The direction of the AUD/USD the rest of the session on Friday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the pivot at .6877.
The Australian Dollar is trading nearly flat as investors shrugged off a stronger than expected retail sales report, choosing instead to focus on risk sentiment.
Australian retail sales surged a record 16.3% in May as a wide scale easing in coronavirus lockdowns allowed entire sectors to re-open, enabling a recovery from an historic plunge in April.
At 02:54 GMT, the AUD/USD is trading .6856, up 0.0003 or +0.04%.
The stunningly strong bounce suggests consumer spending will be not nearly as week as first feared in the June quarter, offering hope the economy can recover quickly from its first recession in three decades, Reuters wrote.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart, but the momentum is trending lower. Furthermore, the formation of a secondary lower top could be a sign that the selling pressure is increasing.
The main trend will change to down on a move through .6777, while a move through .7065 will signal a resumption of the uptrend.
The minor trend is down. This is controlling the downside momentum.
The minor range is .6777 to .6977. Its 50% level or pivot at .6877 is new resistance.
The short-term range is .7065 to .6777. Its retracement zone at .6921 to .6955 is even stronger resistance.
The main range is .6402 to .7082. Its retracement zone at .6733 to .6655 is the primary downside target. Counter-trend buyers could show up on a retest of this zone.
Based on the early price action and the current price at .6856, the direction of the AUD/USD the rest of the session on Friday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the pivot at .6877.
A sustained move under .6877 will indicate the presence of sellers. If this move creates enough downside momentum over the near-term then look for a possible break into the main bottom at .6777 and the main 50% level at .6733.
Overcoming .6877 will signal the presence of buyers. This could create a labored rally with possible targets lined up at .6921, .6955 and .6977.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
