Best Forex Brokers – Updated 2020 List!
Best Forex Brokers – Updated 2020 List!
You will need the best forex broker if you are planning to trade in Forex. Executing trading with the most trusted Forex brokers is critical for success in global currency markets. As an investor or currency trader, the user might have specific needs related to the platform, research instruments they offer. There are several brokers for forex who help people in forex trading stocks, and commodities.
For the past two decades, the Forex trading sector had grown immensely; had offered opportunities for trading. With this, more people came to the accessibility of the financial markets where they need to choose suitable markets to trade. A trader should consider the advantages and disadvantages of the currency market before they proceed with forex trading. In case if you are a new trader, you should have a good knowledge of it before committing to it. The user should do their research and look out for an expert’s knowledge to understand the forex markets and then proceed with trading.
Global trading Market: Forex (foreign exchange) market is one of the largest financial markets around the world. It is growing day by day; around $5 trillion on an average are traded daily, starting with new to experienced traders participating in the forex market. Hence we can say that the forex market is traded globally.
All type of traders: Forex trading is not only for experts but also used by all types of users. Getting started in Forex is very easy and does not cost more money, especially when it is compared with options or stocks to trade; it is adopted by several users worldwide. Besides, without having the largest startup capital, this trading can be accessed by all individuals.
Liquidity: The forex market is huge, and it always associates itself with the word “liquidity” which implies that even though large volumes are traded at any time, the trader must not wait to buy or sell. There is always someone to trade on the Forex market. It can also be automated. Even though there are several trading pairs, one of the major ones is USD / EUR.
Decentralized: When we take into consideration the size of the market and its uses, we can say that not a single institution or a trader can control the market prices for any period. Further, the market adjusts itself accordingly. The market is fully decentralized, and there are no third parties. The user can trade directly with another trader in the market, and retail forex broker associates facilitate it. The market is directly influenced by the economy, not by the company or a person.
Several trading opportunities: Even though the market is going upwards or downwards, the user can trade by using their trading strategies. The user can find an opportunity to trade in any market and can trade with their selected currency pairs. Besides, few users can achieve profit even though there are high volatile periods, and it carries more risk.
Trade round the clock: The forex market is open 24 hours with 5 days a week, and it never sleeps. The trader can trade whenever they choose to. The trading begins with the Sydney session, and it draws to close with the New York session, which means it works round the clock. Even though the trader is active or passive, they can trade at their convenience; it can be morning, afternoon, or night.
No Commissions: Concerning forex trading, there are no trade commissions or low charges for a large volume of trades. It does not charge clearing or exchange fees. Retail brokers earn their income by way of spreads (which is the difference between the bid and ask price). Reputed brokers offer highly competitive spreads by reducing the trading costs and maximizing the trader’s profits.
Accessing Leverage: Several Forex brokers offer leverage, which means the user borrows money from the broker to trade in addition to the deposited money. This is considered as one of the most powerful tools and attractive features to trade on it.
Demo Account: Several Forex brokers offer a free demo account to the users to practice and to test their trade strategies. Practicing with a demo account is like real trade, but the users can trade with virtual funds. The demo account is mainly used by the traders to improve their trading skills by using real market conditions without using real funds.
How to identify and choose the Best Forex Broker?
Identifying and choosing the best Forex broker needs careful planning; you should have goals in investing in foreign currencies. We have given below a few tips to identify and how to choose the best broker –
Every Forex broker that offers Forex Investments has its pros and cons. One of the most important factors to consider is the regulation and the security level offered by these broker companies and the transaction fees. Security features differ from broker to broker. Few brokers have strict security measures like two-step authentication, which keeps the trader’s account safe from hackers.
Several Forex brokers are regulated. Further, U.S brokers are regulated by Commodity futures trading commission(CFTC) and the National futures association (NFA). The trader should keep in mind that not every broker is regulated, and they should research well about the unregulated brokers before proceeding with them.
The user should keep in mind that the forex brokers and their trading platforms have different minimum deposits and transaction fees. Before involving with a platform, the user should devise a budget for the Investments and several other factors to get involved with a broker.
Besides, choosing the best investment style can determine which broker can be best suited for you. Given below, we have compiled a list of top forex brokers for your understanding.
IG Forex broker has been one of the best brokers for Forex and CFD; they are in the trading business for more than 40 years. The company provides access to worldwide exhaustive product lines, including stock indices, Forex, stock sectors, individual equity, cryptocurrencies, commodities, bonds and offers interest rates on various professional-grade mobile and web-based trading platforms.
IG’s minimum initial deposit requirement is 250 pounds or currency equivalent. Standard accounts have a $1 minimum trade amount and a maximum of 300 dollars per option limit. Besides, it does not have a minimum deposit for using bank transfers; yet it has a $300 minimum deposit for using Paypal and credit or debit cards.
IG uses its size to offer users competitive pricing, irrespective of the product traded by the user. For US markets they charge $10 per trade, for European markets they charge 10 pounds or 10 euros per trade or 0.1 %. Also, they charge an inactivity fee of $12 for a month after inactivity of 2 years.
IG is one of the best forex brokers and biggest CFD brokers, which is based on trading revenue, having the largest number of active financial spread across betting accounts in the UK, and offers significant operations in South Africa. CFD and retail Forex traders who wanted access to the forex market will find IG an incredible choice. It is recommended that users have any experience level and looking for the best platform that is easy to use. A bit of investment advice, even though there are several forex brokers offering tutorials and demo account, it is highly recommended that the users do their research on the internet and read about the various experiences offered by the experts to avoid risk of losing money.
