Should I Use a Screener?
A forex screener basically scans the entire forex market to find trades based on a set of parameters. A default set of parameters for trade setups generally comes with the screener software that you can customize depending on the screener you choose to use.
A good forex screener will let you monitor the market for multiple currency pairs simultaneously. By default, most screeners display all current information on each currency pair, including its current exchange rate, the daily high and low for that pair, the daily change, and a buy or sell recommendation according to the software’s screening algorithm.
Additionally, a good screener should include a comprehensive set of technical indicators to select from, as well as the option to customize the parameters of those indicators for trade setup alerts.
The best forex screeners for your needs depend in large on your level of trading experience. For example, an inexperienced trader would not have the background to customize their indicators like a more seasoned trader, so they may not require the ability to do that in the forex screener they select.  Benzinga’s picks for the top forex screeners in 5 key categories appear below.
TradingView is a research platform for traders that offers screeners free forex, stock and cryptocurrency markets. TradingView’s online forex screener lets you scan all major and minor currency pairs at a glance. You can also customize the screener with dozens of different filters and indicators to program alerts according to your trading plan and preferences.
TradingView offers the most comprehensive forex screener for traders at all experience levels. A widget of its forex screener is also available for the cTrader trading platform. Several online brokers, such as FOREX.com , Oanda and FXCM link directly to the TradingView website and allow you to trade directly from the TradingView research platform.
Screenshot of TradingView.com’s forex screener. Source: TradingView.com
2. Best for MetaTrader 4 Users: Multi Forex Scanner
You can download this custom indicator from the MQL5.com website . It was written by Carlos Oliveira for the popular MetaTrader 4 (MT4) trading platform by MetaQuotes, which is available for download free of charge.
The indicator displays a list of currency pairs, cryptocurrencies and spot metals in the forex platforms ’ Market Watch window. The main advantage of this free custom indicator consists of having the ability to automatically execute transactions based on trading opportunities the screener identifies using an expert advisor (EA) written for MT4 that codifies your trading plan.
Multi Forex Scanner for the MetaTrader 4 platform. Source: MQL5.com
