When the very first smartphone was invented in 1992 by IBM, it must have been quite difficult to imagine the advent of technology and the advanced level that would be reached within 28-years.
It may have taken the world nearly three decades to get to the advanced level where it is now with regards to technology pertaining to mobile devices, but some significantly large steps have been taken.
Today, mobile devices are an essential part of daily life and few people are able to survive without their mobile device for long as we have become quite dependent on them.
They have also paved the way to a new level of trading in finances that could not have been foreseen in 1992. Mobile trading opened a substantial amount of doors for software developers, Forex brokers, and traders of Forex alike.
Every week, get a digest of Top African News and Articles from The African Exponent.
With the advent of technology came the ability to trade while away from the trading terminal, with trades being executed from anywhere in the world, whether traders were stationary, or constantly on the move.
When looking at statistics, approximately 52% of website traffic is derived from mobile devices and this has resulted in substantial adaptions from every sector around the world to accommodate more mobile users more adequately.
More Forex brokers are being forced to either invest in the option of providing mobile trading applications, or risk getting left behind as traders flock to brokers that offer the option of trading from the palm of their hands.
Mobile trading has an array of advantages, some of which includes, but is not limited to:
•	Keeping traders in touch with their trading accounts and trading activity.
•	Allowing traders to stay informed and prepared.
•	Access to bonuses provided by brokers to traders who use mobile solutions, and many more.
Which are the best mobile apps for trading Forex?
The mobile trading app allows for the trading of various financial instruments, keeps traders up to date and informed of various development in their trading and in the news, and offers similar advanced features as the desktop and web versions.
IQ Option is known for its advanced mobile trading capabilities which offer traders with trading intelligence along with several other features that perfectly mimic the vibrancy of the trading room.
eToro is known for its social trading capabilities and the mobile app offers no less than the best in this regard with advanced ability to copy the trades of numerous successful traders.
In using Bloomberg’s mobile app, traders are able to execute trades after having used the app to do extensive research or reading news which may affect their trading, or when identifying trends that may be beneficial and offer ideal trading opportunities.
When using this advanced trading app, traders are provided with access to sophisticated and advanced analysis tools along with charts, and over 160 intelligent indicators and drawing tools essential for technical analysis. The app allows traders to stream quotes on Forex, indices, metals, and commodities.
One advantage of this application is that it allows traders the ability to see exactly when a Forex Market opens in a specific time zone or country.
The app can be downloaded for use either on Android or iOS mobile devise.
This app is free to download on Android mobile devices and hosts an array of features such as the opening of various accounts, live quotes with Depth of Market, trading history, advanced tools for technical analysis, and much more.
This proprietary mobile trading app can be used either on Android or iOS devices and allows traders access to trade stocks, Forex, futures, and CFDs at any time from any location around the world.
With technology continuously and consistently changing and improving, it is imperative for Forex brokers to invest in the provision of mobile trading as a lot of traders rely on such avenues which allow them to trade remotely from anywhere at any given time.
There are numerous apps that provide traders with access to Forex trading and the Forex Market , and these are but a few of the best and most popular, and traders will need to find an app that caters to their own needs, preferences, and trading objectives.
Publish your own articles by creating your blog on The African Exponent. More info
