$0.005 per share minimum $1 and maximum 0.5% of trade value; volume discount available
Interactive Brokers (IBKR) offers a world-class brokerage service to U.S.-based clients that encompasses 134 markets in 33 countries. Forex traders will appreciate that IBKR lets you trade 23 different currencies against each other. The company’s U.S. regulators include the CFTC, NFA and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The broker is also regulated in the U.K., Australia and Canada.
The broker also features very competitive trading costs, such as a $0 commission on U.S. stocks and ETFs. To start trading with IBKR, you will need a $10,000 minimum deposit that gets applied to commissions for 8 months, with a $2,000 minimum thereafter. IBKR also charges maintenance and inactivity fees, so it’s best for advanced and active professionals who have plenty of funds to trade.
The broker’s own well-rated trading platforms include its Desktop Trader WorkStation (TWS), Client Portal and mobile app. They allow you to trade multiple asset classes, including options and offer sophisticated market analysis functionality.
Interactive Brokers’ TWS trading platform. Source: Interactive Brokers.
Making a forex transaction involves the simultaneous purchase of 1 currency and the sale of another at a given rate of exchange known as an exchange rate. Forex traders make a profit by buying 1 currency pair low and selling it high, or by selling 1 currency pair high and buying it low. Making profits is the primary goal of forex trading. Many people like to trade forex because they can get started so easily by opening up a trading account and downloading a free trading platform like MetaTrader.
The forex market has a unique set of pros and cons for traders that include those listed below.
High leverage: Because an exchange of currencies at the going market rate has no net value, the use of leverage in forex trading allows you to control quite large positions with a rather small margin deposit. This increases your risk but also lets you benefit from relatively small exchange rate movements.
High liquidity: The forex market is the largest financial market in the world, so it has a very high level of liquidity in the major currency pairs. This allows for sizable transactions to be executed in those pairs at virtually any time during normal trading hours.
Around-the-clock trading: The forex market remains open for trading at all times from 5 p.m. EST on Sunday until 5 p.m. EST on Friday, even during U.S. holidays. This provides constant trading opportunities during market hours.
Fewer asset choices: While many stocks can be traded, only a relatively few currency pairs are available to forex traders, and not all of them are highly liquid like the majors.
Volatility: Strong movements can occur in the forex market as new information is digested by participants. This volatility can result in unexpected gains or losses for traders.
Unregulated OTC market: The Interbank forex market trades over the counter (OTC) and so it remains largely unregulated. Still, some regulations are put in place in many jurisdictions to protect retail traders making transactions through online brokers.
Your online forex broker will serve as your primary trading partner, so choose one carefully. You will definitely want to make sure any broker you select is well-regulated, has a good reputation with clients and meets all of your trading requirements. You can easily try out the services of the forex brokers you like by opening up demo accounts with them to see if any brokers feel right for you. Demo accounts also let you practice trading, and that can save you money if you learn to avoid common trading errors.
Looking for stocks that are about to breakout for gains of 10%, 15%, even 20% potentially or more? The only problem is finding these stocks takes hours per day. Fortunately, Benzinga's Breakout Opportunity Newsletter that could potentially break out each and every month. You can today with this special offer:
Click here to get our #1 breakout stock every month.
Finding the right financial advisor that fits your needs doesn't have to be hard. SmartAsset's free tool matches you with fiduciary financial advisors in your area in 5 minutes. Each advisor has been vetted by SmartAsset and is legally bound to act in your best interests. If you're ready to be matched with local advisors that will help you achieve your financial goals, get started now .
