BSE Smallcap index hits 6-month high; Weizmann Forex zooms 107% in 7 days
BGR Energy soared 16 per cent to Rs 40.75 after the company announced order win worth of Rs 224 crore.
Last Updated at January 9, 2020 13:43 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of small-cap companies were in focus on Thursday with S&P BSE Smallcap index hitting a 6-month high on the back of strong rally in agri inputs, fertilizers, education, metals, textiles and real estate stocks.
Titagarh Wagons, Shakti Pumps, Aptech, BGR Energy, Jindal Saw, Tejas Networks, RSWM, Deepak Fertilisers & Petrochemicals, Anant Raj Industries, Mishra Dhatu Nigam (Midhani), Gujarat State Fertilisers & Chemicals, Puravankara and NIIT have rallied by up to 20 per cent on the BSE. At 01:05 pm, the S&P BSE Smallcap index, the top gainer among broader indices, was up 1.6 per ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
