MarketPulse is a forex, commodities, and global indices analysis news site providing timely and accurate information on major economic trends, technical analysis, and worldwide events that impact different asset classes and investors.
This article is for general information purposes only. It is not investment advice or a solution to buy or sell securities.
Opinions are the authors — not necessarily OANDA’s, its officers or directors. OANDA’s Terms of Use and Privacy Policy apply. Leveraged trading is high risk and not suitable for all. Losses can exceed investments.
© 1996 - 2016 OANDA Corporation. All rights reserved. All Registered Trade Marks used on this Website, whether marked as Trade Marks or not marked, are declared to belong to their respective owner(s). OANDA Corporation owns Trade Marks of all its "FX" products.
370 King Street West 2nd Floor, Box 60 Toronto, 
OANDA Corporation is a registered Futures Commission Merchant and Retail Foreign Exchange Dealer with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and is a member of the National Futures Association . No: 0325821. Please refer to the NFA's FOREX INVESTOR ALERT where appropriate.
OANDA (Canada) Corporation ULC accounts are available to anyone with a Canadian bank account. OANDA (Canada) Corporation ULC is regulated by the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC), which includes IIROC's online advisor check database ( IIROC AdvisorReport ), and customer accounts are protected by the Canadian Investor Protection Fund within specified limits. A brochure describing the nature and limits of coverage is available upon request or at www.cipf.ca .
OANDA Europe Limited is a company registered in England number 7110087 limited by shares with its registered office at Tower 42, Floor 9a, 25 Old Broad St, London EC2N 1HQ and is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority , No: 542574.
OANDA Asia Pacific Pte Ltd (Co. Reg. No 200704926K) holds a Capital Markets Services Licence issued by the Monetary Authority of Singapore and is also licenced by the International Enterprise Singapore.
OANDA Australia Pty Ltd is regulated by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission ASIC (ABN 26 152 088 349, AFSL No. 412981) and provides and is the issuer of the products and/or services on this website. It's important for you to consider the current Financial Service Guide (FSG) , Product Disclosure Statement ('PDS') , Account Terms and any other relevant OANDA documents before making any financial investment decisions. These documents can be found here .
OANDA Japan Co., Ltd. First Type I Financial Instruments Business Director of the Kanto Local Financial Bureau (Kin-sho) No. 2137 Institute Financial Futures Association subscriber number 1571.
