Trading is risky. Your capital is at risk.
With FXTM stock trading you’ll also get free access to real time price data, and real time trade execution to help you make the most of your investments.
Why trade stocks with FXTM?
Buy and sell hundreds of major company stocks, with no trading commission or account management fees
Get assistance with your stock trading account around the clock, Monday to Friday
With a minimum deposit of just $500, choose to trade as little as one share or build an entire stocks portfolio
Invest in hundreds of US stocks, including some of the best known household names
All trademarks displayed on FXTM’s website are the trademarks of their respective owners, and constitute neither an endorsement nor a recommendation of those organizations. In addition, such use of trademarks or links to the web sites of third-party organizations is not intended to imply, directly or indirectly, that those organizations endorse or have any affiliation with FXTM.
Once verified, open your commission-free FXTM stocks account in a few minutes. As soon as your account is created you’ll have access to real time pricing on over 300 of the most commonly traded US stocks.
If there’s a US stock you want to trade that you don’t see listed, just give us a call and we’ll add it for you!
Stock trading with FXTM gives you the opportunity to buy, sell and hold popular US stocks – with no commission and account management charges.
How does stock trading work?
Stock trading is the buying and selling of a company’s shares with an aim to make a profit. When you buy shares in a company you own a small part of that company, and the value of your investment will change as the company’s share price moves up and down.
Investors use information including company news and announcements, company results (earnings), and technical analysis to make decisions about which stocks to buy and when.
Once you’ve bought your investment you can log in anytime to monitor it and check the latest news and announcements. There’s no limit on how long you can hold your investment, and when you’re ready to sell simply login and click to sell instantly. You could then use that cash to make a new investment or return it to your bank account.
Combine the power of MetaTrader with FXTM’s award-winning services.
We offer the industry’s most powerful trading platform MetaTrader 5 on your PC, Mac, mobile or tablet to suit you, allowing you to trade stocks from anywhere in the world.
This platform is equipped with all the tools you need to get the most out of your stock trading experience, including a range of technical indicators, interactive charts and an exemplary security system.
Trading is risky. Your capital is at risk.
Please note that our stock trading service is not available to residents of Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Central African Republic, Cuba, Congo, Guyana, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Somalia, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Vanuatu, Venezuela and Yemen and some other regions. Please contact our support team for more information.
The visual representation of the stock trading service used in the promotional material of this product are just examples and do not reflect the look or functionality of FXTM’s real stock trading service.
