and how does it work?
Trading is risky. Your capital is at risk.
CFDs are popular financial instruments which are key components of a trader’s portfolio. However – and particularly for traders at the start of their trading journey – it can be difficult to fully understand the advantages and disadvantages of investing in and trading CFDs.
For that reason, FXTM has created a guide to CFDs, answering the big question, ‘what is CFD trading?’ In this guide, we will be taking a balanced look at trading CFDs, giving you access to all the information you need to decide whether it’s the right instrument for you, and how these assets can be tailored to suit your trading style.
The term CFD stands for contract for difference which are a type of trading instrument and a popular gateway for investors to enter the financial markets. They are offered by brokers alongside other types of common assets like forex, commodities and spot metals. Unlike these however, CFDs are a form of derivative trading. This means that they derive their value from the movement of an underlying asset.
When traders choose to trade CFDs, it means that they are engaging in a contract between themselves and the broker. The trader – the “buyer” – and the broker – the “seller” – agree to a contract which speculates on the price of an asset in market conditions. While the trader speculates on financial instruments, it is important to note the main distinction between CFDs and traditional trading:
CFDs allow traders to trade price movements without actually owning the underlying asset. By not owning the underlying asset, CFD traders can avoid some of the disadvantages and costs of traditional trading.
So, how exactly does this contract work? Essentially, profit and loss are calculated by looking at the difference in price between when a contract is entered and when it is exited. That means that the broker – or ‘seller’ – who enters into this contract with you will pay you the difference between the price at the beginning of the contract and the price at the end. If a loss is made, the trader – “buyer” – will pay the broker the difference.
The key calculation to work out your profit or loss is: the difference between the price at which you enter and the price when you exit, multiplied by your number of CFD units. CFDs are available across a huge range of markets. With FXTM for example, CFD traders can choose from CFDs on shares, indices, commodities and cryptocurrencies, and enjoy several advantages over trading these instruments directly. To find out more about the individual CFDs on offer, you can visit FXTM’s detailed contract specifications page .
Find out about the advantages of trading CFDs in our video:
Trading is risky. Your capital is at risk.
Trading CFDs with an experienced broker is a simple process. Once you have opened your trading account, you’re just a few steps away from selecting your instrument and starting to trade. Don’t forget – you can always try out your CFD trading preferences using a Demo account to ensure you’re comfortable with your chosen instrument before you enter the live markets.
Between share CFDs, cryptocurrency CFDs, index CFDs and commodity CFDs, choosing your underlying asset is an important choice. Not sure which to choose? Check out our beginner’s guides to forex and forex trading for a broad overview of the underlying assets you can choose from. Alternatively, discover which markets are hitting the headlines by following the latest market analysis reports and videos .
You can discover the particular specifics of each CFD by visiting a broker’s contract specifications page, where you can find out about instrument leverage specifics and competitive trading costs.
Once you’ve decided what kind of CFD you’re going to trade, it’s time to decide on your position. Put simply, if you think the price of your asset will go up you can open a long position (buy), or if you think the price will fall you could open a short position (sell).
To decide what kind of trade you want to open, you can use a broad range of indicators, charts and signals. To find out more about popular strategies and indicators, you can visit our forex strategies guide.
Next, choose the size of the position you want to open. The value of a unit of the CFD you’re trading will depend upon the instrument, so you should calculate the number of CFD units that can work best with your trading strategy.
CFDs can be traded on the industry’s most popular trading platforms, including MetaTrader 4 (MT4) and MetaTrader 5 (MT5). These platforms are equipped with all the tools you need to trade CFDs, including over 50 technical indicators and charting tools. You can also trade on mobile apps, allowing you to keep track of your profits and losses in real-time, on-the-go.
Having established the key, basic calculation of working out your profit or loss with CFDs (the difference between the price at which you enter and the price which you exit, multiplied by your number of CFD units), let’s take a look at how this calculation can be applied in practise.
How Does CFD Trading Work?
If you think the price of General Electric stock will increase over time, you could buy CFDs on #GE with FXTM. The opening price is 31.36 and you buy one lot at this price, meaning that the notional value of your contract is $3,136.
To work out how your position has fared, you simply need to calculate the difference between the opening price and the closing price. If the closing price of General Electric stock is 31.94, for example, the difference is 0.58. This difference, multiplied by your number of CFD units, is how you calculate the profit or loss made on that particular trade.
Margin and leverage are important considerations when trading CFDs. One of the key advantages of CFD trading is that you only need to deposit a small percentage of the total trade value. FXTM CFD traders only require a margin starting from 3 percent. FXTM’s margin calculator is a useful tool to help you to manage your margin on the FXTM Standard account.
Leverage is higher with CFDs than with traditional trading. Traders use a smaller portion of their own capital when opening a position, which allows for potentially bigger returns. That said, it’s important to remember that leverage carries the same potential to increase losses as it does to boost profits. Traders can use the FXTM leverage and margin calculator to work out the specific requirements for every type of FXTM account.
Enter the markets with FXTM to trade CFDs on a range of instruments. With FXTM you can trade:
