Global stocks around the world plunged Thursday along with U.S. markets, which could lead investors in commodity-tied currencies to safer assets such as the Swiss franc and the yen and spur more sharp shifts in foreign-exchange markets.
In currency hedging, companies enter into derivative contracts in an effort to remove their exposure to volatility in exchange rates. Swings in foreign-exchange markets can either hurt or help a company’s earnings.
“For many companies, the visibility of future earnings has gotten very foggy,” said Helen Kane,  chief executive of consulting firm Hedge Trackers.
By choosing not to hedge, a company can be more susceptible to unpredictable financial performance.
Companies usually set cash-flow hedging strategies at the start of the year and generally don’t need to update them. But the disruption in forecasts may require companies to rethink their strategies. Companies that already have a hedging program will likely count on it to smooth the coronavirus’ impact on their liquidity and cash flows. Those that don’t hedge could consider doing so to protect against losses, said Sharon Virag,  retired finance executive who served as CFO of biotechnology company NeoGenomics Inc. and accounting chief for Aetna Inc.
The Morning Ledger provides daily news and insights on corporate finance from the CFO Journal team.
CFOs need to think through their companies’ exposure and challenge assumptions about their overseas liquidity plans and currency-hedging projections, Ms. Virag said.
Global Net Lease Inc. hedges foreign currency exchange risk as a way to protect against unfavorable movement in the euro or pound against the U.S. dollar, Christopher J. Masterson,  CFO of the New York-based real-estate investment trust, said Thursday.
“The strategy is employed by layering in cash flow hedging instruments, primarily FX forwards, over a forward-looking three-year period in order to fix exchange rates for the conversion of pound and euro net cash flows into U.S. dollars,” Mr. Masterson said.
FM Global, a Johnston, R.I.-based mutual insurance company, is monitoring the pandemic before changing its currency hedging strategy. If the company starts to see a spike in the number of insurance claims related to communicable diseases in a jurisdiction where it didn’t have premiums in the same currencies, for instance, the company is more likely to pursue hedging, Kevin Ingram,  FM Global’s finance chief, said Wednesday.
Trivago NV, a German metasearch platform majority-owned by Expedia Group, is also waiting to determine whether the impact of the virus on its business warrants a currency play. The company would begin to hedge if revenue, excluding marketing expenses, from the Americas were to rise to the level of Europe, its primary market, Matthias Tillmann,  Trivago’s CFO, said Thursday.
