Economy 2 hours ago (Jun 30, 2020 16:10)
© Reuters. Bank of England Deputy Governor Jon Cunliffe speaks at the 'Future Forum 2017' event in St George's Hall, Liverpool
LONDON (Reuters) - Bank of England Deputy Governor Jon Cunliffe said on Tuesday that a number of companies are likely to enter financial distress as the coronavirus pandemic continues.
"I would imagine that we are going to see a number of credit events and defaults in this crisis," Cunliffe said in an online discussion hosted by the Institute of International Finance.
Cunliffe also said the BoE should not be dogmatic over the possibility of negative interest rates and policymakers had yet to come to a conclusion about their viability in Britain.
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read and understood Investing.com UK's comment guidlines and agree to the terms described.
