Conagra Brands Inc. shares rose 6% in premarket trade Tuesday, after the owner of food brands, including Birds Eye and Healthy Choice, topped earnings estimates for its fiscal fourth quarter thanks to strong demand for at-home dining during the pandemic. Chicago-based Conagra posted net income of $201.4 million, or 41 cents a share, in the quarter to May 31, up from $126.5 million, or 26 cents a share, in the year-earlier period. Adjusted per-share earnings came to 75 cents, ahead of the 66 cents FactSet consensus. Sales rose to $3.289 billion from $2.613 billion, also ahead of the FactSet consensus of $3.153 billion.
“Our business clearly benefited from increased at-home eating in the fourth quarter, as the elevated retail demand outweighed the reduced foodservice demand,” Chief Executive Sean Connolly said in a statement. “In retail, many consumers tried our modernized products for the first time and then returned for more. While we are optimistic about the long-term implications of recent consumer behavior shifts, given COVID-19 uncertainties, we are only providing guidance for the first quarter of fiscal 2021. We intend to provide an update on our fiscal 2021 outlook next quarter.” The company is expecting first-quarter adjusted EPS of 54 cents to 59 cents, compared with a FactSet consensus of 54 cents. Shares have fallen 1.6% in the year through Monday, while the S&P 500 has fallen 6%.
Market Pulse Stories are Rapid-fire, short news bursts on stocks and markets as they move. Visit MarketWatch.com for more information on this news.
The Tell: Wearing a mask to halt the spread of coronavirus has a big impact on U.S. economic growth—and Goldman has done the math
Risk Disclaimer - By using this web site you agree to its terms and conditions.
All materials, including but not limited to articles, directories, photos, lists, etc., on this website are the sole property of ForexTV or the respective copyright holders and are intended for informational/educational purposes using hypothetical and sometimes anecdotal illustrations. The unauthorized use of any and all materials is prohibited and restricted by copyright law. Any use of materials on this site must be approved in advance by ForexTV.
Before deciding to invest in foreign exchange you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. The possibility exists that you could sustain a loss of some or all of your initial investment and therefore you should not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. You should be aware of all the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial advisor if you have any doubts. Forex (or FX or off-exchange foreign currency futures and options) trading involves substantial risk of loss and is not suitable for every investor. The value of currencies may fluctuate and investors may lose all or more than their original investments. Risks also include, but are not limited to, the potential for changing political and/or economic conditions that may substantially affect the price and/or liquidity of a currency. The impact of seasonal and geopolitical events is already factored into market prices. The leveraged nature of FX trading means that any market movement will have an equally proportional effect on your deposited funds and such may work against you as well as for you. Past results are no indication of future performance. Information contained this web site is intended for informational purposes only and was obtained from sources believed to be reliable. Information is in no way guaranteed. No guarantee of any kind is implied or possible where projections of future conditions are attempted.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Accept Cookie Policy
