Forex (foreign exchange) trading is often advertised as a wealth creation strategy that can offer traders a lavish lifestyle and a high degree of financial independence. For example, forex trading advertisements on social media often show pictures of traders driving fast cars, living in luxury apartments, wearing expensive watches, and trading foreign exchange from the beach. Sounds good, doesn’t it?
But is this kind of lifestyle realistic? Could forex be the key to quitting your 9-to-5 job and living a life of luxury?
Plenty of people do make good money from forex. If you’re a disciplined trader and stick to a proven forex strategy, it’s possible to make big money trading the currency market. And you can literally trade from anywhere, meaning that forex can offer a lot of freedom.
However, before you rush out and open a forex account, it’s important to understand that trading the forex markets successfully is not an easy task. It can take years to perfect a trading strategy and many traders end up losing a lot of money while they’re learning the basics of forex trading.
Indeed, the percentage of forex traders that end up losing money is actually quite concerning. While it’s hard to get an exact figure on the proportion of traders that blow up their accounts, according to some sources, up to 95% of traders end up losing money.
Certainly, disclaimers made by some of the UK’s top trading platforms don’t make for good reading. According to IG Index, 81% of retail investors using its platform lose money, while CMC Markets says 80% of investors lose money on its platform. Looking at these figures, forex trading perhaps isn’t all it’s cracked up to be.
In my view, investing in shares is a much easier way to generate wealth . That’s because stock markets tend to rise over time meaning the longer you invest for, the less chance you have of losing money, and the more chance you have of increasing your wealth.
Stock market investing is often seen as a ‘get-rich slowly’ strategy, because stocks tend to return around 7-10% per year on average over the long run. However, if you’re looking for faster gains, there are a number of strategies that you can pursue which can result in much higher returns.
Take small-cap investing, which focuses on smaller, faster-growing companies for example. With small-caps, it’s not unheard of to make five, 10 or even 20 times your money on a particular stock in the space of just a few years.
Just look at Fevertree Drinks – which makes those fancy mixer drinks you see in every second bar these days. A £2,000 investment there four years ago would now be worth nearly £30,000. Another good example is Boohoo Group, the online fashion retailer. A £2,000 investment there four years ago would now be worth nearly £16,000.
Of course, these are just a few examples. Not every small-cap stock performs like this. And the share prices of smaller companies can also fall significantly too.
But the takeaway here is that if you’re looking to increase your wealth, the stock market does offer an excellent alternative to forex trading. If you’re interested in learning more about making money from stocks, you’ve come to the right place.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Edward Sheldon owns shares in Boohoo Group. The Motley Fool UK has recommended boohoo group. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
See all posts by Edward Sheldon, CFA
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
