Pound Sterling Slide vs Euro, Dollar Continues on Coronavirus Fears and BoE Further Easing
The total number of US cases moved above 2.0 million. Total U.S. coronavirus deaths are now over 113,000, by far the most in the world. Ashish Jha, head of Harvard’s Global Health Institute, stated that the figure could exceed 200,000 at some point in September.
Jha added that the United States was the only major country to reopen without getting its case growth to a controlled level - defined as a rate of people testing positive for the coronavirus remaining at 5% or lower for at least 14 days.
There are also fears that recent protests over racial injustice will increase the risk of new infections seeing a fresh spike.
Although the media coverage has been limited, the number of new global cases has increased to a fresh record high of close to 137,000 on Thursday.
There has been a sharp increase in cases in Russia and Brazil with notable increases also seen in India, Pakistan and Mexico.
Given its importance for the global economy, the US will be under very close scrutiny in the short term.
Nevertheless, increased cases elsewhere will still have an important impact in undermining the global economic outlook and damaging trade.
Given the economic damage, there would be strong opposition to any fresh moves to impose lockdowns.
In an interview on Thursday, Treasury Secretary Mnuchin stated that shutting down the economy a second time is not a realistic course of action give that the harm to the economy and spill-over effects is too great.
“I think we’ve learned that if you shut down the economy, you’re going to create more damage. ”And not just economic damage, but there are other areas and we’ve talked about this: medical problems and everything else that get put on hold.”
President Trump would also strongly oppose fresh measures, especially in Republican states.
The Administration cannot directly influence policies at the state level, but individual governors will also be very reluctant to impose fresh restrictions.
To some extent, states will have to tolerate increased infection rates and take the strain through increased hospital admissions.
If health services start to be over-whelmed, however, some form of control would be unavoidable.
There will also be a danger that insufficient measures will be taken in the short term, increasing the risk of more drastic action later.
There have also been hopes that coronavirus would tend to fade in warm weather, but the latest developments will put this optimism in jeopardy.
Deutsche Bank comments adds; “An additional concern from this recent spike, or in some cases a lack of plateau, is what it might mean for the seasonality argument. These are some of the warmest states in the US, and if the virus is continuing to spread there, it means the northern hemisphere has to perhaps tread more carefully this summer.”
If fears over the US outlook increases further, overall confidence in the economy and US dollar will decline.
The US economy will, however, also secure safe-haven demand if there is a dip in risk appetite, as illustrated by the sharp moves on Thursday. The dollar index has recovered from 3-month lows seen earlier this week with the Euro to Dollar (EUR/USD) exchange rate at 1.1300 from 3-month highs around 1.1420.
If the US economy is hit again, there will also be increased fears over the global outlook.
There would also be fears over erratic policy moves by the US Administration, particularly in the area of trade relations with China.
Marshall Gittler added; “I think the likelihood of a deadly “second wave” in the US is distinctly negative for the dollar in the near term. That’s because a) if the US has to go into lockdown again when the rest of the industrial world has already emerged, the growth differential is going to be simply insane, and b) a second wave would no doubt elicit a second wave of loosening from the Fed, including heaven-knows-what. A researcher at the St. Louis Fed has already argued that negative interest rates will be necessary to achieve a V-shaped recovery.”
Marc-André Fongern, head of research at MAF Global Forex, commented; “With global macro weakness unlikely to subside that quickly, a V-shaped recovery being rather unrealistic, risky assets being fairly expensive, and COVID-19 infections possibly rising during the summer vacation period, I see sufficient reasons for a temporary USD appreciation.”
Some analysts are more optimistic on risk:
Charalambos Pissouros, senior market analyst at JFD Group commented; “As long as governments around the globe continue to ease their lockdown measures, and as long as economic data continues to point that the deep economic wounds due to the coronavirus are behind us, we would treat the retreat as a corrective phase of the broader recovery. We still see decent chances for equities and other risk-linked assets to rebound again, and for safe havens to come under renewed selling interest.”
The main feature is likely to be a sustained increase in volatility across major currencies as sentiment swings sharply over the next few weeks. The lack of liquidity and low trading volumes will also increase the risk of erratic moves during the Summer period.
There is also likely to be a sustained increase in GBP volatility over the next few weeks. If confidence in the global economy slides, the Pound Sterling outlook will be more vulnerable to selling pressure.
Equity futures have rallied on Friday and the US dollar exchange rates have lost ground again with sharp gains for the Australian and Canadian currencies. Sterling has also secured a limited recovery.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Tim is an economist and has been involved in financial markets for over 20 years as an analyst. He...
