Crude oil futures settle that $36.81. Price getting closer to its 100 day moving average
The price of crude oil futures settle today at $36.81. That is up $1.37 or $3.87.
The high price for the day reached $36.89. The low extended to $35.28.
Looking at the daily chart above, the price traded at the highest level since March 11, and moved closer to the bottom of a price gap between March 6 and March 9 (weekend that Saudi Arabia increase production in its oil war with Russia). The gap runs from $41.88 to $37.64. The $37.64 level is the next upside target. Just above that is the falling 100 day moving average currently at $38.02. The price has not closed above the 100 day moving average since January 22.
The price of crude oil is rallying in response to the reopening of the global economy from the coronavirus. That should increase crude oil demand
On the supply side, after the close the private inventory data for the current week will be released by the EIA. On Wednesday the Department of Energy will release there estimates for the current week's crude oil inventories. The expectations are for a 3.3 million barrel build. Recall from last week the inventories rose by a surprising 7.9 million barrels. Supply continues to be a problem.
Despite the supply concerns, the price continues to move higher but will have to contend with key moving average resistance on further upside momentum.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
