These days, there’s no shortage of ways to make money through the financial markets. Yet some strategies are more effective than others. With some, the odds of making money are stacked in your favour, while with others, the odds are against you. With that in mind, I’m going to compare cryptocurrency trading to forex trading and stock market investing. What’s the easiest way to make money?
There’s no doubt it’s possible to make big money on cryptocurrencies. Just look at the people who bought bitcoin (BTC) a decade ago when it was trading under $1. Many of these people are now multimillionaires.
Yet making money from crypto isn’t as easy as many people make it out to be. Digital currencies can be notoriously volatile, which means you can also lose a lot of money. For example, if you’d bought $1,000 worth of BTC in late 2017 during the cryptocurrency bubble , your investment would have been worth around $200 a year later.
Personally, I don’t think crypto trading is worth the risk. Not only are cryptocurrencies impossible to value, but regulators are cracking down on them. Overall, I see this form of trading as highly speculative.
Forex trading isn’t much better, in my opinion. Like crypto trading, there’s money to be made and some experts are able to trade forex for a living. However, currencies are also highly volatile (just look at the pound recently) and statistics show most people that try their hand at forex trading actually lose money. For example, according to both forex.com and forextime.com, 70% of retail investors on their platforms lose money. One reason for this is that when trading forex, you’re up against both the currency markets and the forex provider.
So, while social media shows pictures of forex traders living glamorous lifestyles, in reality, forex trading is nothing like this. Forget the Porsche and the Rolex collection, most forex traders are losing money.
In my view, investing in stocks is a far easier way to make money than playing the crypto or forex markets. With stocks, all you really need to do to make money is find companies that are:
If you invest in these types of companies and hold on to them for a number of years while they get bigger, there’s a good chance you’ll make money.
Take online fashion retailer Boohoo Group, for example. Five years ago, Boohoo’s net profit was around £8.4m and its share price was around 45p. Today however, Boohoo’s share price stands at 282p, as its net profit last year came in at nearly £40m. As its profit has risen, so has its share price. So, just by holding the stock for five years, you could have turned £1,000 into more than £6,000.
Of course, not every stock performs like this. And it’s important to realise you can lose money on stocks too. However, given the choice between being glued to a screen trading crypto or forex, or investing in companies as they grow their profits, the choice is a no brainer, in my opinion.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Edward Sheldon owns shares in Boohoo Group. The Motley Fool UK has recommended boohoo group. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
See all posts by Edward Sheldon, CFA
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
