foreign currency exposures in institutional investment portfolios. And while
much of the impact of the pandemic is difficult to gauge, one thing is sure:
its effects are unlikely to be short-lived.
Disregarding emerging market currencies ignores typically 25% of a portfolio’s foreign exchange exposure, and the contribution to risk is even higher
crash of 1987 or the 2008-2009 Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Indeed, the spike
in volatility seen in March 2020 was last seen during the GFC, and in 1987
daily returns of the Dow Jones index going back more than 100 years.
Indeed, over the last 30 years, the volatility seen in March 2020 was
matched only during the GFC and on Black Monday itself, when the Dow Jones fell
by more than 20% in one day. Prior to that, similar levels of volatility had not
been seen since the Great Depression.
it is difficult to gauge its medium to long-term macroeconomic effects.
A recent paper by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco [1] looks at the macroeconomic impact of the last 12 major pandemics, starting with
the Black Death of 1347. It concludes that the consequences last long, not months, but
the majority of the population below age 60, so this time could be different.
is known about the current pandemic at this stage. Data from China has been met
with scepticism in the West, and fatality rates vastly differ among different
What does this mean for the foreign exchange market?
The US dollar typically benefits in periods of global recessions, so over
the medium term, it is likely to remain well supported. But Exhibit 2 suggests
that US dollar bulls need to be cautious. The current bull market started
during the GFC – more than 10 years ago –and is the longest in history, the
previous bull markets lasting about seven years (from 1980 to 1987, and from
currency exposures as the US dollar surged in Q1 2020. Positive cash flow
flows when the dollar bull market ends. Exhibit 3 illustrates that between 2000
Indeed, when experiencing this significant negative cash flow, some US
after locking in significant losses on short foreign currency forwards.
flow over the long run. There should be two objectives: outperforming passive
negative cash flows in periods of dollar weakness, so the emphasis on
generating positive cash flow (beating a zero benchmark) is important.
costly, especially considering the higher interest rates in those countries. However,
Furthermore, the coronavirus may hit EM countries especially hard. For
many, the crisis compounds the blows of domestic outbreaks, declining global
demand and fewer capital inflows. Importantly, disregarding EM currencies ignores
typically 25% of a portfolio’s foreign exchange exposure, and the contribution
to risk is even higher than that.
Consequences of Pandemics” by Òscar Jordà et al. at https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/wp2020-09.pdf
expressed here are those of the author as of the date of publication, are based
on available information, and are subject to change without notice. Individual
possible that investors will not recover their initial outlay. Past performance
is no guarantee for future returns.
to a higher-than-average volatility due to a high degree of concentration,
greater uncertainty because less information is available, there is less
Some emerging markets offer less security than the majority of international developed markets. For this reason, services for portfolio transactions, liquidation and conservation on behalf of funds invested in emerging markets may carry greater risk.
