Currency Exchange Rate News: Coronavirus Prompts Emergency Fed Rate Cut, Oil Prices Tank
Trade in the Pound (GBP) was mixed yesterday, with Sterling sentiment in flux amid growing criticism over the UK government’s approach to containing the coronavirus.
Unlike its European neighbours, the UK is still yet to announce any social distancing measures, with a number of experts questioning the effectiveness of the government’s ‘herd-immunity’ approach.
Looking ahead, the publication of the UK’s latest jobs report could offer the Pound modest support today if wage growth rose as expected in January, although any upside is likely to prove limited amid the ongoing focus on the coronavirus.
The Euro (EUR) was left mostly directionless on Monday as EU governments introduced even more drastic measures in an attempt to stem the spread of the coronavirus.
This includes the EU’s plan to ban all non-essential travel throughout Europe’s Schengen free-travel zone, which is expected to be implemented later today.
Coming up, it’s likely the Euro could take a hit this morning as the latest ZEW surveys are expected to report a sharp deterioration in economic sentiment in Germany and the wider Eurozone this month in light of the coronavirus crisis.
The US Dollar (USD) initially tumbled at the start of this week’s session, retreating in response to the Federal Reserve slashing interest rates to near zero in the bank’s second emergency rate cut in as many weeks.
However, the ‘Greenback’ didn’t remain in the doldrums for long as another market sell-off saw investors flock back to the safe-haven currency.
Expect to see the US Dollar maintain its upward trajectory today unless there’s a surprise drop in this afternoon’s US retail sales figures.
The Canadian Dollar (CAD) came under pressure on Monday as WTI crude prices slipped over 10% after a number of airlines announced they would be ground the majority of their fleets, further fuelling concerns of a slowdown in global oil demand.
The Australian Dollar (AUD) fell victim to some risk-off trade overnight on Monday, with investors steering clear of the ‘Aussie’ as coronavirus fears weighed on market sentiment.
The New Zealand Dollar (NZD) was offered some support overnight after New Zealand’s government announced it would be launching a stimulus package equivalent to 4% of GDP in order to offset the impact of the coronavirus.
