Did Goldman sell Uber shares at the lows?  It looks that way....
It was reported today that Goldman Sachs sold some 10M shares of Uber in the "4th quarter". More specifically, it was reported that Goldman, which reported earnings Wednesday, sold at the earliest opportunity. The post- IPO lockup period for share sales was on November 6th.
Looking at the daily chart, Uber's IPO price was set at $45. It started to trade on May 10th. On that day the high reached $45. The low was $41.06.  The all time high price reached $47.08 on June 28th.
The low for the stock reached $25.58 on November 6th - the date that the lockup ended.  Did Goldman sell at the low?  It seems that way, but you never know if they sold some over-the-counter ETF -like shares to some other party.  However, the physical shares were indeed likely sold at or near the lows.
Should we all cry for Goldman?
No, they were an early investor in Uber pre-IPO, so their price was not likely up at $45 but something much lower. However, with the price today at $35, they likely left some money on the table.   The price today at $35 is near the middle of the $45 IPO price and the low at $25.58.
The real losers were the investors who got in at the IPO price of $45. I count 9 days since the IPO where the price traded above $45.  The shares highest price was at $47.08.  The price has been below the high price today at $35.14 since August 21, 2019.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
