Dollar weakens as stocks gain; Norway's crown jumps
"Markets are quietly risk-on overnight", said Adam Cole, chief currency strategist at RBC Capital Markets.
The gradual easing of lockdowns has fuelled optimism across global markets despite fresh trade tensions between the United States and China.
LONDON: The dollar NSE -0.23 % edged down on Monday as optimism about the re-opening of economies hit by the coronavirus pandemic boosted risk appetite, lifting commodity currencies such as the Norwegian krone.
The gradual easing of lockdowns has fuelled optimism across global markets despite fresh trade tensions between the United States and China.
"Markets are quietly risk-on overnight", said Adam Cole, chief currency strategist at RBC Capital Markets.
The dollar index drifted 0.05 per cent lower at 100.28. The Norwegian krone was lifted by rising oil prices, supported by output cuts and signs of a recovery in demand.
Against the dollar, the krone jumped 0.6 per cent to 10.1860. Other commodity currencies also rose and gold gained more than 1 per cent to its highest in over seven years.
Gains in stocks also lifted other major currencies such as the Australian dollar, which was up half a percent at $0.6446 and the euro gained 0.05 per cent to $1.0827.
Against the yen, the U.S. currency lost about 0.2 per cent at 107.20 per dollar after data showed Japan slipped into recession for the first time since 2015. Policymakers are bracing for the nation's worst postwar slump.
Investors were also looking to Purchasing Managers' Index surveys due across major economies later this week for the next insight into the outlook.
The pound stood at 89.35 pence per euro and was under pressure at $1.2107 after a week-long deadlock over a post-Brexit trade deal with the European Union and increasing focus on the possibility of negative rates.
The Bank of England's chief economist, Andy Haldane, did not rule such a move, in an interview with the Telegraph newspaper published on Saturday.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
