The Department of Special Investigation has summoned singer Suteewan "Baitoey" Thaveesin and her husband Pattanapon “DJ Man” Kunjara Na Ayudhya to clarify their connection to the owner of Forex-3D. (Post Today photo)
The Department of Special Investigation has summoned singer Suteewan "Baitoey" Thaveesin and her husband Pattanapon “DJ Man” Kunjara Na Ayudhya to clarify their connection to the owner of online broker Forex-3D, who is accused of a billion-baht fraud.
The couple will meet with the DSI as state witnesses, a source close to the investigation said on Thursday.
Investigators want to know how the couple came to know Apiruk Kothi, the founder and chief executive officer of Forex-3D, which lured a large number of people into investing in foreign exchange trading.
The couple will be questioned about the details of their businesses and revenue.
“If the two fail to clarify, officers may further investigate them for potential violations of the tax and anti-money laundering laws,” the source said, adding that more witnesses, including actress Sawika “Pinky” Chaidet and her mother ,are also to be questioned.
There are now over 6,000 documented victims of the scheme. Most claimed they had not received returns that were promised by the company.
The damages are estimated to be roughly 1.2 billion baht in total, according to Piyasiri Wattanavarangkul, the director of the DSI’s Bureau of Illegal Financial Business Crime.
He questioned the legality of Forex-3D following his talk with the Bank of Thailand. The Finance Ministry had never granted companies other than banks and securities firms permission to conduct online trading with foreign currencies, he said.
His bureau is also investigating an alleged Ponzi scam run by Wantanee Tippaveth, aka "Mae Manee", 28, who is currently being detained.
Recruiters who introduced new investors to the Mae Manee scam have the right to claim that they are victims due to their own losses, but if they are found to have recruited at least 10 people, they could also face legal action, said Mr Piyasiri.
As of Wednesday, the number of Mae Manee victims exceeded 4,200, with total losses estimated at 979 million baht.
