On Tuesday, the 30-share pack Sensex ended 181.40 points lower at 41,461.26, while its NSE counterpart Nifty was down 48.30 points at 12,214.50.
The Asian and US markets too will remain shut for the day.
NEW DELHI: Domestic equity, commodity, currency and bond market will be shut for trading on Wednesday on account of Christmas. Markets will resume trading on Thursday, December 26, 2019.
On Tuesday, the 30-share pack Sensex ended 181.40 points lower at 41,461.26, while its NSE counterpart Nifty was down 48.30 points at 12,214.50. The broader market indices closed flat with Nifty Smallcap up 0.01 per cent at 5,679 while Nifty Midcap down 0.15 per cent at 16,852.
The Asian and US markets too will remain shut for the day.
The three major US stock indices ended mixed in a shortened Christmas Eve session on Tuesday.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 36.08 points, or 0.13 per cent, to close at 28,515.45. The S&P 500 fell 0.63 points, or 0.02 per cent, to 3,223.38. While, the Nasdaq Composite Index was up 7.24 points, or 0.08 per cent, to 8,952.88, Xinhua reported.
Five of the 11 primary S&P 500 sectors declined at the close, with industrials down 0.34 per cent, leading the laggards. Real estate rose 0.17 per cent, the best-performing group.
The pan-European STOXX 600 index added 0.14 per cent as it touched an all-time high and the domestically focused mid-cap index in Britain rose 0.63 per cent to hit a new high.
France's CAC 40 and Spain's IBEX 35 both closed little changed, while German, Italian and Swiss country indexes were closed for the day.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
