Financial markets will resume trading on Tuesday, October 29.
The currency, debt and equity markets are closed on Monday on account of Diwali Balipratipada.
Financial markets will resume trading on Tuesday, October 29.
Sensex opened up 339 points, or 0.8 per cent, then pared some of its gains to close at 39,250, up 192 points, or 0.5 per cent, in the special hourlong Diwali trading session on Sunday. The Nifty gained 44 points, or 0.4 per cent, to close at 11,628.
While a revival in corporate earnings is expected to take some time, monetary easing, along with the spurt in policy interventions over the past few months, will hold the key to sentiment in the new year, said market participants. That trend is expected to continue.
Considered an auspicious occasion, traders following the lunar financial year opened accounts for the new year with a 60-minute trading session. A large number of brokers, traders and their family members were present at the customary muhurat trading function held at the BSE’s iconic Phiroze Jeejeebhoy Towers.
The broader NSE index ended 0.01 per cent higher at 11,582.60 on Friday, while the benchmark BSE closed up 0.1 per cent at 39,058.06. For the week, both NSE and BSE closed over half a percent lower.
Meanwhile, Asian markets hit a three-month high as risk assets got a fillip from hopes of a US-China trade deal as soon as next month while the dollar marked time as focus shifts to a US rate decision.
In early Asian trades, MSCI 's broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan added 0.3 per cent for its third straight day of gains to 518.29, the highest since late July.
(With inputs from ET Bureau, Reuters & PTI)
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
