The euro weakened 0.3 per cent to $1.0805, close to last week's level of $1.0778.
Emerging market currencies were also whacked lower.
The euro dropped back towards $1.08 on Monday and the Australian dollar NSE -0.23 % tumbled to a new 11-year low as the rapid spread of the coronavirus outside China drove fears of a pandemic and sent investors to the safety of the US dollar.
The safe-haven Japanese yen and Swiss franc were little moved, however, underlining how the dollar has become the currency of choice for worried investors because the US economy is seen as the most sheltered should the virus damage the global economy.
Italy, South Korea and Iran posted sharp rises in infections over the weekend. South Korea now has more than 760 cases, Italy more than 150 and Iran 43 cases.
The World Health Organization is now worried about the growing number of cases that have no clear link to the epicentre of the outbreak in China.
"If you expect global growth to be lower on the back of this ... it still makes sense to bet on a stronger dollar," said Morten Lund, an analyst at Nordea, also citing the US economy's relative strength and its higher yields over other developed markets.
The euro weakened 0.3 per cent to $1.0805, close to last week's level of $1.0778 -- a nearly three-year low.
"I expect euro/dollar to move lower in the short term, not only because of the incidents in Italy but because the euro zone is much more exposed to China (than the United States)," Lund said.
The dollar index gained 0.1 per cent to 99.562, remaining close to its highs of 99.915 touched last week.
The Australian dollar, often traded as a proxy for China risk because Australian exporters depend heavily on Chinese demand, weakened 0.5 per cent to a new 11-year low of $0.6585. The New Zealand dollar dropped 0.6 per cent.
Currencies closely linked to global growth and commodity prices were also sent lower, with the Swedish crown and Canadian dollar down sharply.
The Chinese yuan fell in offshore markets. The dollar was last up 0.1 per cent at 7.0398 yuan per dollar.
Emerging market currencies were also whacked lower.
Yet risk-aversion, which saw stocks tumble and gold rise, offered little support to the yen.
After partially recovering last week's drop on Friday, it traded marginally higher at 111.42 per dollar as Asian investors discount its safety value owing to Japan's virus exposure.
"The market reaction to the coronavirus appears to be evolving, beginning to differentiate the currencies vulnerable to the virus from the rest," Barclays analysts said in a note.
The Swiss franc was unchanged against the euro at 1.0606 francs, very close to its strongest since 2015.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
