The launch was driven by clients requesting the company expand its offering to include stock indices.
OANDA, a multi-asset trading provider , has recently launched contracts for differences (CFDs) on stock indices for its operations in Japan. Finance Magnates has learned exclusively, that this move was driven by an increasing number of the company’s Japan clients asking to expand its product range to include major stock indices.
Under the new offering, which was launched on the 1st of June 2020, OANDA Japan now offers 16 stocks for trading. From this, 4 are US stock indexes, including the Nikkei Stock Index 225 and Dow 30, as well as major European, American and Asian stock indexes.
Speaking to Finance Magnates, Yoshiharu Yanagisawa, Managing Director with OANDA Japan said: “In recent months, an increasing number of clients in Japan have asked us to expand our range of products to include the world’s major stock indices as a contract for difference.
“As a result, we’re pleased to announce our clients can now trade 16 indices across America, Europe and Asia including the Nikkei 225, UK 100 and the Dow 30, all while enjoying the same robust customer service, dedication to transparency and tight spreads for which OANDA is known.”
Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
In particular, via OANDA Japan, users can trade the AUS200 – the Australian Stock Index 200, CHINA50 – China A Stock Index 50, US500 – US S&P Stock Index 500 and the UK100 – British Stock Index 100, among others.
“We’re very pleased to introduce these new instruments to Japan,” Kurt vom Scheidt , OANDA’s Chief Operating Officer also told Finance Magnates. “The firm remains committed to offering a comprehensive range of asset classes that will enable clients to diversify their portfolios to mitigate risk and provide opportunities for additional returns in a variety of macro-economic climates.”
The launch of CFD stock indices in Japan follows on from the company making the MetaTrader 5 platform available to clients within the country in March of this year. As Finance Magnates reported , the multi-asset platform was first introduced to demo account holders in December.
Similar to the CFD stock indices offering, the addition of the MetaTrader 5 trading platform was introduced in response to client requests.
