Banks’s reluctance to promote this platform invited the ire of the RBI last month.
Launched on August 5, 2019, the platform has 77 of the 85 authorised dealer category 1 banks as members.
Mumbai: The Clearing Corporation of India ( CCIL ) website to buy and sell dollars for retail customers called fxretail is nearly dormant. Banks argue that the idea to bring down margins for small retail forex purchases is ill-conceived as retail customers prefer convenience over low prices for their small and rare forex purchases.
Launched on August 5, 2019, the platform has 77 of the 85 authorised dealer category 1 banks as members. However, it has just 1,000 registered customers, records 10 to 15 trades and daily volumes of Rs 10 crore against Rs 2 lakh crore daily volumes of the local forex market. “Presently, the awareness about the existence of the platform is low amongst customers. It is felt that like any other new product which does not have any precedent in the market, it will take some time to gain popularity,” CCIL said in response to questions. It expects daily volumes to increase to around $100 million in the next six months. About 60 per cent of fxretail customers are from three banks, Bank of Baroda, Union Bank of India and Oriental Bank of Commerce. None of the large domestic and foreign banks have been enthused.
Retail customers have to pay a one-time registration fee of Rs 300 while institutional customers Rs 1,000 fee. Transactions up to $50,000 a day are free, anything above is charged at 0.0004 per cent. There are 28 categories of customers including banks, foreign institutional investors, trusts, mutual funds and partnership firms which can register. But to buy and sell dollars, customers need to link their bank accounts and can set limits and margins for customers.
“Banks have to also create awareness and educate customers about this platform. They are reluctant because it means erosion of their fee income. Banks make about Rs 10,000 crore per year from margins in this business. Naturally, they are reluctant to offer them for free on a transparent platform,” said a person closely involved in the running of the website.
Banks’s reluctance to promote this platform invited the ire of the RBI last month.
In a letter to banks, RBI sought to know how they plan to promote this platform and asked them to submit a plan to get more customers into it. Large foreign and Indian banks make between 2 per cent to 5 per cent of margins in buying and selling foreign exchange.
Typically, bank rates are much higher or lower than the daily spot rate depending on whether you are buying or selling dollars. CCIL hopes that this can be corrected once customers can themselves bid or offer rates on system depending on the spot rate.
“No doubt, margins in forex are big. But can you charge a retail customer buying $1,000 similar to an institutional client buying $50,000? It is unfair for RBI to expect banks to do it. Also, retail customers look for convenience and choice of instruments which banks provide. How will CCIL give them that?” asked a foreign bank executive.
