Forex trading has become increasingly popular in recent years. It allows people to start a business relatively easily, requires minimal capital and can generate high profits.
Previously, trading balances started at a minimum of $100,000 (€90,692), but with the use of leveraged trading, one can start with as little as $100 (€90.69). In addition, because the market is open 24 hours a day, a forex business can easily be run as a side job; traders can choose a time that suits them to enter the market.
Forex also boasts ease of access in comparison with other markets. It is reasonably straightforward to open an account and start trading anywhere by choosing from the wide selection of reliable forex brokers found online. Learning materials for forex are also freely available for anyone who intends to study the market before beginning their trading career.
The flexibility offered by forex markets makes it an alluring venture to those looking for a better work-life balance.
FirewoodFX was founded five years ago by a group of experienced traders. It continues to grow, helping traders at all levels to develop their skills, whether they are a beginner or professional. Because our founders have experience in the trading world, we understand what traders need to maximise their returns.
We provide various types of accounts, features and payment options offer traders with the best options for their personal needs. Beginners can start trading with our micro account, which has an initial capital offering as low as $10 (€9.07). They can also invest their capital and learn how to trade forex at the same time by following a profitable professional trader by using our Forexcopy feature.
For professionals, our premium accounts are accompanied by competitive trading conditions such as low spreads and no commission costs. Besides favourable trading conditions, we also provide various payment options to help clients save time and money. We believe our clients should focus on trading and let us take care of the rest of.
Since the creation of bitcoin in 2009, cryptocurrencies have become increasingly popular, both with traders and as a payment tool that combines speed and reliability. As cryptocurrencies have become more widely used, we have sought to innovate and meet traders’ demands for fast and reliable payment systems.
USD Coin (USDC) is a cryptocurrency that is pegged to the US dollar. Referred to as stablecoins, cryptocurrencies that are pegged to traditional fiat currency are fast and reliable payment instruments that avoid the high price volatility of other cryptocurrencies. With fast processing times, clients can send USDC across the world at very low cost when compared with traditional wiring methods. Traders have welcomed our use of a USDC payment system.
FirewoodFX was founded five years ago by a group of experienced traders. It continues to grow, helping traders at all levels to develop their skills
Over the next few years, the global forex market is expected to stay in good shape. Technological developments are making an already-accessible industry more open and transparent. At FirewoodFX, we are keen to play our part in this trend.
We are always thinking about how we can better support our clients. In the short term, we are providing access to the MetaTrader 5 trading platform – the latest generation of software from MetaQuotes – which offers advanced functionality and superior analysis. Looking further ahead, we will continue to deliver the best service to our customers, always investing in new tools and adapting to market changes.
