The economic turmoil brought in by the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak has left a severe impact on the financial markets including stock, commodity, and others. While the global health crisis is approaching the most critical phase in Europe, the leaders and finance ministers are focusing more on how to pay for the losses that the crisis has caused and how to restart the economies of various countries once the storm has passed.
While this is the scenario across the world right now, there is stock trading that is still happening and it might give Europeans some respite once the lockdown and the global crisis come to an end. Given that millions of people are at home due to the COVID-19 outbreak, many who want to invest might consider the option of stock trading. Especially, first-time stock investors could be interested in trying out something during this global crisis. In that case, this piece of content could be really helpful.
Take a look at previous winners and how they took up the challenge by doing what they do... Show More
Take a look at previous winners and how they took up the challenge by doing what they do best: innovate. Show Less
Stock trading is the process of buying and selling stocks frequently. The stock traders intend to capitalise the short-term market events so that they can sell stocks for a profit or buy the same at a low cost. These people who trade equity securities buy and sell shares from various publicly traded companies and make profit from the stock price fluctuations. They can either do the same for themselves or work for clients.
For the best gains from stock trading, it is important that you understand the market. You should study the market and get to know all the know-hows before investing in the stock market. Once you understand the market, you need to choose an online broker, research the stock market, make a plan and stick to the same.
There are various types of stock trading and it depends on the stock that you are investing in. So, once you have zeroed in on the type of stocks you are going to invest in, you need to think of the extent of gains you can get from the same. Usually, investors overlook the fact that there is a wide range of opportunities available for them and stick to just a few common types of stock trading. Here, you will get to know an idea of the various types of stock trading that you can consider right now as there is enough time to research related to stock trading.
Given that there are many types of stock trading, various companies involved in the industry are specialised in each of these sectors, and here we have detailed some European stock trading companies. Let’s take a look at some of them below.
These days, beginners in the stock trading market have numerous options to keep an eye on the market. Here are some of the options available for beginners.
Trading 212: London-based Trading 212 democratises the financial markets with free, smart, and easy to use apps. The company lets anyone trade commodities, equities, and more, thereby making it easy for beginners to invest in the stock market. Furthermore, Trading 212 makes it lucrative by providing zero commission stock trading in the UK and Europe.
Hargreaves Lansdown: Bristol-based Hargreaves Lansdown is a leading investment platform for private investors. It helps investors save their tax, money, and time on their investments. What’s interesting is that this company enables investments in shares without any minimum value and accounts can stay from £100. This way, beginners will also be able to start investing without much confusion.
BUX: This one is from Amsterdam and is a fast-growing mobile brokerage service that is widely acclaimed for its commission-free investment app . The BUX X trading app makes it super easy and helps new users find their way. Initially, users will start with a funBUX account that is a virtual currency and this does not involve any risk. Later, they become seriousBUX users wherein the risk factor applies.
Revolut: The fintech startup Revolut recently launched a stock trading feature that lets users buy and sell shares without any commission. It is limited to users of the Revolut Metal card. This startup works with the intention to make it easier for users to invest in the stock market. On topping the Revolut account, users can buy and sell shares directly within the app.
Trading app for social trading: eToro
The term social trading combines traditional trading practices with online communities. It has some advantages for both novice and experienced traders. eToro is a social trading and multi-asset brokerage company that focuses on providing financial and copy trading services. With offices in Cyprus, Israel, the UK, the US and Australia, eToro is the world’s leading social trading network.
Alongside being a one-stop-shop for stock trading, online investing, crypto trading and much more, it has also introduced many novel social trading features. eToro has a slew of social trading features such as copy other traders, social news feed, your eToro profile and more.
FOREX or foreign exchange market is the decentralised global hub for trading of currencies. It determines the foreign exchange rates for every currency. FOREX trading includes everything such as buying, selling, and exchanging currencies at existing or determined prices. In terms of trading volume, FOREX trading is the largest one in the world.
The Trading Game is a forex trading and stock market trading game. It helps investors learn to make profits from the stocks or FOREX market. The Trading Game will provide investors with lessons related to basics of currency trading such as Top Currency Pairs. It is designed and developed by experts in stock market, social trade, equity trading and other financial products.
App to learn stock trading: INVSTR
As the stock trading market involves a lot of risks, you need to know the basics of the market before taking a plunge into the same. Without knowledge about stock trading, you will not be able to make the best calls at the right time. This makes knowledge about stock trading very important. And, INVSTR is one such startup that ensures educating people and lets them learn about stock trading.
INVSTR is an award-winning app for aspiring investors. It lets them learn about the stock market and start investing with as little as €1. Furthermore, users can compete with other investors around the world and win real cash rewards. As knowledge is power, INVSTR shares the same with users and provides them with real-time data, charts, technical analysis, automated price alerts, and earnings notifications.
Trading app for US shares: IG
The US stock market is home to many mega-cap companies, including Apple, Google and Amazon. If you are in Europe and want to trade US shares, then there is an option for the same. With the IG app, you can trade for US stocks directly via the app. IG Bank has an obligation under US tax regulation to obtain documentation from its clients that wish to trade US equities. To do so, users need to provide them with one of the various W-8 forms listed on its website or Form W-9.
Notably, IG is considered safe because it is listed on a stock exchange, discloses its financials and is overseen by top-tier regulators. It is aimed at providing the best user experience as the app works with almost all devices and the platform is quite simple and easy to use.
App to invest in funds: Interactive Investor
Interactive I nvestor is the UK’s leading flat-fee investment platform that helps you control your financial future. The Interactive Investor Trading account is the ideal choice for investors looking for flexibility and uncapped investment options. It is our most flexible investment account and has the widest choice of investment options in the market, including funds, shares, investment trusts and ETFs.
Interactive Investor provides unbiased financial information as well as the tools and trading environment needed for investors to make confident and informed investment decisions. It provides access to an extensive choice of markets, instruments and currencies within Trading, ISA and SIPP accounts.
Stay tuned to Silicon Canals for more European technology news.
