In the previous week, the reserves had increased by $1.622 billion to $481.078 billion.
The reserves had touched a life-time high of $487.23 billion in the week to March 6 after rising by $5.69 billion.
Mumbai: The country's foreign exchange reserves surged by $4.235 billion to $485.313 billion in the week to May 8 on account of rise in the foreign currency assets, according to the Reserve Bank of India.
In the previous week, the reserves had increased by $1.622 billion to $481.078 billion.
The reserves had touched a life-time high of $487.23 billion in the week to March 6 after rising by $5.69 billion. During 2019-20, the foreign exchange reserves had risen by almost $62 billion.
In the reporting week ended May 8, 2020, the foreign currency assets (FCA), a major component of the overall reserves, increased by $4.233 billion to $447.548 billion.
Expressed in dollar terms, the foreign currency assets include the effect of appreciation or depreciation of non-US units like euro, pound and yen held in the foreign exchange reserves.
The gold reserves rose by $13 million to $32.291 billion in the reporting week, the RBI data showed.
As at end-March, 2020, RBI held 653.01 tonnes of gold, with 360.71 tonnes being held overseas in safe custody with the Bank of England and the Bank for International Settlements, while the remaining gold is held domestically, according to the RBI's recent half yearly report on management of foreign exchange reserves for the period -October-March 2019-20.
In value terms (USD), the share of gold in the total foreign exchange reserves increased from about 6.14 per cent as at end-September 2019 to about 6.40 per cent as at end-March 2020, the report showed.
In the reporting week, the special drawing rights with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) declined by $3 million to $1.423 billion. The country's reserve position with the IMF also dipped by $8 million to $4.051 billion during the reporting week, the data showed.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
