There are 4 major forex exchanges located throughout various time zones: London, New York, Sydney and Tokyo. Having these international time zones helps the forex market stay open for 24 hours since trades are conducted over a network of computers as opposed to 1 physical exchange at a certain time. Even if a currency closes at a certain rate, that’s the rate at the time that particular market closed. The currency can be traded around the world even after closing hours of a particular exchange.
One thing you might have noticed about the 4 market hours above is that they overlap at certain times. Those overlapping times — when 2 markets are open simultaneously — is the most important time to make a move. That’s because the trading volume greatly increases, adding volatility — the extent and rate at which equity or currency prices change. When it comes to the forex market, that high-risk environment makes for greater payoff opportunities once you get the hang of it.
Until your mastery, it could be a bit of a risk. According to a 2014 Citibank study, 30% of retail forex traders break even or do better during these busy times. That means 70% of traders and investors are losing money. It’s a good idea to experiment with mock forex trades to see how it works before jumping into the mad money exchange.
Once you think you’re ready, here’s the most important forex market times to keep in mind:
When are the Best Times to Trade Forex?
The best time to trade in the forex market is 8 a.m. to noon EST when the New York and London exchanges are both open and active. Interestingly enough, these 2 trading centers account for more than 50% of all forex trades. That makes this overlapping 4 hours a bit of a madhouse, but that means bigger profits if you’re successful.
While it’s important to keep these overlapping times in mind when trading currency, there are some variables to keep on your radar to ensure you’re making smart moves. For example, even if you can trade U.S. currency when New York is closed, you’ll get the best liquidity for this currency during the open market hours. If you have a particular currency in mind, you should most likely trade while the local exchange is open, avoiding unknown market factors that could negatively impact valuations you’re unaware of.
News releases are another factor that shape investors’ decided value on a currency’s long-term prospect. You’ll want to keep track of retail sales figures, unemployment rates, gross domestic product and many other factors to properly plan for possible outcomes. Keep in mind that sudden news can have a major impact on the forex market while you’re asleep or at work.
Our advice is to maintain a consistent schedule for your trades. See what works best for you and pinpoint some important times. This can be when 2 markets are overlapping or when announcements are made.
