In the current low-interest-rate environment, many people are ditching savings accounts that are paying 1% interest and looking for other ways to increase their wealth. Forex trading is one strategy that some people are turning to, while others are looking to boost their savings by investing in stocks. Is one strategy more effective than the other? Let’s compare forex versus stocks.
Social media often portrays forex trading as a glamorous hobby. For example, ads on Facebook and Instagram regularly show forex traders living in expensive apartments, driving fast cars, and showing off their luxury watch collections. These ads will lead you to believe that you can achieve this lifestyle by trading forex just a few hours per day.
However, in reality, most forex traders are not living this kind of lifestyle. In fact, according to some sources, up to 95% of people that try their hand at trading forex lose money.
Disclaimers made by some of the UK’s top forex trading platforms certainly suggest that forex trading is challenging. For example, forex.com says that 70% of its clients lose money, while FXTM says that 83% of its clients lose money trading forex.
So, while there are some people that do manage to generate a second income from forex, it’s clear that most people don’t get rich from it. If you’re looking to grow your wealth, it may not be the best option.
Investing in stocks is very different to forex trading because, over the long term, stock markets tend to rise. This means that if you put together a diversified portfolio of stocks and invest for a number of years, there’s a good chance you’ll increase your wealth. Unlike forex, the odds are in your favour.
Just look at the long-term performance of the stock market. According to Investopedia, between 1926 and 2018 the S&P 500 index delivered an annual return of 10%. Meanwhile, according to the most recent Barclays Equity Gilt study, UK equities have delivered an annual return of around 5% above inflation since 1899. These figures may not sound so exciting at first, but if you were to invest £10,000 a year and you generated a 9% return on your money every year, your portfolio would be worth one million pounds in around 26 years.
There are ways to generate much higher returns from the stock market too. For example, small-cap investing, which focuses on smaller companies, is one strategy that can deliver fantastic returns over time. Had you invested £5,000 in Fevertree Drinks when it floated in late 2014, that money would now be worth nearly £90,000. Similarly, an investment of £5,000 in online fashion retailer Boohoo five years ago when it was an under-the-radar smaller company would now be worth nearly £30,000.
Of course, not every stock performs like this, but the message is clear – the stock market can help you boost your wealth. When it comes to forex trading versus stock investing, the choice is a no-brainer, in my view.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Edward Sheldon owns shares in Boohoo Group. The Motley Fool UK has recommended boohoo group. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
See all posts by Edward Sheldon, CFA
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
