Exchange rate faced significant pressure due to declining external reserves and falling crude oil prices.
The coronavirus pandemic has had a devastating impact on the global economy and businesses. In Sub-Saharan Africa, oil and other resource-intensive countries will be significantly affected given their over-dependence on these commodities for their foreign exchange earnings and revenue.
Nigeria, Africa’s leading oil producer has been badly hit by the crash in crude oil prices. Following the coronavirus outbreak, the foreign exchange inflows into the Investors and Exporters (I&E) window dropped on the back of lower foreign portfolio inflows.
According to a report from FSDH research, the foreign portfolio investors (FPI) declined from $2.04 billion in January 2020 to $57.7 million in May 2020. The CBN intervention increased from $3.9 billion in January 2020 to $2.48 billion and $2.89 billion in February and March respectively.
The attendant effect of COVID-19 on oil price constrained the CBN’s capacity to intervene further as dollar inflow dwindled in April. Following the lockdown and restriction of economic activities in April and May, total inflows to the I&E window dropped from $3.19 billion in January to $459.2 million in April and $381.2 million in May 2020.
The exchange rate faced significant pressure in the I&E window due to declining external reserves and falling crude oil prices. The Naira fell from 367/$1 in early March to 401.6/$1 in mid-April. As oil prices increased in May following OPEC cuts and higher crude oil demand, external reserve situation also improved.
In addition, The Nigerian government’s ability to secure $3.4 billion loan from IMF also contributed to the improvement in the reserves position. The reserves stood at $36.6 billion as of June 1, 2020.
In the first quarter of 2020, foreign capital inflows into Nigeria amounted to $5.85 billion. This is an increase of 54% from $3.8 billion in 2019 fourth quarter but a 31.2% decrease from $8.5 billion recorded in the first quarter of 2019.
Foreign portfolio investment continued to dominate capital inflows with a share of 73.6%. This represents a 9.9% points decrease from 83.5% in first-quarter 2019.
READ MORE: Naira strengthens against the dollar at I&E window, closes at N386 to $1
Due to the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the foreign direct investment inflow in the first quarter 2020 fell to $214 million, a 13.4% decrease relative to the $247 million recorded in the first quarter of 2019. The FDI accounted for 3.7% of total inflows, just as Lagos and FCT accounted for 87.7% and 12.1% respectively of the inflows in the first quarter of 2020.
Foreign investment inflow is expected to decline in 2020 when compared with the $24 billion inflow recorded in 2019. The highest decline in inflows will be recorded in the second quarter following the lockdown and movement restrictions.
Chike Olisah is a graduate of accountancy with over 15 years working experience in the financial service sector. He has worked in research and marketing departments of three top commercial banks. Chike is a senior member of the Nairametrics Editorial Team.
You may contact him via his email- chike.olisah@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
Naira gains against the dollar at I&E window, forex liquidity up by 242%
Forex shortages have persisted since the crash in oil prices coincided with the global lockdown.
Forex turnover at the Investor and Exporters (I&E) window recorded a huge increase on Monday, June 29, 2020, as it rose by 242%, a significant increase from what was recorded on Friday, June 26, 2020, in the foreign exchange market. This is according to data from the FMDQOTC, an exchange where forex is traded by foreign investors and exporters.
According to the data tracked by Nairametrics, forex turnover increased from $35.92 million on Friday, June 26, 2020, to $122.89 million on Monday, June 29, 2020, representing a significant increase of 242% a day on day. While the percentage increase in turnover appears huge, it still falls short of the $200 million recorded in January 2020.
Although there seems to be an improvement in liquidity in the foreign exchange market, the volatility and uncertainty of the market remain due to liquidity shortages across markets.  Liquidity remains quite tight in the foreign exchange market, with the average turnover in the I&E market significantly down to about $45.5 million in the month of May compared to $297.5 million that was recorded in January.
Several reports tracked by Nairametrics indicate that the accumulated demand for forex in the market could be between $1.5 and $5 billion as supply shortages persist. Forex shortages have persisted since the crash in oil prices coincided with the global lockdown due to COVID-19. The rise in demand and contrasting drop in supply has called for another round of devaluation, which the CBN has insisted it has plans to implement. A devaluation last occurred in March. The activities of the speculators seem to have continued unabated.
Speculators have thus patronized the parallel market, otherwise known as the black market, thereby widening the gap between it and the I&E window. The CBN maintains that the perceived demand cannot be substantiated as the lockdown induced by the COVID-19 pandemic suggest demand should be low due to travel restrictions and drop-in economic activities.
The further decline in liquidity could further fuel speculations in the black market where the exchange rate has traded at a premium of N60 over the last few weeks.
In related news, the exchange rate on the I&E window continued with its positive performance as it appreciated on Monday, closing at N386 to a dollar, compared to the N386.33 to a dollar that was reported on Friday, June 26, representing a 33 kobo gain. The opening indicative rate was N386.86 to a dollar for Monday. This represents a loss of 50 kobo when compared to the N386.36 opening rate recorded on Friday.
At the black market where forex is traded unofficially, the naira remained stable as it exchanged for N460 to a dollar on Monday. This was the same exchange rate that was recorded on Friday last week.
Nigeria continues to maintain multiple exchange rates comprising the CBN official rate, the BDC rates, and the NAFEX (I&E window). Nairametrics reported last week that the government is mulling unifying the multiple exchange rates in a bid to increase the amount available for state governments to share.
The stability of the exchange rate in the foreign exchange market can be attributed to a relative drop in demand for the dollar and improvement in forex liquidity. There still appears to be some uncertainty in the foreign exchange market as it is still not clear when the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) will resume sales of dollars to Bureau De Change Operators (BDCs).
The planned opening of the airports for flight operations by the federal government will act as a boost to the CBN’s intervention in the BDC segment of the market.
The World Bank had also applauded the CBN’s plan to unify its multiple exchange rate as that will help attract foreign investment to boost sustainable economic recovery and also support the various reforms being introduced by the government.
The American Dollar Index tracks the dollar’s strength relatively against a bouquet of other major currencies.
The U.S dollar index has been on the defensive, staying above a key support level of 97.400. This follows comments by America’s Federal Reserve Chair, Jerome Powell, who during an interview yesterday, explained that the outlook for the world’s most powerful economy is “extraordinarily uncertain” and will depend both on containing the coronavirus pandemic, and on government economic support.
The U.S dollar index, used to gauge the strength of the U.S dollar against a bouquet of major currencies, was down marginally at 0.07% to trade at 97.435, 3.39 am local time.
READ MORE: Tether expected to surpass Ethereum, based on strength of the U.S dollar
Why tracking the U.S dollar Index helps: Individuals hoping to meet foreign exchange payment obligations, and process transactions via the dollar to countries like England, France, or Japan, will need to pay fewer dollars for such transactions.
The American Dollar Index tracks the dollar’s strength relatively against a bouquet of other major currencies around the world, such as Japanese yen, Euro, British pounds sterling, Swedish krona, Canadian dollar, Swiss franc, etc.
However, Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp, in a note sent to Nairametrics explained the optimism that currency traders are having about the U.S dollar, as the U.S economy keeps printing impressive data. He said:
“But with US data printing well above expectations, US dollar bulls are not giving the plot up quickly US exceptionalism continues to resonate in the latest run of market-beating US economic data.”
Fresh optimism on the U.S. economy came from the U.S home sales data, which showed that housing market activity had rebounded in May from a previous steep fall triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Forex turnover at the Investor and Exporters (I&E) window had a rebound on Friday, June 26, 2020, as it rose by 144.68%, a significant increase from what was recorded the previous day in the foreign exchange market. This is according to data from the FMDQOTC, an exchange where forex is traded by foreign investors and exporters.
According to the data tracked by Nairametrics, forex turnover increased from $14.68 million on Thursday, June 25, 2020, to $35.92 million on Friday, June 26, 2020, representing a significant increase of 144.68%, day on day. while the percentage increase in turnover appears huge, it is still a far cry from the $200 million recorded in January 2020.
Although there seems to be an improvement in liquidity in the foreign exchange market, the volatility and uncertainty of the market remains due to liquidity shortages across markets.  Liquidity remains quite tight in the foreign exchange market, with the average turnover in the I&E market significantly down to about $45.5 million in the month of May compared to $297.5 million that was recorded in January.
Several reports tracked by Nairametrics indicate that the accumulated demand for forex in the market could be between $1.5 and $5 billion as supply shortages persist. Forex shortages have persisted since the crash in oil prices coincided with the global lockdown due to COVID-19. The rise in demand and contrasting drop in supply has called for another round of devaluation, which the CBN has insisted it has plans to implement. A devaluation last occurred in March. The activities of the speculators seem to have continued unabated.
Speculators have thus patronized the parallel market, otherwise known as the black market, thereby widening the gap between it and the I&E window. The CBN maintains that the perceived demand cannot be substantiated as the lockdown induced by the COVID-19 pandemic suggest demand should be low due to travel restrictions and drop-in economic activities.
Further decline in liquidity could further fuel speculations in the black market where the exchange rate has traded at a premium of N60 over the last few weeks.
In related news, the exchange rate on the I&E window reversed its earlier consecutive days of decline as it appreciated on Friday, closing at N386.33 to a dollar, compared to the N387.27 to a dollar that was reported on Thursday, June 25, representing a 94 kobo gain. The opening indicative rate was N386.36 to a dollar for Friday. This represents a gain of 72 kobo when compared to the N387.08 opening rate recorded on Thursday.
At the black market where forex is traded unofficially, the naira depreciated further by N3 to close at N460 to a dollar on Friday, as against the N457 to a dollar on Thursday. The rate at the start of the week was N455 to a dollar.
Nigeria continues to maintain multiple exchange rates comprising the CBN official rate, the BDC rates, and the NAFEX (I&E window). Nairametrics reported last week that the government is mulling unifying the multiple exchange rates in a bid to increase the amount available for state governments to share.
The contrasting performance indicates increasing demand pressure in the foreign exchange market especially at the retail end of the market.
The CBN Governor, Godwin Emefiele, had announced plans during an investors conference organized by Citibank, to unify the exchange rate around the NAFEX rate. Financial analysts and business leaders have expressed their support for the policy as this will ensure more transparent management of the foreign exchange market, eliminate forex arbitrage being enjoyed by currency speculators, attract more foreign investors (both foreign direct investments and foreign portfolio investments) and so on
Nairametrics had earlier reported of plans by the federal government not to source for debt from the Eurobond market as it will shift focus to domestic borrowing and from concessionary sources. The government also through the Director General, Debt Management Office, Patience Oniha, confirmed that Nigeria will not be seeking for debt relief from its commercial and bilateral creditors.
