To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video
MILWAUKEE (CBS 58) -- A foreign exchange student  in South Milwaukee is in urgent need of a new home.
Peng has been a  sophomore at South Milwaukee High School this school year.
Her American nickname  is Pearl.
She’s developed  friendships, including with the school’s other foreign exchange student, Anita  Faur, but Pearl’s host family is dealing with an emergency and they’re no  longer able to have Pearl.
“[Pearl] always is  nice to me and she’s nice to everybody,” she said.
Kerry Jude with  Greenheart Exchange, the non-profit organization that’s brought over 15 foreign  exchange students to southeast Wisconsin this year, is working to find Pearl a  new home.
She hopes it’s in  South Milwaukee so Pearl doesn’t have to change schools midyear.
“It’s amazing how  people tend to step up in cases of emergency,” Jude said. “Our altruistic side  really comes into focus.”
Hosts go through an  application process that includes background checks and a home  inspection.
Anita’s host family is  so happy they did it.
“She’s that missing  piece of the puzzle we never knew was missing,” said Shannon Eckert, who's  hosted Anita since August. “Just having another culture in the house and how  they do things and how we do things and then we just kind of mesh them  together.”
Anita says she came  here to find her version of the American dream.
Pearl too - she’s an A  student and loves being in drama club.
Jude says hosting is  immensely valuable, not just to the students but to their American family as  well.
“You really do get to  build a bond that in some cases is a lifelong bond,” she said. “I currently  work with another coordinator on my team who hosted a young lady 24 years ago.  They regularly visit her in France.”
If Pearl can’t find a  host family in South Milwaukee, Jude hopes to place her in southeast Wisconsin  so she doesn’t have to go back to Taiwan.
If you'd like to learn more about hosting, click here: hostwithgreenheart.org .
