Foreign Exchange Management in Vietnam: New Circular Takes Effect
Foreign Exchange Management in Vietnam: New Circular Takes Effect
Posted by Vietnam Briefing Written by Pritesh Samuel Reading Time: 3 minutes
The Vietnamese government’s new regulations on foreign exchange took effect on September 6. Circular No 06/2019/TT-NNN (“Circular 6”) now governs foreign exchange in foreign investment activities in the country.
As per Vietnam law, any transaction that is related to direct or indirect investment transaction by a foreign investor must be implemented by an investment capital account opened in a licensed bank which is permitted to trade and supply foreign exchange.
FDI in Vietnam means the transfer of capital for investment and participation to manage investment activities in Vietnam as defined by Circular 19/2014/TT-NHNN. This includes residents that are entities and receive direct foreign investment, non-residents involved in a business cooperation agreement (BCC), and non-residents who are foreign investors of FDI entities.
To conduct FDI activities, investors are required to open their foreign currency and Vietnamese Dong account at a licensed bank.
According to the new Circular 6, the definition of ‘foreign directed invested enterprise’ has been broadened. This now includes:
An enterprise or company with a foreign investor owning 51 percent or more of charter capital in an M&A transaction or has been established by specialized laws like insurance and law firms; and
Project enterprises or companies established by foreign investors to implement PPP project as per the investment law.
FDI enterprises are required to open a Direct Investment Capital Account (DICA). A DICA is a current account in either a foreign currency or the local Vietnamese Dong. A DICA is typically in the name of the FDI entity, the foreign investor in a business cooperation contract or private partnership contract (PPP).
As per Circular 6, if a transaction of share transfer in an FDI entity is between a non-resident and resident, the transfer of funds must be done through a DICA. The same applies to fund transfers for investment project transfers.
A DICA can be used for:
Making payment of loans including foreign; and
The new regulations also allow for further flexibility for foreign investors that want to transfer funds using a DICA. The regulations now allow them to remit funds for pre-establishment costs before obtaining the IRC. This can be done directly from the foreign country into Vietnam to contractors or third parties.
In addition, payments for capital transfer between a foreign seller and foreign purchaser as well as between a local seller and local purchaser do no need to be done via a DICA.
As per Circular 6, any of the below documents can be used to open a DICA. These are:
