Both forex traders and stock traders rely on relatively short-term trading strategies. A stock trader who’s trading with the intent to make a profit usually won’t be interested in holding onto his or her stock for years to come. Similarly, a forex trader only wants to hold currency until he or she can exchange it for a profit in his or her base currency.
Technical analysis is a type of financial analysis that uses patterns and indicators to inform a trader when he or she should buy or sell an asset. Traders who use technical analysis to inform their trading strategy typically don’t spend a lot of time reading the news or researching a company’s business plan. Instead, they may look at candlestick charts for indicators that a stock or currency will drop or rise in price soon.
Both forex traders and stock traders primarily rely on technical analysis when they decide what they should buy or sell. Because the price of a stock or currency may change on a minute-to-minute basis, it’s important that you have a reliable technical analysis program to inform your trading.
Forex trading and stock trading also have a number of key differences you need to understand. Let’s take a look at some of the largest differences.
In the world of trading, “leverage” is the power to open a position that’s larger than the capital in your account. You might hear some traders refer to using leverage as “trading on the margin.”
Leverage is usually expressed as a ratio. For example, let’s say that you have $100 in your brokerage account and your broker offers you 100:1 leverage. This means that for every $1 in your brokerage account, you can trade with the power of $100. If you have $100 in your account and 100:1 leverage, you can place a trade worth as much as $10,000.
Leverage is a crucial part of forex trading because currencies usually don’t see massive fluctuations in price. It’s normal for a currency to increase in value by just $.0003 in a whole day. This means that you’ll typically need at least $100,000 to invest to see any type of significant profit on your trades. Leverage makes it possible to profit on forex trades without having hundreds of thousands of dollars to invest. On the other hand, leverage is also risky and can quickly wipe out your deposit if you don’t make smart trades.
Leverage is rarer on the stock market. You may only be able to find 2:1 leverage with many brokers. However, stocks also move in value more dramatically, which means that you need to invest less to see a profit.
The forex market isn’t centered around a single time zone or set of hours. Each forex market has its own hours of operation. Let’s take a look at when a few of the world’s largest stock markets are open.
New York opens at 8 a.m. EST and closes at 5 p.m. EST.
Sydney opens at 5 p.m. EST and closes at 2 a.m. EST.
Tokyo opens at 7 p.m. EST and closes at 4 a.m. EST.
London opens at 3 a.m. EST and closes at noon.
You can see the highest liquidity when trading hours overlap. However, the forex market is technically open 24 hours a day except on the weekends because there’s a global demand for currency that isn’t limited to a single time zone.
When most people talk about stock trading, they’re referring to trading on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), the largest exchange in the world. The NYSE is open from 9:30 a.m. EST to 4 p.m. EST Monday through Friday. The NYSE is closed during the weekends, and it’s also closed during major American holidays (like Christmas and Labor Day).
Many traders prefer the forex market thanks to its massive daily trading volume. Every day, the forex market sees about $5.1 trillion worth of trades. This makes the forex trading market the largest exchange in the world by far.
The stock market is significantly smaller than the forex market. The NYSE sees about $169 billion worth of trades each day it’s in operation. Though this number doesn’t include the daily trading value of foreign markets, the stock market still pales in comparison to the size of the forex market.
Before you decide to start stock trading, be sure you consider the pros and cons of entering the market.
Easier to get started. Almost every brokerage in the United States offers some form of trading on the NYSE. This means that you’ll have more choices when it comes to your broker and more control over which platform you use.
A massive number of stocks to trade. There are currently more than 2,000 different stocks listed on the NYSE and more than 3,000 stocks listed on the NASDAQ. This gives you plenty of options when it comes to choosing where to invest your money.
Higher volatility. As a general rule, stocks tend to be more volatile than currencies. It’s normal for a stock to rise or drop up to 5% in value each day, while a currency may rise or fall by only a fraction of a penny. This allows you to earn more of a profit without using leverage.
Pattern day trading laws. The stock market is regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which regulates who can trade and when. Under SEC rules, only traders who have a portfolio balance of $25,000 and above can place more than 3 day trades a week.
Limited hours. The major stock exchanges are only open on weekdays from 9:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. If you live outside of the United States (or on the West coast) you might have trouble finding time to trade during the most volatile parts of the day.
Forex trading also comes with a number of unique pros and cons.
Fewer trading options. Are you overwhelmed by the number of stocks available to trade? There are only a few major currency pairs so you can compare all of your options.
Lower financial bar for entry. Unlike stock trading, there’s no legally-regulated minimum balance you need to get started. When you take leverage into account, it’s possible to get started with as little as $50.
More liquidity. In order to sell a share of stock, someone else on the market needs to want to buy it. Most forex transactions are filled instantly thanks to the massive daily trading volume and near-constant demand of the currency market.
Danger of leverage. Leverage can be a powerful trading asset, and it’s almost always a necessity to trade forex. However, leverage can also quickly wipe out your initial deposit if you make a single bad trade.
Fewer platform options. Not every brokerage firm offers forex trading. This means that you may have limited options for which platform you can use.
Whether you decide to start stock trading or forex trading, you’ll want to make sure that you have a strong technical analysis background. Both forex trading and stock trading rely heavily on short-term price movements, so an up-to-the-minute charting software is an absolute must-have. Be sure to learn more about how you can get free forex charting software or the best stock trading software before you invest your money.
Looking for stocks that are about to breakout for gains of 10%, 15%, even 20% potentially or more? The only problem is finding these stocks takes hours per day. Fortunately, Benzinga's Breakout Opportunity Newsletter that could potentially break out each and every month. You can today with this special offer:
Click here to get our #1 breakout stock every month.
Finding the right financial advisor that fits your needs doesn't have to be hard. SmartAsset's free tool matches you with fiduciary financial advisors in your area in 5 minutes. Each advisor has been vetted by SmartAsset and is legally bound to act in your best interests. If you're ready to be matched with local advisors that will help you achieve your financial goals, get started now .
