Here is what you need to know on Tuesday, June 30:
The American dollar ended the day mixed against its major rivals, with the usual correlations broken amid quarter-end flows. Currencies considered safe-havens such as the Swiss Franc and the Japanese yen were the worst performers against the greenback. Commodity-linked currencies ended the day unchanged, supported by surging oil prices and the good performance of equities .
The GBP/USD pair fell to a fresh monthly low of 1.2251. Brexit talks have resumed between UK’s chief negotiator, David Frost, and EU Michel Barnier, with no real progress reported so far. The EU commission spokesman said that their main target for these upcoming weeks is “to intensify our negotiations in order to make progress in getting a deal. Our goal is to make progress and to reach a deal." Mr. Frost, on the other hand, warned the EU must not drag out Brexit talks into the autumn. Tensions weighed on the Pound .
The EUR/USD pair flirted with 1.1300, but gave up ahead of the close, ending the day little changed in the 1.1230 price zone.
The coronavirus pandemic continues to be the main market mover, as the global cases surpassed 10 million. WHO head, Dr. Tedros, said that the worst is still to come  and that it is not even close to be over. Meanwhile, in the US, the number of cases remains on the rise, and several Southern States are restricting business once again.
Gold prices spent the day consolidating, with spot ending it little changed at around$1,770.00 a troy ounce.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
