ForexLive European FX news wrap: Dollar firmer with month-end, quarter-end in focus
It is the final trading day of the month, quarter and half-year and a lot of the focus will come down to how the flows will play out ahead of the closing stages later today - with a lot of emphasis on FX to be on the London fix later in the day.
Risk sentiment continues to be more choppy in general as we see European indices and US futures fluctuate between gains and losses before holding mild gains for the most part ahead of North American trading currently.
The DAX is up by 0.5% but UK FTSE is down 0.3% while US futures are mildly higher around 0.1% after having been trading lower around 0.3% to 0.5% for most of the session.
In short, risk sentiment is still indecisive while holding some cautious tones - especially earlier in the session when the Australian state of Victoria reimposed fresh lockdowns.
Meanwhile, the dollar is keeping firmer as we navigate through the month-end and quarter-end flows with EUR/USD testing support at 1.1200 while AUD/USD also retreated from 0.6880 to 0.6833 but is keeping just above support at 0.6845-50 for now.
Cable is also keeping at the lows, down 0.3% to 1.2260 levels with USD/CAD touching 1.3700 before staying just under there currently.
Looking ahead, today is one of those days where anything can happen and flows may very well just negate all the happenings in the market and do what it does.
I want to say window dressing is also part of the equation but we'll see how sentiment develops during the day especially with the latest US coronavirus numbers still to follow.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
