The liquidity in the foreign exchange market appears to have improved, the volatility and uncertainty of the market seem to still persist.
Forex turnover at the Investor and Exporters window rose 315% on Wednesday providing a semblance of a boost to liquidity in the foreign exchange market. This is according to data from the FMDQOTC, an exchange where forex is traded by foreign investors and exporters.
According to the data tracked by Nairametrics, forex turnover rose from $16.06 million on Wednesday compared to $66.61 million on Thursday representing a 315% increase day on day. While the increase in percentage terms appears to be a high, daily turnover of $66.6 million is still far from the over $200 million recorded in January 2020.
READ MORE: CBN to integrate non-interest window in its loans to SMEs, households
Although the liquidity in the foreign exchange market appears to have improved, the volatility and uncertainty of the market remain, particularly due to liquidity shortages across markets.  Liquidity remains quite tight in the foreign exchange market with the average turnover in the I&E market is significantly down to about $45.5 million in the month of May compared to $297.5 million that was recorded in January.
Several reports tracked by Nairametrics indicate the pent up demand for forex in the market could be between $1.5 -$5 billion as supply shortages persist. Forex shortages have persisted since the crash in oil prices coincided with the worldwide lockdown due to Covid-19. The rise in demand and contrasting fall in supply has called for another round of devaluation which the CBN has insisted it has to plans to implement. A devaluation last occurred in March. Speculators have thus throned to the black market widening the disparity between it and the I&E window.
In related news, the exchange rate on the I&E window appreciated marginally on Thursday closing at N385.70/$1 compared to N386/$1 reported on Wednesday, June 17th, representing a 30 kobo gain. The stability of the naira in the foreign exchange market continues today, as the local currency was marginally strengthened at the Investors and Exporters (I&E) window.
At the black market where forex is traded unofficially, the exchange rate between the naira and dollar depreciated by N1 to close at N453 on Thursday. The rate at the start of the week was N450/$1.
Nigeria continues to maintain multiple exchange rates comprising of the CBN official rate, the BDC rates, and the I&E window. Nairametrics reported earlier in the week that the government is mulling unifying the multiple exchange rates in a bid to increase the amount available for state governments to share.
Chike Olisah is a graduate of accountancy with over 15 years working experience in the financial service sector. He has worked in research and marketing departments of three top commercial banks. Chike is a senior member of the Nairametrics Editorial Team.
You may contact him via his email- chike.olisah@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
Naira gains against the dollar at I&E window, forex liquidity up by 242%
Forex shortages have persisted since the crash in oil prices coincided with the global lockdown.
Forex turnover at the Investor and Exporters (I&E) window recorded a huge increase on Monday, June 29, 2020, as it rose by 242%, a significant increase from what was recorded on Friday, June 26, 2020, in the foreign exchange market. This is according to data from the FMDQOTC, an exchange where forex is traded by foreign investors and exporters.
According to the data tracked by Nairametrics, forex turnover increased from $35.92 million on Friday, June 26, 2020, to $122.89 million on Monday, June 29, 2020, representing a significant increase of 242% a day on day. While the percentage increase in turnover appears huge, it still falls short of the $200 million recorded in January 2020.
Although there seems to be an improvement in liquidity in the foreign exchange market, the volatility and uncertainty of the market remain due to liquidity shortages across markets.  Liquidity remains quite tight in the foreign exchange market, with the average turnover in the I&E market significantly down to about $45.5 million in the month of May compared to $297.5 million that was recorded in January.
Several reports tracked by Nairametrics indicate that the accumulated demand for forex in the market could be between $1.5 and $5 billion as supply shortages persist. Forex shortages have persisted since the crash in oil prices coincided with the global lockdown due to COVID-19. The rise in demand and contrasting drop in supply has called for another round of devaluation, which the CBN has insisted it has plans to implement. A devaluation last occurred in March. The activities of the speculators seem to have continued unabated.
Speculators have thus patronized the parallel market, otherwise known as the black market, thereby widening the gap between it and the I&E window. The CBN maintains that the perceived demand cannot be substantiated as the lockdown induced by the COVID-19 pandemic suggest demand should be low due to travel restrictions and drop-in economic activities.
The further decline in liquidity could further fuel speculations in the black market where the exchange rate has traded at a premium of N60 over the last few weeks.
In related news, the exchange rate on the I&E window continued with its positive performance as it appreciated on Monday, closing at N386 to a dollar, compared to the N386.33 to a dollar that was reported on Friday, June 26, representing a 33 kobo gain. The opening indicative rate was N386.86 to a dollar for Monday. This represents a loss of 50 kobo when compared to the N386.36 opening rate recorded on Friday.
At the black market where forex is traded unofficially, the naira remained stable as it exchanged for N460 to a dollar on Monday. This was the same exchange rate that was recorded on Friday last week.
Nigeria continues to maintain multiple exchange rates comprising the CBN official rate, the BDC rates, and the NAFEX (I&E window). Nairametrics reported last week that the government is mulling unifying the multiple exchange rates in a bid to increase the amount available for state governments to share.
The stability of the exchange rate in the foreign exchange market can be attributed to a relative drop in demand for the dollar and improvement in forex liquidity. There still appears to be some uncertainty in the foreign exchange market as it is still not clear when the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) will resume sales of dollars to Bureau De Change Operators (BDCs).
The planned opening of the airports for flight operations by the federal government will act as a boost to the CBN’s intervention in the BDC segment of the market.
The World Bank had also applauded the CBN’s plan to unify its multiple exchange rate as that will help attract foreign investment to boost sustainable economic recovery and also support the various reforms being introduced by the government.
The American Dollar Index tracks the dollar’s strength relatively against a bouquet of other major currencies.
The U.S dollar index has been on the defensive, staying above a key support level of 97.400. This follows comments by America’s Federal Reserve Chair, Jerome Powell, who during an interview yesterday, explained that the outlook for the world’s most powerful economy is “extraordinarily uncertain” and will depend both on containing the coronavirus pandemic, and on government economic support.
The U.S dollar index, used to gauge the strength of the U.S dollar against a bouquet of major currencies, was down marginally at 0.07% to trade at 97.435, 3.39 am local time.
READ MORE: Tether expected to surpass Ethereum, based on strength of the U.S dollar
Why tracking the U.S dollar Index helps: Individuals hoping to meet foreign exchange payment obligations, and process transactions via the dollar to countries like England, France, or Japan, will need to pay fewer dollars for such transactions.
The American Dollar Index tracks the dollar’s strength relatively against a bouquet of other major currencies around the world, such as Japanese yen, Euro, British pounds sterling, Swedish krona, Canadian dollar, Swiss franc, etc.
However, Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp, in a note sent to Nairametrics explained the optimism that currency traders are having about the U.S dollar, as the U.S economy keeps printing impressive data. He said:
“But with US data printing well above expectations, US dollar bulls are not giving the plot up quickly US exceptionalism continues to resonate in the latest run of market-beating US economic data.”
Fresh optimism on the U.S. economy came from the U.S home sales data, which showed that housing market activity had rebounded in May from a previous steep fall triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Forex turnover at the Investor and Exporters (I&E) window had a rebound on Friday, June 26, 2020, as it rose by 144.68%, a significant increase from what was recorded the previous day in the foreign exchange market. This is according to data from the FMDQOTC, an exchange where forex is traded by foreign investors and exporters.
According to the data tracked by Nairametrics, forex turnover increased from $14.68 million on Thursday, June 25, 2020, to $35.92 million on Friday, June 26, 2020, representing a significant increase of 144.68%, day on day. while the percentage increase in turnover appears huge, it is still a far cry from the $200 million recorded in January 2020.
Although there seems to be an improvement in liquidity in the foreign exchange market, the volatility and uncertainty of the market remains due to liquidity shortages across markets.  Liquidity remains quite tight in the foreign exchange market, with the average turnover in the I&E market significantly down to about $45.5 million in the month of May compared to $297.5 million that was recorded in January.
Several reports tracked by Nairametrics indicate that the accumulated demand for forex in the market could be between $1.5 and $5 billion as supply shortages persist. Forex shortages have persisted since the crash in oil prices coincided with the global lockdown due to COVID-19. The rise in demand and contrasting drop in supply has called for another round of devaluation, which the CBN has insisted it has plans to implement. A devaluation last occurred in March. The activities of the speculators seem to have continued unabated.
Speculators have thus patronized the parallel market, otherwise known as the black market, thereby widening the gap between it and the I&E window. The CBN maintains that the perceived demand cannot be substantiated as the lockdown induced by the COVID-19 pandemic suggest demand should be low due to travel restrictions and drop-in economic activities.
Further decline in liquidity could further fuel speculations in the black market where the exchange rate has traded at a premium of N60 over the last few weeks.
In related news, the exchange rate on the I&E window reversed its earlier consecutive days of decline as it appreciated on Friday, closing at N386.33 to a dollar, compared to the N387.27 to a dollar that was reported on Thursday, June 25, representing a 94 kobo gain. The opening indicative rate was N386.36 to a dollar for Friday. This represents a gain of 72 kobo when compared to the N387.08 opening rate recorded on Thursday.
At the black market where forex is traded unofficially, the naira depreciated further by N3 to close at N460 to a dollar on Friday, as against the N457 to a dollar on Thursday. The rate at the start of the week was N455 to a dollar.
Nigeria continues to maintain multiple exchange rates comprising the CBN official rate, the BDC rates, and the NAFEX (I&E window). Nairametrics reported last week that the government is mulling unifying the multiple exchange rates in a bid to increase the amount available for state governments to share.
The contrasting performance indicates increasing demand pressure in the foreign exchange market especially at the retail end of the market.
The CBN Governor, Godwin Emefiele, had announced plans during an investors conference organized by Citibank, to unify the exchange rate around the NAFEX rate. Financial analysts and business leaders have expressed their support for the policy as this will ensure more transparent management of the foreign exchange market, eliminate forex arbitrage being enjoyed by currency speculators, attract more foreign investors (both foreign direct investments and foreign portfolio investments) and so on
Nairametrics had earlier reported of plans by the federal government not to source for debt from the Eurobond market as it will shift focus to domestic borrowing and from concessionary sources. The government also through the Director General, Debt Management Office, Patience Oniha, confirmed that Nigeria will not be seeking for debt relief from its commercial and bilateral creditors.
