US elections: Additional opinion polls have confirmed Democrat Joe Biden's solid lead against President Donald Trump, which is above 9%. Investors fear a clean sweep for Democrats. Elections news is having trouble competing with COVID-19 headlines.
EUR/USD is stabilizing at the lower ground ahead of the European Central Bank's meeting minutes release for its June meeting when it decided to boost its bond-buying scheme. The level of concern about the economy and explaining that the move was proportional – answering the German constitutional court  – are eyed. Various European countries are experiencing local COVID-19 outbreaks, which currently seem under control.
GBP/USD is trading above 1.24 but off the highs. The UK government is struggling with criticism about his handling of the crisis. Brexit may grab the headlines ahead of the resumption of talks on Monday.
WTI oil is trading around $37, at lower ground. an increase in inventories joined the risk-off mood. Commodity currencies are retreating from the highs.
Cryptocurrencies are on the back foot, with Bitcoin hovering around $9,100.
More Is it time to batten down the hatches for COVID 2.0?
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
