Here is what you need to know on Tuesday, April 14th:
The dollar remained weak, resuming its decline with the return of the US markets. The EUR, however, was unable to benefit from the weakness of its rival, ending the day with modest losses around 1.0920.
The GBP/USD pair surged past 1.2500, its highest in over a month, amid lack of interest in the greenback coupled with weekend news indicating that UK PM Boris Johnson left the hospital, still recovering from coronavirus.
The Japanese yen surged, amid demand for safe-haven assets. Gold made the most out of it, with spot advancing to the $1,720.00 a troy ounce price zone, its highest since November 2012.
Commodity-linked currencies were among the best performers, despite the poor performance of US equities, most likely benefiting from gold’s rally.
The Canadian dollar was also up, despite crude oil prices fell. After a long weekend of discussion, the OPEC+ agreed to cut 9.7 million barrels per day through May and June. The cut was the deepest agreed by global oil producers, yet it fell short of the market’s expectations.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
