Naira improved against the dollar by N1.35, closing at N386.33 to a dollar, as against the indicative rate of N387.68 to a dollar that it opened with.
The naira has depreciated to N386.33 to a dollar at the Investors and Exporters (I&E) window, as the volatility of the foreign exchange market continues. The local currency was weakened by N0.83 against the dollar, when compared to the N385.50 to a dollar that it traded on Tuesday, June 2, 2020.
The exchange rate at the I&E window is different from the Central Bank of Nigeria’s published exchange rate, which currently stands at N360/$1. This is also different from the exchange rate at the parallel market, which is still stable at N445/$1, according to information on AbokiFX as of Wednesday, June 3, 2020.
Available information from the daily trading at FMDQ (where FX is traded by importers and investors) shows that the naira improved against the dollar by N1.35, closing at N386.33 to a dollar, as against the indicative rate of N387.68 to a dollar that it opened with on Wednesday.
Further analysis of the information from the FMDQ shows that the turnover for the day declined by about 28.3% at $24.64 million. This is against the $34.35 million turnovers that was recorded the previous day.
The foreign exchange market seems to have stabilized at the parallel market, following the reduction in demand for dollars especially by currency speculators, and improved liquidity. The rebound of crude oil prices appears to have eased the concerns of investors over possible devaluation of the naira.
The gap between the CBN official rate and the parallel market rate, also known as the black market, has been greatly reduced as the naira appreciated to N445 to a dollar from N460 to a dollar last week, following CBN’s intervention.
According to data compiled by Bloomberg, the Naira spot market rate is overvalued by 10% when measured by its current real effective exchange rate relative to the 5-year average.
Chike Olisah is a graduate of accountancy with over 15 years working experience in the financial service sector. He has worked in research and marketing departments of three top commercial banks. Chike is a senior member of the Nairametrics Editorial Team.
You may contact him via his email- chike.olisah@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
The plan is to ensure that every new fintech product obtains regulatory approval prior to being launched.
Earlier this week, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) unveiled the regulatory framework for sandbox operations that will help control how new tech-based financial products/services are launched into the Nigerian market.
In a 16-paged circular that was sent to all deposit money banks and fintech firms (especially those offering mobile money and payments services), the CBN explained that the regulatory sandbox will serve as “a formal process for firms to conduct live tests of new, innovative products, services, delivery channels, or business models in a controlled environment, with regulatory oversight subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards.”
This is also intended to make it possible for the apex bank to adequately keep up with the latest innovations by banks and fintechs, whilst ultimately engendering a reliable, safe, and efficient payment system in the country. See the full breakdown of the regulatory sandbox operation below:
To reduce time-to-market for innovative products, services, and business models
To ensure appropriate consumer protection safeguards in innovative products;
To provide an avenue for regulatory engagement with fintech firms in the payment space, while contributing to economic growth.
Based on the last objective above, it can be seen that this is yet another major step the Central Bank of Nigeria has taken towards regulating the Nigerian fintech space. Back in 2018, the apex bank had taken a major step by announcing the minimum capital for mobile money operators in Nigeria . Now, it is set to regulate how new products and services are launched by mobile money operators and digital payment service providers.
To find out more about the CBN’s draft framework for regulatory sandbox operations, click here .
Akeredolu now joins the list of top public officials that have contracted the disease.
The Governor of Ondo State, Rotimi Akeredolu, has tested positive to the coronavirus disease. He now joins the list of top public officials that have contracted the disease.
This was personally confirmed by the Governor through a tweet post on his official Twitter handle on Tuesday, June 30, 2020.
According to his post, ‘’Today I tested positive to coronavirus disease. All is well, I’m asymptomatic and have been self-isolating. Work continues. Your continued prayers over my well-being are most appreciated.’’
Today I tested positive for #COVID19 . All is well. I'm asymptomatic and have been self isolating. Work continues. Your continued prayers over my well being are most appreciated. pic.twitter.com/P5UH0SmBiw
— Arakunrin Akeredolu (@RotimiAkeredolu) June 30, 2020
The governor said that he had malaria a few days ago and was treated. However, he said that after the National Executive Council of his party, the APC, one of his colleagues advised that he should have a coronavirus test. He said that the result came out today, June 30 and he tested positive.
However, the governor pointed out that he was asymptomatic and is yet to show any symptom of the disease. He said although he is not feeling sick or odd in any way, his doctors advised that he should take the normal treatment and self-isolate as he believes that supervised home management will be ideal for him for now.
Akeredolu also assured that work will be going on as he will be attending to files at home.
The Ondo State Governor will be the latest high profile Nigerian to have contracted the disease. The immediate past Governor of Oyo State, Senator Abiola Ajimobi, passed away last week after a serious illness due to complications from the coronavirus disease.
The Nigerian insurance sector is expected to grow at a subdued rate in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Nigerian insurance sector is expected to witness considerable growth in the medium to long term, despite an interruption in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In specific terms, players in the smaller life insurance segment of the market are expected to grow their collective premiums by 4.8% to N179.81 billion in 2020. This is a downwardly revised forecast due to the country’s weakened economic condition. Meanwhile, the life insurance segment is expected to grow its premiums to as much as N207.96 billion by 2024.
On the other hand, the non-life insurance segment of the market (which is significantly larger), is projected to grow its premiums by a revised 2.9% to N248.85 billion in 2020. In the medium term, growth in the non-life segment is expected to reach N321.53 billion in 2024.
It should, however, be noted that these projected growths are not going to come about easily, mainly due to Nigerians’ general lack of enthusiasm for insurance. According to Fitch Solutions, premiums growth will continue to be limited due to expected low average earnings by the insurance firms.
Widespread poverty was identified as a major factor making it impossible for a lot of Nigerians to access insurance covers. But then again, some wealthy Nigerian are known to avoid spending on insurance covers. This general lack of enthusiasm is known to hamper growth in the Nigerian insurance sector. The report, therefore, called for more action to be taken towards educating Nigerians about the importance/benefits of both life and non-life insurance.
“With a market supported by the country’s steady economy and large population, Nigeria’s insurance sector will enjoy a period of growth and development over the medium and long term, albeit interrupted by a slower pace of growth in 2020 due to the effects of the coronavirus pandemic. The outlook for premiums growth, however, continues to be limited due to low average earnings and widespread poverty, which will weigh on insurance affordability. As even the more affluent middle-class consumers tend to avoid purchasing insurance, which hampers the growth of compulsory basic insurance lines such as motor vehicle insurance, Nigeria’s potential consumer base needs to be educated more about the benefits of both life and non-life insurance coverage to support more robust growth in the sector.
“In spite of Nigeria’s large population, only a small proportion purchases life insurance. Life premiums currently account for 41.9% of overall insurance spending in the country. Low incomes and a lack of understanding of the benefits of life insurance remain the most important obstacles facing life insurers. However, a recovering economy, coupled with rising employment and incomes, will drive demand for life insurance products over the forecast period,” part of the report said.
In view of the competitive and regulatory landscapes, Fitch Solutions noted that the insurance sector in Nigeria is replete with mostly small players. The highly fragmented nature of the market makes it very competitive, even though only a few really command a greater percentage of the market share. In total, there are approximately 57 insurance companies in Nigeria and the report forecasted that the number may shrink in the coming years due to possible mergers/acquisitions.
Note that the National Insurance Commission, NAICOM, had recently revised its capital requirements for various segments of players in the insurance. You may keep up with that development by clicking here .
In the meantime, foreign players have been showing serious interest in the Nigerian insurance sector. A typical example is the French insurance firm – AXA which has stakes in Nigeria’s  AXA Mansard Insurance Plc. Other examples are South Africa’s Old Mutual Ltd and Sanlam Emerging Markets (Proprietary) Ltd. As Nairametrics reported, Sanlam recently took over full ownership of FBN Insurance Ltd after FBN Holdings Plc divested all its stakes in the insurance firm which used to be one of its many subsidiaries.
