Reserve had touched a lifetime high of $487.23 billion in the week to March 6, after it rose by $5.69 billion.
The gold reserve also increased by $3.03 billion to $30.89 billion in the reporting week, the RBI data showed.
Rupee's coronavirus-induced weakness to linger in near-term: Poll
Mumbai: After falling massively in the week ended March 20, the country's foreign exchange reserve surged by $5.65 billion to $475.56 billion in the week ended March 27, helped by an increase in foreign currency assets, according to the latest data from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI).
In the week ended March 20, the reserve had declined by $11.98 billion to $469.91 billion as the RBI was supplying dollars to contain fall in the rupee, which has breached the 76 mark against the US dollar.
In the week of March 13, it had fallen by $5.34 billion to $481.89 billion. This was the first decline in the country's reserve in almost six months.
The reserve had touched a life-time high of $487.23 billion in the week to March 6, after it rose by $5.69 billion.
During the week ended March 27, the foreign currency assets (FCA), a major component of the overall reserves, increased by $2.56 billion to $439.66 billion.
Expressed in dollar terms, the foreign currency assets include the effect of appreciation or depreciation of non-US units like the euro, pound and yen held in the foreign exchange reserves.
The gold reserve also increased by $3.03 billion to $30.89 billion in the reporting week, the RBI data showed.
The special drawing rights with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) were up by $14 million to $1.42 billion.
The country's reserve position with the IMF also increased by $44 million to $3.58 billion, the data showed.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
