    * Graphic: World FX rates in 2020 tmsnrt.rs/2egbfVh (Recasts, adds new comment, FX table, updates prices, changes byline, dateline; previous LONDON)
    NEW YORK, June 26 (Reuters) - The safe-haven dollar rose on Friday, as investors grew cautious about a
    Currencies that thrive with higher risk appetite such as the euro, sterling, as well as
commodity-linked currencies like the Australian, New Zealand, and Canadian dollars struggled against the
    Cases rose across the United States by at least 39,818 on Thursday, the largest one-day increase of
the pandemic, with Texas becoming the new hot spot for the novel coronavirus. More than 36,000 new U.S.
cases were recorded on Wednesday, a few hundred shy of the record 36,426 on April 24.
    "There's an inverse correlation between the risk sentiment and the dollar," said Erik Bregar, head of
FX strategy, at Exchange Bank of Canada. "Whenever we get headlines that hurt risk sentiment, that helps
    In midmorning trading, the dollar rose 0.2% against a basket of currencies to 97.571.
    The dollar showed little reaction after the data showed U.S. consumer spending, which accounts for
more than two-thirds of U.S. economic activity, jumped 8.2% last month. That was the largest increase
since the government started tracking the series in 1959.
    That said, personal income fell 4.2% last month. 
coronavirus but underscore what’s expected to be a choppy road to recovery," said Joe Manimbo, senior
market analyst at Western Union Business Solutions in Washington. 
    The euro, meanwhile, reversed gains against the dollar to trade 0.1% lower at $1.1202.
session at the $1.12 strike.
    That said, the euro was on track to end the week on a positive note.
markets are long euro/dollar, though positioning is not stretched.
. The U.S. dollar gained 0.6% at C$1.3712.
 Description      RIC         Last           U.S. Close  Pct Change     YTD Pct     High Bid    Low Bid
 (Reporting by Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss; Addition reporting by Saikat Chatterjee in London; editing by
