With Robinhood Financial, you can make unlimited commission-free trades in U.S. listed stocks, options and ETFs. With Robinhood Crypto, you can buy and sell cryptocurrencies, although these do not trade commission-free.
Another very useful feature offered by Robinhood is fractional share investing. This lets you select an amount of money you wish to invest in a stock that is then converted into a fraction of a share amount in the stock of your choice. This feature lets you manage your funds better, invest in more costly stocks, and customize your portfolio with fractional shares of companies you like.
A Robinhood Gold account gives you access to margin accounts. Fees start at $5 per month for a $1,000 margin account or a 5% per year average percentage rate (APR) charge for margin accounts over $2,000. Other features of the Gold include professional research reports by Morningstar, access to margin of up to $5,000–$50,000 depending on your account balance and Level II market data. You can find out more about Robinhood from Benzinga’s Robinhood App Review .
FOREX.com and Robinhood represent completely different types of online broker. The best broker for you will depend on whether you prefer to trade currencies or invest/trade stocks. Both brokerages accept U.S. clients and provide quality service, low costs and excellent trading platforms. While they each offer educational material, FOREX.com has more extensive resources for beginning forex traders.
In addition to the built-in research and analysis features of the MetaTrader platform, FOREX.com’s proprietary trading platform includes a news feed you can customize to focus on your favorite currency pairs. Also, FOREX.com’s award-winning Global Research Team regularly produces reports and videos on the forex, equity and commodities markets.
Other research offerings at FOREX.com include an economic calendar, regular webinars and pivot points that can be used in conjunction with other technical indicators.
Robinhood has partnered with Morningstar to provide clients with in-depth research on over 1,700 stocks. In addition, Robinhood produces a daily 3-minute newsletter called Snacks that is released before the stock market is open.
In the Learn section of Robinhood’s website, you can find a large variety of “Buzzworthy” articles on many financial topics. The section has vital information on many financial terms, with writers from The Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg and Forbes.
Both brokers offer excellent research options in their fields of specialization. Taken together, FOREX.com’s global research team and Robinhood’s in-house research and partnership with Morningstar covers most topics that affect traders in the currency and stock markets.
FOREX.com makes its money via the dealing spread quoted for a currency pair or precious metal. This means that the more you trade and the larger the amounts you deal in, the more you’ll pay away to the broker. FOREX.com also offers an Active Trader Program that allows traders with an account balance over $25,000 and a trading volume of over $25 million to receive tighter bid/offer spreads for their trades.
You can also open a commission-based account at FOREX.com that charges a flat $5 per trade with notably reduced dealing spreads. For example, if the typical spread in a currency pair like EUR/USD is 1 pip, then the spread in a commission account tends to be a fraction of that, say 0.02 pip. The minimum deposit for a FOREX.com account is $50 for U.S.-based clients.
Robinhood does not charge commission on stock orders from self-directed accounts made via a mobile device or its Web platform. Other regulatory trading fees do apply, however, and include: $22.10 per $1,000,000 of the principal amount transacted, Term Auction Facility (TAF) fees of $0.000119 per share of equity sells capped at $5.95 and $0.002 per option contract sells. Robinhood has no minimum deposit requirement for regular accounts, but you will need at least $2,000 to open a Gold account.
The fees you pay at FOREX.com depend on the amount of activity in your account. The more you trade in a standard account, the more you pay away in the spread, while the broker’s commission account has tighter spreads and a $5 commission charge per trade.  With Robinhood, your commission cost is $0, so your overall stock trading costs are minimal even with the TAF and other regulatory fees.
Because FOREX.com has its base in the United States, the broker is registered as a futures commission merchant (FCM) and a retail foreign exchange dealer (RFED), and it has oversight from the CFTC and NFA. The broker also maintains capital levels well above requirements, and customer deposits are kept in segregated accounts from the company’s in a global network of custodian banks and brokers.
As a member of the Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC), Robinhood protects customer securities and cash of its members up to $500,000, which includes protection of $250,000 held in cash. While your funds are protected if you trade stocks, Robinhood Crypto is not a member of SIPC or the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), so any cryptocurrency investments you make through Robinhood are not protected by those entities.
Both Robinhood and FOREX.com are well regulated and give their clients considerable asset protection. If you plan on trading cryptocurrencies through Robinhood, your transactions have no oversight and your money could be at risk if a problem arises.
Customer support can be reached continuously during the trading week between 10 a.m. Sunday to 5 p.m. Friday EST. You can access FOREX.com’s customer support via 2 contact methods:
Robinhood customer support consists of a page on its website where you can investigate frequently asked questions. This FAQ includes topics like how to get started, how to open an account, necessary documents, taxes and bank transfers, investing and cash management.
If you can’t find the information you’re looking for, you get directed to a Contact Us page, where you can select the type of question you have from a list. Just input your question and enter your email address to wait for an answer.
The lack of any personal support for Robinhood clients could be the weakest feature for this broker. FOREX.com, on the other hand, has both email and telephone access, which could save you a lot of time and money if a problem arises with a trade or your account.
FOREX.com allows you to trade in over 80 currency pairs as well as gold and silver. You can also trade a variety of futures products and options on futures through the broker’s FuturesOnline affiliate.
Robinhood’s tradable asset classes include:
Robinhood takes the lead with respect to stocks and the overall number of tradable assets, although forex traders will still want to pick FOREX.com.
The FOREX.com website and its supported trading platforms have intuitive features that make it easily accessible to beginners and experienced traders alike. In addition to its own sophisticated proprietary trading platforms, you can make transactions via the popular MetaTrader 4 (MT4) platform. You can also get mobile and web versions of both the MT4 and FOREX.com proprietary platforms.
The Robinhood trading platform can be downloaded as a mobile app or used as a web-based version. The mobile app features candlestick charting not available on the web version.
Both applications have intuitive qualities that make them immediately usable by both beginners and seasoned traders and investors. The platforms also let you access tax documents and account statements, and you can fund an account easily through the mobile app.
FOREX.com offers a comprehensive technical analysis package with its trading platforms, plus other features like automatization and customizability not found on the relatively simplistic Robinhood app. If you plan to trade currencies, then FOREX.com’s platform and services excel in all aspects.
Furthermore, if you have experience trading stocks and already have access to quality research, indicators and charting options, then Robinhood’s platform would be more than adequate for just executing your trades. Otherwise, you will need to open a Gold Robinhood account to access Morningstar’s stock research.
Both online brokers rank among the best in the business when it comes to offering their clients excellent, affordable services and easy-to-use trading platforms tailored to their respective markets. Robinhood would suit those who want to trade or invest in stocks, while FOREX.com would be ideal for U.S.-based currency traders.
Looking for stocks that are about to breakout for gains of 10%, 15%, even 20% potentially or more? The only problem is finding these stocks takes hours per day. Fortunately, Benzinga's Breakout Opportunity Newsletter that could potentially break out each and every month. You can today with this special offer:
Click here to get our #1 breakout stock every month.
Finding the right financial advisor that fits your needs doesn't have to be hard. SmartAsset's free tool matches you with fiduciary financial advisors in your area in 5 minutes. Each advisor has been vetted by SmartAsset and is legally bound to act in your best interests. If you're ready to be matched with local advisors that will help you achieve your financial goals, get started now .
