Forexlive Americas FX news wrap: Coronavirus fear heats up. Stocks lower. Yields lower.
Spot gold is trading up $8.30 or +0.53% at $1571.15.  The price is trading up from last Friday's close at $1557.24 or +$13.91 (up 0.89%).
WTI crude oil futures trading down $1.21 or -2.18% at $54.38. The price of crude oil fell over 7% for the week.
The day today saw Canada retail sales rise by 0.9% versus 0.6% expected. The number came on the back of a -1.1% decline last month.
In the US the only economic news was the Markit PMI which came in a little bit stronger than expectations at 53.2 versus 53.0.
Most the rest of the day was influenced by the coronavirus news.  The fear helped to lift gold prices.  For the week go prices increase by 0.89%.
Crude oil continued to move lower on global growth concerns.
The US stocks fell today with the Nasdaq and S&P both only about -0.9%. For the week, the NASDAQ broke a string of sevens consecutive weeks higher, falling by -0.45%. The Dow ended the week with a 4 day losing streak (and down -1.05%).
In the US debt market, the 10 year yield fell by -4.5 basis points and tested the early November low of 1.668% (see chart below). The low for the day reach 1.668%.
The high yield today of 1.76% was also just below the 100 day moving average at 1.7663% (see blue line in the the chart). So the support and resistance were both tested. The levels will be important in trading next week.
In the forex market, traders moved into the relative safety of the JPY and the USD today. They were the 2 strongest currencies of the day.  On the downside, risk aversion sent the AUD lower. The GBP was also lower despite better-than-expected PMI data. Although higher, the data still remains below the 50 level indicative of a contracting manufacturing base.  Next week the Bank of England rate decision is a tossup on whether they cut by 25 basis points or keep rates unchanged.
For the week in the forex market, the JPY is the strongest of the majors, while the AUD is the weakest. The US dollar rose modestly versus the major currencies. It was higher versus AUD (+0.80%), EUR, CAD and CHF, and lower vs the JPY (-0.78%) and GBP.   The greenback was near unchanged versus the NZD for the week (+0.09%).
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
