ForexLive European FX news wrap: Another bloodbath for stocks; ECB in focus next
It is another bloodbath of a day in the equities space after Trump called for a 30-day travel ban against Europe, sending the market into yet another spiral.
US futures were down around 4% to start the morning but as European equities a saw heavy losses pick up momentum, S&P 500 futures hit limit down with another 5% drop.
That also saw USD/JPY ease lower under towards 103.50-70 levels from a slight move higher towards 104.20 to start the European trading day.
Treasury yields also stayed pressured for the most part, with 10-year yields down by over 15 bps, but that did not stop the dollar this time around from posting gains today.
The greenback pushed higher against the likes of the euro and pound, with the former falling from 1.1310 to 1.1220 and the latter falling from 1.2810 to 1.2720 - hitting its lowest levels since October last year.
The aussie and kiwi were routed heavily amid the risk-off mood and all eyes will turn towards the ECB and Wall Street next on how the rest of the trading day will unfold.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
