    launch our new book on foreign exchange intervention in Latin America. I
    generously sharing the stage.
    intervention in countries with inflation-targeting regimes. We have seen
    many twists and turns over the past year, including trade tensions and
    that enabled them to weather that storm. But the experience has underlined
    continually in their quest for economic and financial stability.
    discussion of the policy toolkit needed to ensure stability. We have been
    increasingly figures in our internal policy discussions, and we plan to
    have more interactions about it with officials like you.
Foreign exchange intervention is an element of that toolkit. Since the
    targeting with flexible exchange rates. In some cases, this transition came
    after crises that highlighted the shortcomings of pegged currency regimes.
Within this transition to inflation targeting, countries experimented with
    various degrees of exchange rate flexibility. While some rarely intervene
    foreign exchange intervention remains limited. That’s why a study focused
    on this region is so useful. Latin America provides a wealth of information
    to build buffers and to counterbalance sustained capital inflows. These
    flows initially came in response to the commodity super-cycle, and then as
    to counter depreciation pressures.
    framework and under a defined set of rules. In others, it was more ad hoc
    and was aimed at accommodating immediate foreign exchange liquidity needs.
    But in some episodes, pressures in foreign exchange markets were due to
    hedging demand, and that intervention was carried out through derivatives.
So, the book offers an overview of the issues countries had in common. Fund
    staff have written the introductory chapters, and experts from seven Latin
    contributed summaries of their countries’ intervention policies, goals, and
    decision-making processes of these institutions. And it offers a good
    example of policy institutions and decision makers collaborating, to learn
    from each other and advance our collective thinking.
A couple of key themes emerge: first, we see the benefits of a rules-based
    of the region’s largest economies. In Mexico, for example, mechanisms have
    been used to accumulate reserves, reduce the pace of reserve accumulation
    policies in reducing exchange rate volatility and market uncertainty. The
    undermining the credibility of the inflation target. Of course, the
This is not a textbook, but an important accumulation of experience and
    expertise from practitioners on the cutting edge of an integrated policy.
    strengthen our defenses against instability and disruption. And perhaps one
    day it will contribute to a true textbook for policymakers.
I look forward to hearing your ideas—and to a robust debate. Thank you.
