Investing.com - The dollar has drifted lower in early European trade Monday, but that’s off three-week highs as investors looked for safety amid renewed worries about a second wave of coronavirus infections.
At 3 AM ET (0700 GMT), the dollar index , which tracks the greenback against a basket of six other currencies, was down 0.1% at 97.493. The index had earlier climbed to a daily high of 97.677, a level not seen since the start of this month, while USD/JPY was up 0.1% at 106.94.
“The main driver has been concerns about the spread of the coronavirus and arguably the speed of the global recovery, emphasizing the still strong FX versus risk correlation,” said analysts at Danske Bank, in a research note.
Sunday saw a record 183,020 cases globally, according to the World Health Organization, with the bulk in North and South America. The number of global cases is now almost 9 million, according to Johns Hopkins University data.
EUR/USD last traded up 0.1% at 1.1191 after dipping to a three-week low of 1.1168 in early trade. This followed the failure of the European Union leaders to agree on a structure for the planned 750 billion euros Covid-19 recovery fund.
“From the comments from the leaders, the disagreement does not seem to be about the size of the package, but rather about grants versus loans distribution,” said Danske Bank.
This is proving a tricky obstacle, with four members [Sweden, Denmark, Austria and the Netherlands] being particularly vocal in their opposition to the plan to pay out the majority of this stimulus in grants instead of loans.
The EU leaders are aiming to reach an agreement before the summer break, which may mean late July/early August, potentially at a physical meeting.
GBP/USD gained 0.2% to 1.2379, holding just above a three-week low, weighted as well by Brexit worries since there has been little progress in trade discussions with Europe.
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read Investing.com's comments guidelines and agree to the terms described.
