FOREX-Dollar, yen rise on Fed's bleak view, U.S. stock market drop
* Yen rises to 1-month high; Swiss franc hits 3-month peak
    * U.S COVID-19 infections rise, fears of 2nd wave mount
    * Graphic: World FX rates in 2019 tmsnrt.rs/2egbfVh (Adds new comment; updates prices)
    NEW YORK, June 11 (Reuters) - The safe-haven dollar, yen and Swiss franc gained on Thursday as U.S.
    The yen rose to a one-month high against the dollar, while the Swiss franc climbed to a fresh
    The dollar index, though, was higher on the day, as investors sold currencies associated with
risk-taking such as the euro, sterling and the Australian dollar.
    The market took its cue from the U.S. stock market, which in early afternoon trading was down sharply.
    "This historic gain in equities is getting a reality check. There are some concerns about
John Doyle, vice president of trading and dealing at Tempus Inc. in Washington.
    "But perhaps because of how fast and how hard equities have gone up and the dollar has gone down,
    Since late May, with better-than-expected economic data and as economies and U.S. states started to
re-open, the dollar has fallen 3.5% against the currency basket.
    The Fed, after a two-day meeting, signaled it plans years of extraordinary support for the U.S.
economy, which policymakers project will shrink by 6.5% in 2020, with the unemployment at 9.3%.
shutdowns aimed at curbing the spread of the disease.
    In the United States, new infections are rising slightly after five weeks of declines, according to a
Reuters analysis. Part of the increase is due to more testing, which hit a record high on June 5 of
545,690 tests in a single day but has since fallen.
    In early afternoon trading, the dollar fell 0.3% against the yen to 106.76 yen, after
earlier dropping to a one-month trough.
    The dollar also slid to a three-month low versus the Swiss franc of 0.9399 franc, and was
last down 0.3% at 0.9412 franc.
    Against a basket of currencies,, however, the dollar rose 0.4% to 96.556, led by gains versus
    The euro dropped 0.5% to $1.1315.
    High-beta currencies heavily geared toward global growth, such as the Australian dollar and
the Norwegian crown, led losers, falling more than 1% against the dollar.
 Description      RIC         Last           U.S. Close  Pct Change     YTD Pct     High Bid    Low Bid
 (Reporting by Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss; Editing by Bernadette Baum and Dan Grebler)
