Foreign Exchange trading, known as Forex, appears to have get-rich-quick appeal, but the reality is that most Forex traders lose money – sometimes a lot of it.
Instead of speculating on currency movements, I’d rather build wealth by investing in shares and share-backed investments. Studies have shown that over the long haul, shares have beaten the returns from all the major classes of assets such as property, commodities and cash savings.
However, I reckon it would be folly to bring a get-rich-quick approach to investing in shares because it may lead to taking punts on risky, profitless companies with an enticing story. Such beasts could end up being no better than Forex trading for investors, with a high percentage of losers. For example, those backing Sirius Minerals have endured a rough ride so far.
To me, one of the keys to finding successful investments in the stock market is to focus on the quality of the underlying business, which usually shows up in the trading and financial record. If you can find a company with a multi-year record of rising revenue, earnings and cash flow, you’re off to a good start with your research.
But I’d also look for decent quality indicators such as chunky profit margins and a good return on capital employed. If you can find those, there’s a good chance the business operates in a well-protected and profitable niche of the market.
However, the numbers alone won’t always tell you everything you need to know about a business. It pays to dig into the nature of the firm’s operations to try to get to grips with how the company can maintain its resilient trading position in the market.
Some firms can throw out tasty looking financial numbers that aren’t sustainable. The cyclical firms can be a good example of that phenomenon. Banks, housebuilders, retailers and others can all be trading their socks off one minute and crashing the next, which can lead to a roller coaster ride for investors. Sometimes, such companies can deliver a poor investing outcome even when you hold the shares for a very long time.
But when you’ve pinned down a quality business with sustainable operations, the next challenge is to buy the shares as cheaply as you can, so the focus moves to valuation. And I admit that genuine, high-quality businesses rarely sell at bargain-basement valuations. But if you over-pay for shares, you could end up turning a decent company into a poor investment if the valuation goes on to ‘normalise’.
Well-known US investor Warren Buffett overcame the problem by adjusting his investment strategy. Instead of buying cheap valuations whatever the quality of the enterprise, he moved towards buying the shares of high-quality companies when their valuations were fair. And I think that kind of strategy could help you to invest your way to wealth.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Kevin Godbold has no position in any share mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
