Forex (foreign exchange) trading is often advertised as a financial strategy that can help you generate life-changing wealth. Social media will have you believe that if you start trading currencies, you’ll be wearing a Rolex and driving a Lambo in no time.
In reality though, forex trading is quite hard. If you’re looking to make big money in the financial markets, I think there are much easier strategies to pursue.
While some forex traders do make good returns trading currencies, the majority lose money. How do I know this? Forex brokers admit it!
For example, on the forex.com website, it says that 69% of its retail investor accounts lose money. Meanwhile, on the fxcm.com website, it says that 70% of its retail investor accounts lose money. In other words, seven out of 10 people trading forex on these platforms are losing money (among beginners it’s probably actually closer to nine out of 10).
Why do so many forex traders lose out? Well, one reason is that the currency markets are notoriously volatile. This means that to be successful, you need to have a really disciplined approach and be able to separate your emotions from your trading strategy. A lot of people just don’t have the right temperament
Ultimately, to make consistent profits from the foreign exchange markets, it takes years of practice. Most people give up before they get there.
If your goal is to make big money in the financial markets, I would forget about forex trading and instead look at investing in smaller growth companies.
As small companies grow and become more profitable, their share prices tend to rise as well. This means that if you pick the right stocks, you could potentially turn £1k into £2k, £5k, or even £20k without really doing much.
Here are some examples. In early 2015, shares in online fashion retailer Boohoo Group were trading for just 25p. Today, however, the stock is trading at over 280p, meaning that if you had invested £1k in the company in early 2015, it would now be worth around £11k. Similarly, five years ago shares in vehicle-testing group AB Dynamics were trading for around 165p. Recently, however, those shares were trading above 2,800p, meaning that you could have turned £1k into around £17k in the space of less than five years.
Of course, not every smaller company performs like this. Just look at Sirius Minerals. It has lost around 70% of its value over the last five years. As with any financial strategy, it’s important to be aware of the risks.
Yet if you focus on profitable businesses that are growing quickly, diversify your money over a number of different companies in different industries, and have patience, you have a good chance of making money, in my view.
If you’re looking to learn more about making money from smaller companies, you’ve come to the right place.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Edward Sheldon owns shares in Boohoo Group. The Motley Fool UK has recommended AB Dynamics and boohoo group. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
See all posts by Edward Sheldon, CFA
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
