The FTSE 100’s recent crash could tempt some investors to seek to profit from its short-term price movements. After all, the index and other assets such as forex are currently highly volatile. They could move sharply in either direction over a short time period. As such, the profit potential of short-term trading may be high.
However, the risks involved in such a strategy could be significant. The news flow regarding coronavirus is impossible to predict, and could have a major impact on investor sentiment. Therefore, investors may be better off simply buying and holding FTSE 100 stocks ahead of a potential recovery.
The high volatility currently present in financial markets can mean quick profits for those traders who can accurately predict upcoming price movements. The problem is that anticipating those movements correctly on a consistent basis is highly challenging. Financial markets are highly dependent on news flow regarding coronavirus in the near term, as well as a multitude of other variables. Since it is impossible to know how news will evolve over the coming days, weeks and months, there is a significant risk that you could experience losses.
Buying shares and holding them for the long term sometimes leads to losses. However, those are paper losses that are not realised until an asset is sold. By contrast, products such as spread betting and forex can lead to mounting losses over a short period of time due in part to their use of leverage, and the fact that trades are often short term in nature. As such, buying and holding shares could prove to be a lower-risk means of capitalising on a possible stock market recovery.
Although it is possible to generate high returns from spread betting and forex, a buy-and-hold strategy can also yield impressive total returns. Investing during past bear markets, for example, has enabled investors to profit from the cyclicality of the stock market. With the FTSE 100 having always recovered from its lowest ebbs to report new record highs, buying low and selling high seems to be a consistently successful strategy.
Moreover, it is a far simpler means of generating a profit over the long term. Buying and holding high-quality shares is less labour-intensive than conducting multiple short-term trades. It also saves on commission costs, and does not require the use of leverage. This can make it a much more attractive option from a risk/reward standpoint.
Of course, buying and holding shares may in itself seem to be a risky move right now. Markets could realistically move lower in the near term, and lead to a difficult period for investors. But, through buying companies with solid balance sheets and strong cash flow, you can increase your chances of surviving the market crash and benefitting from its likely recovery.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Peter Stephens has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
