While spread betting and forex trading may offer the potential for near-term gains, they also carry a significant amount of risk. Their volatility and unpredictability, as well as leverage, could cause losses for investors. As such, buying undervalued FTSE 100 shares and holding them for the long term could be a better strategy.
With that in mind, here are two large-cap shares that seem to be undervalued at the present time. They are forecast to post strong earnings growth in the current year that may improve your prospects of making a million in the long run.
The rising gold price has had a positive impact on the prospects for precious metals mining company Polymetal (LSE: POLY) . Its shares have risen by 43% in the past year as investors have become increasingly bullish about the outlook for the wider sector.
Looking ahead, the company is forecast to post a rise in its bottom line of 32% in the current year. Despite this, it trades on a price-to-earnings growth (PEG) ratio of just 0.4. This suggests that it could offer a wide margin of safety, and there may be further capital growth ahead for its investors.
The gold price could realistically move higher. Geopolitical risks in the Middle East have been heightened in recent weeks, while the global trade war may mean that investors focus on defensive assets.
With US interest rates unlikely to move higher at a rapid pace, now could be the right time to buy a slice of Polymetal. Although it could be a risky stock to own due to its dependence on the gold price, its low valuation suggests that its risk/reward ratio is favourable for long-term investors.
The recent trading update from British American Tobacco (LSE: BATS) highlighted the progress it is making at what is an uncertain period for the tobacco market. It is delivering good growth in new categories, such as e-cigarettes, despite regulatory changes in the US. They have caused investors to become cautious about the wider industry, but British American Tobacco believes that they could produce a stronger regulatory environment in which it is well placed to succeed.
Additionally, the company is making progress in deleveraging. This will help to reduce its overall risks, and could improve its financial performance. It is also making market share gains in combustibles and in new categories that may produce a more resilient profit performance in the coming years.
In the current year, British American Tobacco is forecast to post a rise in net profit of 6%. Its price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio of 10.3 suggests that it offers good value for money, while a dividend yield of 6.4% highlights its income investing potential. As such, now could be a good time to buy it for the long term.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Peter Stephens owns shares of British American Tobacco. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
