The chart below was also posted on social media StockTwits/Twitter @AidanFX June 16 2020 showing that a bearish market pattern (blue) formed which then triggered the pair to react with a move lower. A bearish divergence pattern (purple) also formed and was clearly visible which also signalled for the move lower. Dynamic (black) and static (pink) resistance plus the 0.618% Fib. level (orange) also added to the reaction lower from the  blue box confluence zone. Momentum indicator crossed below the 100 level confirming the SELL and for momentum to continue lower. I called for traders to SELL GBP/USD and only a move above the confluence zone would invalidate the SELL trade setup. Stop loss was set above the confluence zone targeting the green 1:1 RR and 1:2 RR targets.
GBP/USD continues lower the rest of the trading week and on June 21 2020, the start of the new trading week, price reaches the 1:2 RR target at 1.2335 from 1.2570 entry for +235 pips. If you followed me on Twitter/Stocktwits @AidanFX you too could have caught the GBPUSD move lower.
FURTHER DISCLOSURES AND DISCLAIMER CONCERNING RISK, RESPONSIBILITY
Trading in the Foreign Exchange market is a challenging opportunity where above average returns are available for educated and experienced investors who are willing to take above average risk.
However, before deciding to participate in Foreign Exchange (FX) trading, you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of  xperience and risk appetite. Do not invest or trade capital you cannot afford to lose. EME PROCESSING AND CONSULTING, LLC, THEIR REPRESENTATIVES, AND ANYONE WORKING FOR OR WITHIN WWW.ELLIOTTWAVE- FORECAST.COM is not responsible for any loss from any form of distributed advice, signal,
Again, we fully DISCLOSE to the Subscriber base that the Service as a whole, the individual Parties, Representatives, or owners shall not be liable to any and all Subscribers for any losses or damages as a result of any action taken by the Subscriber from any trade idea or signal posted on
the website(s) distributed through any form of social-media, email, the website, and/or any other electronic, written, verbal, or future form of communication . All analysis, trading signals, trading recommendations, all charts, communicated interpretations of the wave counts, and all content from any media form produced by www.Elliottwave-forecast.com and/or the Representatives are solely the opinions and best efforts of the respective author(s).
In general Forex instruments are highly leveraged, and traders can lose some or all of their initial margin funds. All content provided by www.Elliottwave-forecast.com is expressed in good faith and is intended to help Subscribers succeed in the marketplace, but it is never guaranteed. There is no “holy grail” to trading or forecasting the market and we are wrong sometimes like everyone else.
Please understand and accept the risk involved when making any trading and/or investment decision.
UNDERSTAND that all the content we provide is protected through copyright of EME PROCESSING AND CONSULTING, LLC. It is illegal to disseminate in any form of communication any part or all of our proprietary information without specific authorization.
UNDERSTAND that you also agree to not allow persons that are not PAID SUBSCRIBERS to view any of the content not released publicly. IF YOU ARE FOUND TO BE IN VIOLATION OF THESE RESTRICTIONS you or your firm (as the Subscriber) will be charged fully with no discount for one year  subscription to our Premium Plus Plan at $1,799.88 for EACH person or firm
who received any of our content illegally through the respected intermediary’s (Subscriber in violation of terms) channel(s) of communication.
