Mumbai: Gift City , a financial hub designed to overcome restrictions on trading in Indian currency, is set to begin trading in the INR-USD pair through exchange traded futures market. This will probably reduce the quantum of trading in the overseas market that makes monitoring of it difficult for the regulator.
The central bank Monday issued directions for currency derivatives in any currency pair involving the Indian Rupee in international financial centres.
“Contracts in the Rupee shall be settled in a currency other than the Indian Rupee. Any person resident outside India may undertake these derivative contracts,” RBI said in a statement. “It has now been decided to allow Rupee derivatives (with settlement in foreign currency) to be traded in International Financial Services Centres (IFSCs), starting with Exchange Traded Currency Derivatives(ETCD).
The regulatory permission to trade in any currency derivative with the Indian Rupee as underlying, would probably address overseas investors’ demand for easier hedging options against their exposure to assets such as stocks, or bonds in India. In the absence of easier rules for such trading they were trading in Singapore, London and other markets in the so called Non-Deliverable Forwards.
“Gift IFSC exchanges can start making application to SEBI for product approval with detailed contract specifications and once product approval is granted they can start commencing trading,” a senior executive with the direct knowledge of the matter told ET.
So far, there are five cross currency pairs that are on offer for trading in the IFSC futures and options platform. They include euro-USD, pound-USD, yen-USD, yuan-USD and Australian dollar-USD. But these hardly attracted any trading with the cash market being overly concentrated in the INR – USD pair.
In 2018 Bank of England reported $23 billion in offshore rupee trades, while RBI sources estimate deliverable daily onshore forwards at $21 billion for 2019.
“We will be keen to launch the INR USD Futures and Options contracts on our India INX Derivatives platform on a non-delivery basis after obtaining necessary regulatory approvals,” said V. Balasubramaniam, MD & CEO at India International Exchange (IFSC) Ltd. “Our effort will be to get the international investors and non-resident investors to engage on this at the IFSC for all their needs including hedging.’’
Developing NDF market in IFSC aids in greater financial integration with the rest of the world as India’s economic growth increases, dealers said.
NDF markets are not a phenomenon peculiar to the Indian Rupee. They are common for currencies of many emerging market economies (EMEs).
