Based on Friday’s price action, the direction of June Comex gold over the near-term is likely to be determined by trader reaction to $1727.50.
Gold futures are edging higher late in the session on Friday as traders react to increasing tensions between the United States and China. The biggest fear for investors is that the intensifying spat will lead the U.S. or China to take action that would curtail the global economic recovery from the restrictions and lockdowns due to the coronavirus pandemic.
At 18:38 GMT, June Comex gold is trading $1733.10, up $11.20 or +0.65%.
U.S.-China friction came to the fore again over the source of the coronavirus and escalated further with China’s proposal to impose security laws on Hong Kong, drawing flak from Washington.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart, however, momentum has been trending lower since the formation of the closing price reversal top on May 18.
A trade through $1775.80 will negate the closing price reversal and signal a resumption of the uptrend. The main trend will change to down on a trade through the last main bottom at $1676.00.
The minor trend is down. This confirmed the shift in momentum. A trade through $1757.60 will change the minor trend to up.
The short-term range is $1788.80 to $1666.20. Its 50% level at $1727.50 is controlling the near-term direction of the market.
The main range is $1576.00 to $1788.80. Its retracement zone at $1682.40 to $1657.30 is the next potential target zone. This zone stopped the selling at $1676.00 and $1666.20 recently.
Based on Friday’s price action, the direction of June Comex gold over the near-term is likely to be determined by trader reaction to $1727.50.
A sustained move over $1727.50 will indicate the presence of buyers. If this can build a support base at this level, it could generate the momentum needed to challenge $1775.80 and $1788.80.
A sustained move under $1727.50 will signal the presence of sellers. This could lead to an eventual acceleration to the downside with the next major target the 50% level at $1682.40.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
