If conditions continue to improve and as more regions open up their economies, we’re likely to see gold drift toward $1682.40 to $1657.30. A resurgence above $1727.50 will be the first sign that doubt over a sustainable recovery is creeping back into the market.
Gold futures are trading lower in the overnight session on Tuesday as tensions eased somewhat between the United States and China as to who’s to blame for the start of the coronavirus pandemic.
Moves by some countries to relax virus restrictions also dampened the precious metal’s investment appeal. A stronger U.S. Dollar is also weighing on demand for the dollar-denominated asset as well as renewed interest in higher-yielding assets like stocks.
At 09:54 GMT, June Comex gold is trading $1704.90, down $8.40 or -0.49%.
The recent slow, grinding, sideways to lower price action reflects investors weighing fears of a second wave of coronavirus cases against efforts to reopen businesses and loosen restrictions.
The main trend is down according to the daily swing chart. It turned down last week when sellers took out the main bottom at $1704.10 although some bearish traders are probably waiting for the swing bottom at $1666.20 to fail before considering an actual change in trend has taken place.
The short-term range is $1788.80 to $1666.20. Its 50% level at $1727.50 is new resistance.
The intermediate range is $1576.00 to $1788.80. Its retracement zone at $1682.40 to $1657.30 is providing support. This zone stopped recent selling at $1666.20 and $1676.00.
The main range is $1453.00 to $1788.80. Its retracement zone at $1620.90 to $1581.30 is a major support area.
The market is currently trading inside a pair of 50% levels at $1727.50 and $1682.40, suggesting investor indecision. Like I wrote earlier, investors are weighing the possibility of a second-wave of coronavirus cases against an improvement in the economy.
If conditions continue to improve and as more regions open up their economies, we’re likely to see gold drift toward $1682.40 to $1657.30. Taking out $1657.30 will show that investors are increasing their confidence and that the worst may be over.
A resurgence above $1727.50 will be the first sign that doubt over a sustainable recovery is creeping back into the market.
As long as investors continue to adopt a “wait and see” approach, traders are going to have to be content with a rangebound trade.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
