A few short-covering rallies aside, we believe August Comex gold is likely to trade into the $1621.90 to $1582.40 retracement zone over the near-term.
Gold prices fell more than 2% on Friday as interest rates spiked lower in response to a stronger-than-expected U.S. Non-Farm Payrolls report . The data led to increased optimism of a rebound in the global economy and a faster-than-expected recovery in the U.S. economy. It also led to speculation that perhaps a widely expected U.S. recession will not be as severe as precious thought.
At 17:56 GMT, August Comex gold is trading $1684.60, down $42.80 or -2.48%.
The surge in Treasury yields drove up demand for the U.S. Dollar , which weighed on foreign demand for dollar-denominated gold. The slightly firmer U.S. Dollar and stronger yields means the opportunity cost to hold gold in a portfolio has gone up, giving money managers a valid reason to liquidate long gold positions.
The main trend is down according to the daily swing chart. The trend turned down earlier in the week when sellers took out the previous main bottom at $1701.60. The main trend will change to up on a move through the previous main top at $1761.00.
The downtrend was reaffirmed earlier on Friday when $1683.30 failed as support. This puts the market in a position to challenge the April 21 main bottom at $1668.40.
The short-term range is $1789.00 to $1668.40. Its 50% level at $1728.70 is resistance. Holding below this level will help maintain the strong downside bias.
The main range is $1454.80 to $1789.00. If sellers can take out $1668.40 then look for the downside pressure to possibly extend into its retracement zone at $1621.90 to $1582.40.
A few short-covering rallies aside, we believe August Comex gold is likely to trade into the $1621.90 to $1582.40 retracement zone over the near-term. This is also a key value zone so we expected buyers to show up on a test of this zone.
The primary driver of the selling pressure will be demand for risky assets, rising Treasury yields and the shedding of safe-haven gold positions.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
