Gold is going to have a hard time sustaining a rally if the big three – the dollar, Treasury yields and stocks continue to rise. We could see a few counter-trend rallies over the near-term, but they’re likely to create fresh shorting opportunities unless the narrative about a potential U.S.-China trade deal turns negative.
Gold futures traded lower on Wednesday, pressured by increased demand for risky assets. The major stock indexes rose to record highs. Treasury yields also moved higher, helping to make the U.S. Dollar a more attractive asset. The stronger greenback dampened foreign demand for dollar-denominated gold.
Boosting risk appetite was hope that the United States and China would soon reach an initial trade deal. Also bolstering prices was solid U.S. economic data, which once again confirmed the resiliency of the economy.
At 20:30 GMT, February Comex gold is trading $1461.00, down $6.40 or -0.44%.
The main trend is down according to the daily swing chart. A trade through $1453.10 will reaffirm the downtrend. The main trend will change to up on a trade through $1486.00.
The main range is $1418.90 to $1571.70. Its retracement zone at $1477.30 to $1495.30 is controlling the near-term direction of the market. It’s also resistance. Trading on the weak side of this zone is helping to generate the current downside bias.
A short-term range is $1525.20 to $1453.10. Its 50% level at $1489.10 is also resistance. It falls inside the main retracement zone.
On November 26, gold formed a closing price reversal bottom. Counter-trend buyers probably came in to defend the $1453.10 main bottom. A trade through $1470.00 will confirm the reversal bottom. This won’t change the trend to up, but it could lead to a 2 to 3 day counter-trend rally.
Over the near-term, the key level to watch is $1453.10. This is a potential trigger point for an acceleration to the downside. The daily chart shows there is plenty of room to the downside with the main bottom at $1418.90 the next major downside target.
Gold is going to have a hard time sustaining a rally if the big three – the dollar, Treasury yields and stocks continue to rise. We could see a few counter-trend rallies over the near-term, but they’re likely to create fresh shorting opportunities unless the narrative about a potential U.S.-China trade deal turns negative.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
