Last Friday, the New York Stock Exchange shut its doors, and floor traders went home for the foreseeable future. All trading will be electronic going forward.
Perhaps I’m old school, but that seems like a recipe for disaster. With just computers and algorithms in control, I see the potential for a sudden and sharp decline in the stock market.
The amount of new daily cases outside of China has grown to approximately 30,000. If the spread continues at this rate, it could double by next Sunday. That would likely trigger another wave of quarantine measures.
I don’t think we should expect a sustainable low in the stock market until the rate of daily cases peaks and begins a clear and steady decline. According to WorldOMeter, on March 20, 2020 there were some 30,664 new cases worldwide. Up significantly from February.
Even with the relentless decline stocks, the AAII bull/bear spread suggests market participants are still looking to buy the dip in stocks. At previous bottoms, the percentage reached much lower levels (-29.46, -27.97, and -26.54). Therefore, I’m reasonably confident the current reading of -16.79 is not enough to support a sustainable bottom in stocks – dip buyers may get punished.
Longer-term, there is no doubt in my mind that gold is heading higher. Governments are about to print massive amounts of money to offset the economic meltdown. However, gold remains vulnerable to further liquidation after hitting our March $1700 target . I think prices could test $1350-$1400 before this cycle bottoms.
Our Gold Cycle Indicator (GCI) finished the week at 46. Usually, I would start to look for a bottom about now. However, the current cycle is more aggressive than most, it could take another month or two for prices to bottom.
AG Thorson is a registered CMT and expert in technical analysis. He believes we are in the final stages of a global debt super-cycle. For more information, please visit https://goldpredict.com/
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
