There are currently three classes of Google stock: A, B and C. Each of these different classes is explained in greater detail below.
Google class A ( GOOGL ) shares have consistently traded at a premium compared to their class C counterparts. This is because the market assigns a value to the voting power that an investor will receive if they buy class A stock.
The premium is usually between 1%-5%, for class A, but the two classifications of publicly-traded Google stocks generally move in close tandem.
For example, between January 2018 and January 2019, the closing price of class A stock ranged from $984.66 per share to $1285.50 per share. In contrast, the closing price of Google class C stock ranged from $976.21 to $1268.32 per share.
While they do not grant as much voting power as class B shares, owning class A shares is the only way that an average investor or a Google outsider will be able to vote on decisions at stockholder meetings.
Class B shares are held by insiders, directors and the founders at Alphabet and Google. The majority of this classification of Google stock is owned by Larry Page and Sergey Brin, with a smaller amount being held by former Google chief executive officer (CEO) Eric E. Schmidt, independent director L. John Doerr and senior vice-president and chief legal officer David C. Drummond.
Many argue that investing in Alphabet, just like with many Silicon Valley companies, is an investment in the leadership and the founders more than anything. As a result, by maintaining majority voting control of their company, Page and Brin ensure that investor confidence in their company remains high, so long as they both remain at the helm.
Google class C ( GOOGL ) were created following the first stock split in April 2014, and ownership of these shares grant no voting privileges at shareholder meetings. Google stock class C trades at a slight discount to its class A counterpart, but the two prices often move in correlation.
Since its creation, Google stock class C has been ‘split’ once. As previously mentioned, this was not a stock split in the traditional sense. Instead, it was a form of compensating investors in class C shares on the assumption that they would trade at a slight discount to class A shares.
This compensation, in the form of 2.7455 shares for every 1000 class C shares that an investor held, was granted if the stock price of class C and A differed by more than 1% in the first year. Ever since this first year, class C shareholders have not been compensated for any deviations in price.
The creation of class C shares also enabled Google to offer stock incentives to employees and executive officers, and revenue raised by selling the shares has facilitated acquisitions without requiring Page or Brin to give up majority control of their company.
Will Google stock split again?
Many investors are currently speculating over whether Google will stock split again. For one, the current share price makes the stocks inaccessible to certain investors, particularly those who trade part-time or do not have a lot of capital.
Larry Page and Sergey Brin have stated, however, that they aren’t concerned by this and that they prefer their investors to have a long-term interest in Google’s vision rather than those investors and traders seeking to make a quick profit from Google stock.
Since Page and Brin hold a majority of the voting share between them, any future stock split or increase in voting power for shareholders will have to be approved by both of the founders in order for it to pass through the board. If their previous voting record is anything to go on, this seems unlikely at present.
Disclaimer: for the purpose of this article, since all splits took place before the formation of Alphabet Inc., we have referred to the stock splits as ‘Google’ stock splits, rather than stock splits of Alphabet.
2 United States Securities and Exchange Commission, 2019
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Discover the range of markets you can spread bet on - and learn how they work - with IG Academy's online course.
Practice makes perfect. Take what you’ve learned in this shares strategy article, and try it out risk-free in your demo account.
Put the lessons in this article to use in a live account. Upgrading is quick and simple.
Deal on 70 key US stocks out-of-hours, so you can react to news
Put the knowledge you’ve gained from this article into practice. Log in to your account now.
