This Hertz fiasco is one of the most-sordid, depressing stories in market history. The company shares are worthless or close to it.
Yet somehow Robinhood traders were duped into pumping it.
The bond holders need to be made 100% whole before equity gets a sense. To give you a sesne of where that stands, the 2022 bonds are trading at 42-cents and that's about par for the course. There is a total of 5.5B in debt outstanding overall so at 42% recovery, that's something like a 2.3B shortfall.
That all needs to be paid out by liquidating whatever assets are left.
Somehow the equity is trading at $2.83 and the bondholders got the idea to sell $1 billion in shares, which was approximately 247m shares at the levels where they petitioned the judge. That compares to 142m currently outstanding in the entire float.
The bondholders have been honest with the judge. They told him "the common stock could ultimately be worthless."
But, hey, if we offer $1B in shares and someone wants to buy them, who is the judge to stop it? The judge just agreed in a decision shortly after the close.
Now I don't think they'll actually be able to float that much stock at reasonable levels but in this market, you never know. In any case, that money will go straight from the stock holders to the bond holders who no-doubt can't believe their good fortune.
The NYSE is already in the process of delisting HTZ.
On the one hand, this is hilarious. On the other, it says so many bad things about market functioning, the intellect of market participants and the overall madness of crowds; that it's frightening.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
