Most online forex brokers will have a list of at least 80 currency pairs to pick and choose from. Common currency pairs that are traded in the forex market are EUR/USD, GBP/USD, USD/JPY, AUD/USD, USD/CHF, USD/CAD and NZD/USD. But, just because a currency pair is popular doesn’t make it profitable. Making informed investments based on research and statistical data helps you limit the risks involved in the binary options you buy.
Online forex platforms let you pick the type of binary option you want to buy. Depending on your choice, the payout percentage on the binary options will vary accordingly. The most-traded binary options are listed below.
High or low: You can predict if the price will rise above or fall below the strike price of your currency pair. For instance, if the EUR/USD is valued at 1.1134, you can buy a high or a call option at 1.1139. Likewise, you can buy a low or a put option at 1.1131.
Range or boundary: You can predict if the price of the currency pair stays within the strike price or if it will exceed it. For instance, if the GBP/USD is valued at 1.2452 and you expect it to reach 1.240, you can buy a range option. Likewise, you can buy a boundary option if you expect it to reach 1.259.
One touch: You can predict the price a currency pair is likely to reach. For instance, if the AUD/USD is valued at 0.6147, you can buy a one-touch option at 0.6150.
No touch: You can predict the price a currency pair is not likely to reach. For instance, if the AUD/USD is valued at 0.6147, you can buy a no-touch option at 0.6140.
60 seconds: You can predict the rise or fall of a currency pair value within 1 minute. For instance, if USD/CAD is valued at 1.3997 and you expect it to reach 1.3999 in the next 60 seconds, you can buy a call option.
Once you’ve decided on the type of forex binary option to trade, you can choose to buy a call or a put contract. If you expect the value of the currency pair to rise, buy a call option. And if you expect the value of the currency pair to fall, buy a put option. This does not apply for one touch and no touch binary options.
You need to set a time duration for the forex binary option to trade. The expiry on a forex binary option contract can be anywhere between 30 seconds to 1 day or even 1 week. Many traders indulge in intraday binary options to make a quick buck. Be careful while following in their footsteps; you could burn your fingers on a binary option just as fast.
Unlike forex trading, binary option contracts are purchased for a fixed rate and a fixed reward. Both the buyer and the seller of the binary option contracts will have to put in their money beforehand. So, you can cash in on your earnings as soon the currency pair hits the strike price.
Foreign exchange trading does not have a physical marketplace. You have to open an account with an online forex broker to be able to trade in currency pairs. Since global economic and political news has a drastic impact on forex, you have to explore the full set of analytical tools that an online broker provides with a registered account.
Based on crucial factors such as pricing, trade fees, trade execution speed, ease of use and regulations, Benzinga recommends the following online brokers for trading forex binary options.
