Facebook has 2.3 billion active users across the globe and a market cap of $585 billion (as of 12 July 2019). Find out how you can buy and sell Facebook shares with this useful guide on the world’s biggest social media network.
You can buy Facebook shares via IG’s share dealing service, using your desktop or the IG app. Simply follow these four steps to buy Facebook shares:
Open an IG share dealing account: you can open your account here, it only takes a few minutes
Log in to your account: once you’re logged in, go to ‘My IG dashboard’
Find Facebook shares: go to the 'finder' panel, type in ‘Facebook’ and click on its name in the dropdown list
Remember, share dealing is a non-leveraged investment, meaning you need to pay the full value of the shares upfront. As soon as you’ve confirmed your purchase, the shares will be shown in your account. If the Facebook share price moves, the change will also be reflected in your account.
You can sell your Facebook shares through the IG share dealing service in just four steps. When you’re ready to sell:
You can trade Facebook shares using derivative products such as contracts for difference (CFDs) or spread bets. This is different to share dealing in that you do not own the physical shares, you simply speculate on the price movements of the underlying asset by going long or short.
Derivatives use leverage, which means you don’t need the full value of the shares upfront, instead you’ll put down a deposit – called the margin. With CFD trading and spread betting, your profit or loss will be based on the full value of your position. This means both profits and losses may be magnified compared to your initial deposit.
When you trade CFDs on Facebook shares, you are speculating on whether the share price will go up or down. If you think it will rise, you’d go long and if you think it will fall, you’d go short. With CFDs, you exchange the price difference between opening and closing your position.
When you spread bet on Facebook, you are betting an amount of money per point on its share price movement. If your prediction is right, you will make a profit and if you’re wrong, you will make a loss. The extent of the price movement and your position size determines your profit or loss.
In 2003, a student of Harvard University - Mark Zuckerberg - unknowingly launched his career into becoming one of the most influential people in history. It all started when he designed an online service called Facemash. The service was shut down by university officials after just two days, but Zuckerberg got the traction he needed. Almost immediately after the shutdown, he started planning and coding Facebook with Dustin Moskovitz and Eduardo Saverin, which launched as ‘The Facebook’ in February 2004. By the end of the year, it had one million users.
Between 2005 and 2011, a lot of business development happened for Facebook. It secured the official facebook.com domain, and expanded its reach, functions, teams and physical locations. It hired Google executive Sheryl Sandberg and also received financial boosts from organisations such as Accel Partners and Microsoft .
In April 2012, Facebook acquired Instagram and a month later it held its initial public offering (IPO) – ending the first trading day with a valuation of $104 billion. This was slightly higher than the $77 billion to $96 billion valuation it had been predicting. Facebook stock was listed at $38 a share, but after a week of trading, the price fell to less than $27. The drop was attributed to a lack of investor confidence in the stock and disappointing first quarter (Q1) results. This was the same year that Facebook reached one billion users.
A lot of product development took place over the next five years, making Facebook more popular and pushing the share price over the $100 mark. However, the focus shifted to more legal troubles in 2017 as Facebook’s policies came under scrutiny for issues related to fake accounts and user privacy. In 2018, Zuckerberg attended his first congressional hearing on Facebook’s data privacy. The turbulence in the business caused Facebook shares to drop from $184 to $153 in March 2018. It recovered in July, reaching $214, but then fell dramatically to $124 by the end of the year. Since then, Facebook has committed thousands of personnel to work on the platform’s safety and security.
In June 2019, Facebook announced the launch of its cryptocurrency, Libra. The share price experienced a slow upward movement from $187 to $188 a day after the announcement was made.
Although Facebook does not have a lot of direct competition, there are other players in the market that may influence its popularity – including Snapchat , Twitter and Pinterest . However, because it owns so many other social media channels, Facebook still has the biggest market share.
The majority of its shares belong to institutional investors and key figures in the Facebook sphere, including Zuckerberg, Sandberg, Moskovitz and Saverin. Chief technology officer Michael Schroepfer and WhatsApp’s chief executive officer (CEO) Jan Koum also hold Facebook stock.
There are four members on Facebook’s management team:
