The firms team up to provide connectivity to the Chinese international derivatives markets through the TT platform.
Photo: Will the Chinese flag start waving over the retail currency market any time soon?, Photo: Bloomberg
Chicago-headquartered Trading Technologies International, Inc. (TT), a global provider of trading software, infrastructure and data solutions, and Huatai Futures, the subsidiary of Huatai Securities, headquartered in Guang Zhou, Guang Dong Province, China, today announced they have teamed up to provide connectivity to the Chinese international derivatives markets through the TT platform.
Through partnering with TT, Huatai’s global customers will be able to trade Chinese international derivatives products listed on the China Financial Futures Exchange (CFFEX), Dalian Commodities Exchange (DCE), Shanghai Futures Exchange (SHFE), Shanghai International Energy Exchange (INE) and Zhengzhou Commodity Exchange (ZCE) via the TT platform, according to the announcement.
“We are thrilled to announce Huatai Futures has chosen the TT platform as a solution to support international clients’ access to trade China. By partnering with Huatai Futures, we are immediately building on our commitment to provide a best-in-class experience for our customers,” Mark Pottle, regional executive sales director for Trading Technologies in Asia, said in a statement.
Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
Elf Chen, deputy general manager of Huatai (Hong Kong) Futures Limited, said in that the partnership with Trading Technologies comes at a time when China is opening up its listed derivatives markets for global investors while overseas listed derivatives markets are getting more and more attention from Chinese investors.
“Together with TT, Huatai can now provide a one-stop solution for overseas and Chinese institutions at the highest global standard,” Chen noted.
TT’s privately managed infrastructure spans five continents, delivering secure market access and superior performance from anywhere in the world. Designed specifically for professional traders, TT incorporates a broad array of customizable tools to accommodate trading strategies that range from manual point-and-click trading to single-digit microsecond automated order entry.
