Forex trading allows you to speculate on the changes in the strengths of different currencies over time and buy and sell them against each other.
Online traders promise very lucrative, guaranteed returns, which tend to stop after victims have invested money and got their first round of profits, the FCA says.
Social media sites are increasingly littered with bogus Forex traders, with the hashtag #forextrader attached to more than 4million posts on Instagram and a total of £27million lost to such schemes in the UK in 2018/2019.
After the finance watchdog banned another type of trading called binary options in April, officials warn that unauthorised Forex scams are on the rise.
Officials urge potential victims to check whether traders, especially those who promise huge profits on social media, are approved by them.
Several Instagram Forex traders rely on celebrity endorsements and non-geniune reviews. Ash Trades posted this picture of Marnie Simpson from reality TV show Geordie Shore using his trading signals. It is not clear if she was aware he is unauthorised at the time of her post
Sophia advertises celebrity endorsements from the likes of Ex-On The Beach Star Stephen Bear (left) and former Love Island winner Nathan Massey (right). A spokesman for Mr Massey said he was not aware Sophia was on the FCA warning list when he endorsed her. It is not clear whether Mr Bear was aware she is not authorised
Pictures of TV personalities such as Geordie Shore's Chloe Ferry (pictured) show them posing with their phones and thanking 'Ash Trades' for making them extra money. It is not clear if Miss Ferry was aware he is unauthorised at the time of her post
Luke Blackburn, 23, from East Riding in Yorkshire, describes himself as a Forex trader on Instagram and boasts 13,100 followers.
How do Forex scams work?
UK consumers are being increasingly targeted by unauthorised forex trading and brokerage firms offering the chance to trade in foreign exchange, contracts for difference, binary options and cryptoassets.
They promise very high returns and guaranteed profits, either through a managed account where the firm makes trades on the investor's behalf or by trading using the firm's trading platform.
Most consumers report they have initially received some returns from the firm to give the impression that their trading has been a success.
They will then be encouraged to invest more money but at this stage or soon after the returns stop, their account is suspended and there's no further contact with the firm.
Many scam firms claim to be based in the UK and even claim to be FCA authorised.
You should check the FCA register of authorised firms before dealing with any firm.
If they're not authorised by us, it's probably a scam. You can also check the warnings list of firms to avoid.
The 23-year-old says he dropped out of college and invested in Forex with a £1,000 loan at the age of 18, which has made him enough money to buy three homes, an expensive car and a jet-setting lifestyle.
He claims his customers can do the same by 'copying his exact trades' and all they need is '£300 of your own money to back your trades' and five minutes a day.
His profile is covered in pictures of him next to his large Mercedes sports car, wearing designer coats and watches.
Several images show dozens of £20 notes next to shopping bags from the likes of Louis Vuitton and luxury watchmaker Tag Heuer.
His website, Trade With Infinity, offers online tutorials and educational courses on Forex trading.
Monthly packages for standard 'signals' are priced at £39.99, while 'VIP signals' will cost you £99.99 a month.
But Mr Blackburn, or LukeTradesFX, is not accredited by the FCA, which makes it illegal for him to offer the services he advertises.
According to the FCA warning list: 'We believe this firm has been providing financial services or products in the UK without our authorisation.
'This firm is not authorised by us and is targeting people in the UK. Based upon information we hold, we believe it is carrying on regulated activities which require authorisation.'
Mr Blackburn has taken his Instagram page offline and told MailOnline he does not need to be regulated.
Twenty-three-year-old Luke Blackburn (pictured) says he dropped out of college and invested in Forex with a £1,000 loan at the age of 18, which has made him enough money to buy three homes, an expensive car and a jet-setting lifestyle
A woman who goes by the name Sophia FX trades has also been listed as unauthorised and a potential scam trader.
She has 17,000 followers on Instagram, which is full of pictures of her in glamorous outfits surrounded by wads of cash.
How do you know if it's a scam?
There are four important things to look for when considering investing in a Foreign Exchange scheme.
Business foundations: Does the trader or trading firm have a proper business set up with a website, or are they just operating through social media?
Experience: Does the trader/individuals have any proof they are experienced in trading? At least two years' experience is preferable.
Regulation: Does the trader/education provider have the necessary FCA accreditation for the service they provide? They need regulatory cover either through a trading partner or direct from the FCA.
Reviews: Are the service reviews of the trader left through a credible review service and do the reviews relate directly to the product being advertised? Celebrity endorsements do not count as credible.
Others show her dining at restaurants with views of Canary Wharf and the City of London with captions such as 'drinks with a view... join our team and follow our Forex signals and profit as we do in generation an additional income'.
Sophia claims she has clients who earn between £200 and £2,000 a day after they invested £350 in her free 30-day trial.
On an Instagram story entitled 'Why Forex', she boasts: 'No experience needed, make £50 to £300 a day, become a financial expert.'
She also has celebrity endorsements from several reality TV stars.
Ex-On The Beach Star Stephen Bear urges his followers to 'Send my girl @sophiafxtrades a watsapp [sic]', with former Love Island winner Nathan Massey doing the same.
Sophia was recently added to the FCA warning list, which states she is offering illegal services she is not allowed to charge money for.
A representative for Mr Massey said he was not aware Sophia is not an authorised trader. It is not clear if Mr Bear knew she was on the FCA warning list at the time of his post.
Another unauthorised Forex trader, 'Ash Trades', claims to offer real-time Forex signals solely through Instagram and Whatsapp.
He has 13,100 followers and regularly posts pictures of himself at the wheel of a sports car with handfuls of cash.
He uploads photos of himself on luxury holidays to Marbella and the USA, which often feature fast cars, yachts and fine dining restaurants.
Ash has celebrity endorsements from Geordie Shore stars Chloe Ferry and Marnie Simpson.
Pictures of the TV personalities show them posing with their phones and thanking 'Ash Trades' for making them extra money. It is not clear if the reality stars knew he was not authorised at the time of their posts.
Ash claims all customers need to do is send him a direct message with the words 'FREE 30 DAY' and he will send buy and sell signals to copy in trading.
The FCA warns he is not allowed to sell 'signals' and is continuing to do so despite official warnings. His Instagram page is still active.
Biomedical sciences student Gurvin Singh, 20, from Plymouth, was also recently added to the warning list.
He claims he has made £100,000 after learning about Forex in his first year of university and giving people online tutorials.
Mr Singh drives a Maserati Ghibli, often showing it off on his Instagram profile, where he also flaunts his use of private jets and five-star holidays.
But this week the watchdog warned Mr Singh is not an authorised Forex trader.
Biomedical sciences student Gurvin Singh, 20, from Plymouth, was also recently added to the warning list
Mr Singh drives a Maserati Ghibli, often showing it off on his Instagram profile, where he also flaunts his use of private jets and five-star holidays
Listing his companies Gurvin Singh Dyal, GS3 Trades Ltd, and GS3 Marketing Limited, they added: 'This firm is not authorised by us and is targeting people in the UK.
'Based upon information we hold, we believe it is carrying on regulated activities which require authorisation.'
But Singh claims he does not have to have authorisation and says he stopped advertising copy trading on social media months ago - despite his Instagram profile being active this week.
He said: 'I do not feel I have done anything wrong and everything will be carrying on in the new year. I will be talking to the FCA about what I can and can't do.
Young entrepreneur Jake Lee dropped out of his economics university course to set up his own trading education business called Improve Your Future.
He offers online learning material to help people make money through financial markets. He works with an FCA-regulated trading partner for his copy trading service but spends most of his time trying to educate people on how to avoid scams.
He claims social media fraudsters are ruining the industry's reputation and luring vulnerable people of his age into losing money.
A picture on Sophia FX Trade's Instagram shows her dining at restaurants with views of Canary Wharf and the City of London with captions such as 'drinks with a view... join our team and follow our Forex signals and profit as we do in generation an additional income'
Another post by Sophia FX Trades reads: 'Want to start trading? Drop me a message...'
Ash Trades advertises his 'services' by claiming he can work anywhere in the world. This picture was taken in a resort in Greece and claims customers can make up to £2,000 a day
The 21-year-old told MailOnline: 'I'm glad to see this issue being addressed properly.
'Trading online is an amazing opportunity for individuals to take control of their own investments, however the industry and opportunity has been ruined by the rise of trading scam schemes exploiting those individuals genuinely looking to improve their futures.
'Manipulative techniques are so common in this industry, and it's not a surprise that the majority of scams nowadays stunt their lifestyles rather than their actual honest trading results.
'Nearly half of our client base have been scammed before by an online get rich quick scheme, I'm just thankful that these clients picked themselves back up, put their trust in us and are now reaping the real genuine rewards from this amazing opportunity.'
MailOnline has contacted Sophia FX Trades and Ash Trades for comment.
***Have you lost money on a Forex scam? Email lara.keay@mailonline.co.uk or call 02036151637***
Share or comment on this article:
