India’s foreign exchange reserves rose by $64 billion in 2019 to touch $457.5 billion.
An analysis of reserve accumulation by the Singaporebased DBS shows that despite a few bad years in between, India piled up $176 billion since August 2013 taper tantrums.
The Reserve Bank of India’s dollar buying spree in 2019 could well be the best buffer available for the economy when renewed geopolitical threats turn the oil economy adverse. India turned out to be the biggest accumulator of Greenbacks with it buying the highest among all major emerging markets as it utilised the opportunity of high inflows.
India’s foreign exchange reserves rose by $64 billion in 2019 to touch $457.5 billion as of December 27, 2019, according to RBI data. This is the highest accumulation of reserves among major Asian peer central banks. Most other peer central banks have piled up at best around $10-15 billion during the year with Taiwan adding $15 billion and Thailand adding $14 billion. While Indonesia, Philippines , Malaysia and Korea have piled even lesser amounts.
An analysis of reserve accumulation by the Singaporebased DBS shows that despite a few bad years in between, India piled up $176 billion since August 2013 taper tantrums.
Global markets reacted adversely to the US Fed announcement that it would go slow on quantitative easing, resulting in hardening of US treasury yields and pull-out of funds from emerging markets. Korea and Taiwan come at a distant second and third with their central banks piling up $76 billion and $65 billion respectively during the period.
Currently, the reserves are adequate to cover over ten months’ imports. In the current times of global uncertainties, these reserves would come in handy to defend the rupee. “Authorities have been steadfast in building reserves, to build a strong buffer against global uncertainties,” said Radhika Rao, India economist at DBS. “In the process, ensuring a stable currency in the face of short-term flows and contain vulnerabilities arising from a rising external debt, owing to higher external commercial borrowings last year.”
However, on the flip side, the pile-up in reserves has local rupee liquidity implications as the central bank has to convert the dollar into rupee, which forms a part of the base money or the reserve money and has to be released into the system as cash.
A reserve pile-up of $64 billion is equivalent to ₹5.12 lakh crore of rupee liquidity.
In the absence of strong currency demand, there could be excess liquidity in the system. “Liquidity is being handled actively, keeping conditions flush to ensure adequate policy transmission, with dollar absorption from the system also adding to the surplus,” Rao said. “This is being balanced by operationtwist moves, which are liquidity-neutral but undertaken to lower wide term premia.”
