In the previous week, the reserves had declined by USD 113 million to USD 479.455 billion.
During FY20, the country's foreign exchange reserves had risen by almost USD 62 billion.
MUMBAI: India's foreign exchange reserves increased by USD 1.622 million to USD 481.078 billion in the week to May 1, due to rise in the foreign currency assets, according to RBI data.
In the previous week, the reserves had declined by USD 113 million to USD 479.455 billion.
The forex reserves had touched a life-time high of USD 487.23 billion in the week to March 6, after it rose by USD 5.69 billion.
During FY20, the country's foreign exchange reserves had risen by almost USD 62 billion.
In the reporting week ended May 1, 2020, the foreign currency assets (FCA), a major component of the overall reserves, rose by USD 1.752 billion to USD 443.316 billion.
Expressed in dollar terms, the foreign currency assets include the effect of appreciation or depreciation of non-US units like the euro, pound and yen held in the foreign exchange reserves.
The gold reserves declined by USD 623 million to USD 32.277 billion in the reporting week, the Reserve Bank data showed.
The special drawing rights with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) increased by USD 5 million to USD 1.426 billion.
The country's reserve position with the IMF also rose by USD 489 million to USD 4.059 billion during the reporting week, the data showed.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
