Borrowings by Indian firms through loans;
All investments in equity in incorporated entities (public,
as notified from time to time;
(ETFs) which invest more than 50% (fifty)per cent in equity;
Depository receipts issued against equity instruments.
"equity instruments" throughout the NDI Rules. The
introduced under the NDI Rules. The term "hybrid
proposal in this regard is, as these instruments were regulated
been amended by the NDI Rules. As per the NDI Rules,
company (as defined under the Companies Act, 2013) or an office,
outside India and conducting e-commerce business. In terms of
in e-commerce activities in India.
sectors of the Indian economy in relation to coal mining, single
taken into account by the NDI Rules. Since the NDI Rules were
notified by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, it was
error. However, now pursuant to the Amendment Rules, the changes
companies. Please note that under the NDI Rules, the investment
each series of debentures, preference shares or share warrant. Some
key changes are as below:
With effect from 01 April 2020, the aggregate limit for
sectoral caps as provided in Schedule I of the NDI Rules. This
increase the cap for FPI, beyond the aggregate limit of 24% (twenty
four percent). Though this is not a major change, it is a change
company may on or before 31 March 2020, decrease such aggregate
its aggregate limit, if such company had decreased the same, to the
percent) or the sectoral cap/statutory ceiling. However, once the
aggregate limit of FPI investment is increased, the same cannot be
decreased to a lower threshold by the company.
the working group under the chairman ship of Shri H.R. Khan, Deputy
investment head room available to FPIs. This change in NDI Rules
sectoral cap and permitting companies to reduce the same, if they
India in widely followed international indices.
company's paid up equity capital on a fully diluted basis, or
paid up value of each series of debentures, preference shares or
investments that caused the breach. If they fail to do so, the
investor group would be treated as an FDI investment.
defined under TISPRO. Under the new NDI Rules, a FVCI can invest in
debt instrument issued by an Indian start-up". Also, the words
VII. Mode of Payment and Reporting Requirements: No change as
the earlier position under TISPRO have been retained.
the regulatory powers between the Central Government and the RBI,
in relation to regulating of foreign investment in India, has
finally taken place under the NDI Rules. It is expected that this
incorporated into the NDI Rules and vice-versa. For example, the
tracking on the liberalizations it had announced earlier.
1. Headed by the erstwhile Governor of RBI, Mr. Raghuram
5. Reserve Bank of India Notification No.
preference shares issued as on and up to April 30, 2007 and
to June 7, 2007 till their original maturity. Non-convertible/
9. SEBI (Foreign Portfolio Investors) Regulations, 2014
(superseded by SEBI (Foreign Portfolio Investors) Regulations,
Internal Trade's (DPIIT) Notification No. G.S.R. 364(E), dated
the 11 April 2018- An entity shall be considered as a Start-up: (i)
limited company (as defined in the Companies Act, 2013) or
(under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008) in India. In
the case of Start-ups in the biotechnology sector, the period shall
years since incorporation/ registration has not exceeded Rs. 25
crore; (iii) Entity is working towards innovation, development or
improvement of products or processes or services, or if it is a
guide to the subject matter. Specialist advice should be sought
