A US dollar bill is pictured behind a protective mask, which are widely used as protective gear against COVID-19, in this illustration taken March 17. (REUTERS/Alexey Pavlishak/File Photo)
Indonesia’s foreign exchange (forex) reserves dropped US$9.4 billion in March to $121 billion as Bank Indonesia (BI) stepped up market intervention to stabilize the rupiah exchange rate amid heavy capital outflows, according to the central bank.
Forex reserves have continued to decrease since February,  when they dropped from $131.7 billion in January, the second-highest level in the country’s history. March’s figure is enough to support seven months of imports and payments of the government’s short-term debts and is above the international adequacy standard of about three months of imports.
“The fear has induced capital outflow and amplified exchange rate pressures on the rupiah, especially in the second and third week of March 2020,” BI wrote in a statement on Tuesday.
The rupiah lost around 15 percent of its value against the dollar in March as investors rushed to sell riskier assets and flock to safe haven assets amid fears over COVID-19’s rapid spread.
Foreign investors have sold Rp 148.76 trillion (US$9.04 billion) in Indonesian assets, including Rp 135.08 trillion in government bonds and Rp 9.71 trillion in Indonesian shares, BI data shows.
The central bank has stepped up intervention in the spot foreign exchange and domestic non-deliverable forward markets, as well as bought bonds dumped by foreign funds, to anchor the rupiah, Governor Perry Warjiyo said recently.
The central bank has purchased Rp 172.5 trillion in government bonds, including Rp 166.2 trillion from foreign investors in the secondary market.
“Stabilization measures and policy mix reinforcement implemented by Bank Indonesia, as well as close coordination with the government and the Financial Services Authority (OJK), have gradually helped the market recover and market mechanisms have resumed since the last week of March 2020,” BI’s statement reads.
The central bank was of the view that rupiah exchange rate against the greenback was relatively adequate and fundamentally undervalued. It expected the rupiah to appreciate to Rp 15,000 per dollar by year-end.
“Bank Indonesia will continue to maintain reserve asset adequacy to bolster external resilience and preserve macroeconomic and financial system stability,” the central bank said.
The rupiah stood at Rp 16,426 per dollar on Tuesday morning, having depreciated 0.09 percent, Bloomberg data showed.
