He says he felt nervous, but had been assured he could withdraw the money at any time and Mr Singh was properly authorised to offer the service, so believed it would be alright.
But come Christmas Eve, his account had gone from £22,000 in profit to £6,000, losing £16,000 overnight.
Desperate to know what was happening he and others contacted Mr Singh, who claimed the problems were 'because of Brexit' and profits would return to normal next year.
Mr Jangra told MailOnline: 'I was 100 per cent drawn in by his Instagram. He seemed like a real trader.
'I used my dad's money, he trusted me to make a good decision, but it backfired and he was furious.
'Why would you do that? On Christmas Eve? What sort of human would do that to people?
He added: 'We were promised we could withdraw the money at any time. But anytime anyone said 'When can I withdraw? he would make excuses.
'He said because of Brexit the pound was slow and told us to wait, but there was no communication.
Alleged victims claim they were told they could withdraw funds at any time, but messages from a number called 'GS' show them telling people they can't withdraw
'He would say stuff like 'it's Christmas, there's no one in the office', and 'things will go back to normal'.
'But when it went down to zero I knew it was done. I couldn't think properly. I couldn't tell anyone.'
Another student, 21-year-old Azhar Iqbal said he would have never invested in GS3 Trades if he had known he was not on the FCA register.
He invested £10,000 using his savings from part-time retail work and his £3,000 student loan.
Mr Iqbal, who lives in Birmingham, first invested in July and saw his profits rise to £19,500 by November.
He claims losses started to show on his account but Mr Singh claimed he was 'hedging' trades as part of his plan to double profits again by March.
But on Christmas Eve, Mr Iqbal's account only had £35 left in it and Mr Singh had blocked him and all the other investors on WhatApp, he claims.
He said: 'He sold it as being FCA-registered but we found out he wasn't.
'He said he would trade on my behalf and would guarantee 10 per cent profits every month.
'He told us that we could withdraw at any time. But when anyone said 'can we withdraw?' he would always make excuses.
When his account plummeted, he claims Mr Singh scapegoated his broker, Infinox.
But when he approached Infinox, they blamed Mr Singh, he says.
Asked about the effect the loss has had on him, he said: 'It ruined my Christmas. It's ruined everything.
'It's like starting from zero again. All my life saving's from when I started working at 17 are gone.
'Usually I help my parents pay the bills but I can't do that anymore.
'I can't even tell me family, they would be too upset. They think I've still got the money.'
IT manager Richard Ham decided to take action after he was also allegedly duped by the scheme.
He only invested £1,500 in GS3 Trades but decided to create WhatsApp and Telegram groups of alleged victims after many claimed Mr Singh blocked all forms of communications with his clients and they were left with nothing.
The 35-year-old from south London says he decided to invest in Forex after getting involved in cryptocurrencies in recent years.
He said: 'I work in cyber security, so I'm interested in the technical side of it.
'He made out like he was FCA-backed. So I thought he was genuine.
'We thought he was using a broker called Infinox based in London, but it was Infinox in the Bahamas instead.
'I'm not too worried about the money. It's more the principle. He promised us. He needs to explain himself. That's the drive for me.'
Mr Ham and another alleged victim called Jonathan Reuben have linked up all the people they can who were in the GS3 Trades customer WhatsApp groups.
He says his group has 440 people but believes there are many hundreds more.
Matthew Horan, security director of C3IA Solutions Ltd and National Cyber Security Centre Certified Company Lead warned against potential scammers.
He said: 'The age old saying that if it sounds too good to be true, it probably is too good is right and therefore step away.
'People like Mr Singh will be trawling the web for potential victims.
How do copy trading scams work?
Copy trading or multiple account management is when traders arrange for their trades to be automatically copied onto the client's account.
Copy trading services in the UK have to be authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority.
This means the trader themselves, or the broker they use for the MAM service, have to be FCA-registered.
If the firm offering you copy trading services is not regulated or is not partnered with an FCA-regulated trading partner, you will not be covered by the watchdog and risk being scammed.
The FCA says: 'If they're not regulated by us, it's probably a scam.'
Most consumers report they have initially received some returns from the firm to give the impression that their trading has been a success.
They will then be encouraged to invest more money but at this stage or soon after the returns stop, their account is suspended and there's no further contact with the firm.
Many scam firms claim to be based in the UK and even claim to be FCA authorised.
Many bogus trading and brokerage firms will use the name, 'firm registration number' (FRN) and address of firms and individuals who are FCA authorised. This is called a 'clone firm'.
The scammers then give their own phone number, address and website details, sometimes claiming that a firm's contact details on the Register are out of date.
Scammers might also claim to be an overseas firm, which don't always have their full contact and website details listed on the Register.
Scammers may even copy the website of an authorised firm, making subtle changes such as the phone number.
'I concur with the FCA advice wholeheartedly, anyone wishing to conduct online transaction or trading on the individual's behalf should first check with the FCA on their approved traders register to ensure that the individual or company is a bona fide trader.
'If they are registered by the FCA and they are found to be in breach then individuals must contact them through the consumer helpline.
'The FCA has the ability to investigate and seek compensation, if not reported due to a victim feeling embarrassed or ashamed then the problem does not get highlighted, and then the fraudulent activities can carry on and more people become victim.'
According to research carried out by Action Fraud, until recently over 55-year-olds were the biggest targets for investment fraud.
But new figures show 13 per cent of under-25s would trust an investment offer received via social media compared to just two per cent of over-55s.
An Action Fraud spokesman said: 'We can confirm we received a number of reports in December 2019.
The FCA said it could not comment on Mr Singh's case any further but Infinox Capital Limited is a broker registered with them in London.
Jay Mawji, managing director of Infinox Capital Limited said his UK firm does have a 'brand relationship' with the Infinox in the Bahamas but they are completely separate companies.
He told MailOnline: 'I don't know this person at all, he is not a client of ours.
'Infinox Bahamas is allowed to carry our brand name but it's a separate legal entity and it's not the same company. It has nothing to do with our FCA-registered business.
Infinox Capital Group Limited is regulated by the Securities Commission of the Bahamas but is not covered by UK jurisdiction.
Gurvin Singh previously said in a statement: 'Investors signed a limited power of attorney with [the broker] which is regulated in the Bahamas. [The broker] carried out the trading on the client's behalf.'
Share or comment on this article:
