I recently caught up with Justin Grossbard, Managing Director of Compare Forex Brokers , to discuss his perspective for how big data has made a significant impact on financial markets, including Forex. Justin Grossbard is the Managing Director of Compare Forex Brokers and owner of the digital agency ‘Innovate Online.’ He has a Masters In Marketing and is Google Analytics certified.
insideBIGDATA: Big data  has made a significant impact on financial markets, including Forex. Can  you give us a high-level view for how big data has changed the way  trading is done?
Justin Grossbard: Trading volumes in financial markets, particularly the Forex market have never  been higher. We have come a long way from having stock brokers manually  placing trade orders on behalf of their clients. The digital revolution  brought about by the internet has meant instructions such as buy and  sell orders don’t need to be manually entered by a human being. Traders  can trade efficiently from wherever they are around the world. All they  need is an internet connection and a trading platform with all trading  instructions picked up by markets and exchanges with the touch of a  button. Traders have the power to call their own shots nowadays and are  not reliant on physical brokerage houses or trading floors. This was  highlighted as recently as late March as a result of US lockdown  measures in the wake of the Covid19 crisis when the New York Stock  Exchange decided to close until the crisis passes; currently all trades  are being executed online.
insideBIGDATA: Have you seen that big data helps traders get a complete overview of  their trading patterns and generate in-depth reports on profits and losses?
Justin Grossbard: The  modern trading platform is a powerful tool. Not only do traders have  global market news at their fingertips, they can also execute trades in  mere milliseconds. All trades are recorded instantly and a virtual paper  trail of every trade, profitable or otherwise, is stored in the cloud  thanks to big data. Traders are able to generate a tremendous amount of  reports based on this data that really helps them formulate and hone  their trading strategies. None of this was really possible for retail  traders until the late 90s and information started to be communicated  faster and in real time on the internet. I think this is only going to  improve over time as internet speeds and communication becomes more  efficient thanks to 5G and beyond.
insideBIGDATA: How would you assess the success in incorporating machine learning and algorithmic trading techniques to expand upon execution and trading  strategies in order to make more informed decisions?
Justin Grossbard: When  it comes to financial markets, sentiment and trader psychology play a  massive role. Traders don’t always act rationally and a ‘follow the  leader’ approach to trading and investing often contributes to market  turmoil. While not perfect, algorithmic and machine based trading  techniques not only increase trading volumes and enhance the value or a  market or index, they also aim to reduce the impact of human psychology  (they’re computers after all). However, since the advent of algorithmic  traders market falls (and gains) are much more rapid. This was  experienced recently with the biggest and fastest daily drop in the  share market since the crash in October 1987. Yes big data in the form  of algorithmic trading has helped to create significant wealth but its a  double edged sword and sometimes the snowball effect of algo traders is  often worse than negative human sentiment.
insideBIGDATA: It’s been said that when forex trading, it is crucial to anticipate how  others react. Can using big data tools help take this into account when  developing a trading strategy?
Justin Grossbard: Given  trading derivatives is a zero sum game, traders are always looking for  an edge. Even receiving market news a split second ahead of the masses  could result in significant gains. Its why most brokers talk up the low  latency of their servers and connection speeds. News and pricing  communicated fast and in real time to traders is imperative as most  money is made in the period of time leading up to and right after  sensitive market news is released. For instance, interest rate news,  jobs & GDP data. Big data makes it easier for traders to forecast  market news and structure their trades accordingly.
insideBIGDATA: Brokers are heavily regulated in the world of forex. How can big data  offer transparency and reporting options to help meet increasingly  stringent guidelines?
Justin Grossbard: Just  this morning we had a request from one of our clients to have a trade  of theirs looked into. He was concerned that his stop loss order wasn’t  honoured which resulted in a substantial loss for him. This issue was  immediately communicated to his broker’s Trade Queries team for  auditing. He is waiting on an answer which will be communicated to him  shortly. However, audits such as these are easy to do given all trade  data is recorded in real time on the various trading platforms provided  by brokers.
 transparency. While the cost to use an ECN platform is often higher, 
 the occurrence of price manipulation.
insideBIGDATA: How is big data analytics able to allow the forex broker to estimate  crisis prevention situations in advance so they can alert traders about  the risk?
Justin Grossbard: Using  a series of historical information brokers can forecast forthcoming  news and market events that are likely to impact the overall performance  of the market. How these events will impact liquidity, pricing  fluctuations of tradable assets etc allows them to better inform their  clients so that they can prepare to maximise their returns or minimise  their losses. It also allows the brokers to mitigate risk. One common  risk mitigation tactic brokers utilise is to alert their traders ahead  of a volatile market event. They will then increase margin requirements  and reduce leverage afforded traders to protect the downside of market  forces turning against them. In January 2015 a forex broker called  Alpari went out of business due an unforeseen market event. Had they  been a bit more scrupulous in terms of risk they would have avoided  bankruptcy like the overwhelming majority of other brokers.
