Iran's currency, the rial, lost some 20% against the US dollar in two weeks as Iranians rushed to hedge against depreciation of their assets. Some fear an imminent collapse of the nuclear deal and return of economic sanctions.
"We are sitting idle watching numbers go up. You cannot do business when you start the day with one rate and end with another," Ismail Kazemi, an Iranian coffee importer, said in a phone call from his office in north Tehran.
"Best is to do nothing until the dust settles," he added.
In the foreign exchange market it has been more of a sandstorm for the past few weeks. The Iranian currency, the rial, lost 8% against the dollar in one day this week.
On Monday night the government stepped in, removing the discrepancy between the exchange rate used by traders - 60,000 rials to the dollar - and the official rate - previously 37,000.
The new single rate has been set at 42,000 rials to the dollar.
"We do not recognise any other rate," Iran's first Vice-President Eshaq Jahangiri said on a late television broadcast.
"Anyone trading at any other rate will be considered a smuggler," he added.
The old official rate was costly to the government, and therefore limited to imports of selected goods that were deemed necessary.
Just this week the government said it could no longer offer it to students studying abroad, and they now have to buy foreign currency from the open market to pay for their tuition.
With some $50bn (€40bn; £35bn) in oil exports, Iran's government is the main supplier of hard currency to the economy. But there is also an open market of licensed exchange offices and unlicensed street traders.
When it comes to exchange rate, the two have seldom sung from the same hymn sheet.
Iran uses its petro-dollars for virtually all its expenses, from import of basic staples such as wheat to military adventures in Syria.
But there is a cap on how much of its hard currency it can allocate to expenditure considered "luxury", such as Iranians travelling to Thailand for fun, or those who import cosmetics.
This is where the open market comes in - always at a higher price. Unifying the two rates is a 40-year-old dream. But it is not the first time that Iran has tried to force a single rate.
In January 2012, Iran's central bank set the exchange rate of the US dollar at 12,260 rials while the value the rial on the open market was about half that. The so-called unified rate lasted only a few months.
Iran was then accused of pursuing a nuclear weapons programme and the economy was crumbling under international sanctions that limited its oil exports.
