The rate implied by Fed funds futures for periods in the future, is derived by taking 100.00 and subtracting the price of the contract. So if the price is at 99.50 for a contract (just as an example), the rate implied for that month by the market is 100.00 -99.50 or 0.5%.
The price of the January 2021 Fed funds futures contract just traded above the 100.00 level to 100.005. That implies a rate of -0.005%.  The market is not seeing a rebound in yields any time soon and is in fact, seeing negative rates.
Meanwhile, helping the trend in the Fed Funds futures is that the yield in the 2 year note,  is trading at a new record low level of 0.1408%.   It is getting closer to teh 0.0% level.
Looking at the treasury curve, all yields are lower on the day. The 2-10 year spread has narrow by about 1 base point today to 51.59 basis points versus 52.46 basis points at the close yesterday.
The treasury market - and things like the Fed funds contract  - are reflecting safe haven flows and potentially as well expectations for future rates. Given inflation, the inflation adjusted returns on to year notes is negative. The Fed funds contract is anticipating that the Fed may be forced to lower rates below 0.0%.
PS, gold is moving higher on safety flows and the lower rates. The price of gold is currently up around $16 or 0.94% at $1701.83.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
