On Friday, 18 October 2019, the cabinet of Japanese Prime Minister, Shinzo Abe, greenlighted proposed revisions to the Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Act (the "Forex Act") that tighten the regulatory requirements for foreign direct investment in Japan. A bill will now go on to the Japanese Diet and if passed could come into effect by March 2021.
Under the proposed amendments to the Forex Act, foreign investors seeking just a one percent interest in businesses with importance to national security, public safety, public infrastructure, or Japan's economy will be required to undergo a prior notification and approval process with the Japanese government before consummating the proposed investment. The current version of the Forex Act requires such prior notification and approval only if foreign investors seek a 10 percent interest in the relevant Japanese companies.
Notably, the classes of relevant businesses requiring prior notification for investments were proposed to remain the same as under the current law. As such, prior notification would be required with regard to certain businesses including defence, nuclear power, infrastructure, biological products, information technology, communications and agriculture.
The proposal also requires foreign stakeholders to undergo the prior notification process before making changes in management, such as nominating new board members at annual shareholder meetings or proposing sales of important business lines. The specific shareholder acts that will require prior notification have not been listed in detail in the current proposal; however, more details may be provided when a bill is published and brought to the Diet for consideration.
Foreign investors are exempted from the prior notification and approval process if the investor acquires shares in listed Japanese companies through portfolio investments (unless the acquisition falls under an exception as discussed below). In order to be exempted from prior notification as a portfolio investment, the following criteria must be met:
1. neither the investor nor a closely related affiliate may be an officer or member of the board of directors;
2. the investor must refrain from proposing the sale or abolition of important business lines at annual shareholder meetings; and
3. the investor must not have access to non-public technological information related to national security, etc.
The portfolio investment exemption cannot be used by (i) state-owned enterprises; or (ii) companies that have violated this regulation in the past. The exemption is not applicable to businesses that manufacture weapons or provide nuclear power, electricity, or communications services.
Despite the considerable press coverage the proposal has received thus far, stakeholders should keep in mind that a bill has not yet been submitted to the Japanese Diet. Only a proposal has been endorsed by the Prime Minister's cabinet and as such, the legislation is likely to take a slightly different form over the coming weeks.
In point of fact, as a response to public concern regarding the increased scrutiny of foreign investment into the relevant categories of businesses, particularly from foreign institutional investors and shareholder activists, the Ministry of Finance has indicated that it plans to separate all publicly traded companies into the following three categories:
1. companies for which investments will always require prior notification and approval (i.e. businesses that manufacture weapons or provide nuclear power, electricity, or communications services);
2. companies for which an exemption to prior notification and approval may apply for portfolio investments; and
3. companies for which investments will not require prior notification.
Additionally, the Ministry of Finance stated that stock transactions by: (i) foreign securities firms using their proprietary accounts; (ii) foreign banks; (iii) foreign insurance companies; and (iv) foreign asset management companies will be exempted from the prior-notification requirement, irrespective of the business sectors of the invested company (even if the invested company falls under category 1 above and would otherwise require prior notification). Still, specific details of the Ministry of Finance's categorization of publicly traded companies have not been released. Such administrative rule propagation will follow only if the proposed bill is passed by the Diet.
The push to adopt a CFIUS type regulatory scheme in Japan not only steps up Japan's protection of national security interests from foreign investors, but may also help to support the possibility of Japan being considered an "excepted foreign state" under the CFIUS regulatory scheme. Under the new FIRRMA regulations, one of the factors to be considered in identifying "excepted foreign states" is that the foreign state has "established and is effectively utilizing a robust process to analyze foreign investments for national security risks and to facilitate coordination with the United States on matters relating to investment security." Being an "excepted foreign state" under the CFIUS regime would be beneficial to Japanese companies seeking to engage in transactions that might otherwise trigger CFIUS review, a pool of transactions that has grown significantly under CFIUS' new expanded jurisdiction.
In light of the proposed changes to the Forex Act in Japan, clients considering investments into domestic Japanese companies should keep a close eye on developments.
