Naira further strengthened at the I&E forex window, as local currency stabilizes
A cursory look at data from FMDQ shows that the turnover for the day witnessed significant drop.
The positive performance of the naira in the foreign exchange market continued on Thursday, as the local currency was strengthened at the Investors and Exporters (I&E) window.
The naira appreciated to N385.75 to a dollar at the I&E forex window, after the day’s trading session. It gained N1.19 against the dollar, when compared to the N386.94 to a dollar that it exchanged on Wednesday, June 10, 2020.
The exchange rate at the I&E window is different from the Central Bank of Nigeria’s published exchange rate, which currently stands at N360/$1. This is also different from the exchange rate at the parallel market, which was stable at N450 to a dollar, according to information on AbokiFX, as of Thursday.
Available information from the daily trading at FMDQ (where FX is traded by importers and investors) shows that the naira improved against the dollar by N1.75, closing at N385.75 to a dollar, as against the indicative opening rate of N387.50 to a dollar that it opened with on Thursday morning. The opening indicative rate on Thursday also represents a loss of N0.54 when compared to the N386.96 that it opened with on Wednesday.
A cursory look at data from the FMDQ shows that the turnover for the day witnessed a significant drop by about 80% at $12.45 million, when compared with the $62.28 million that was recorded the previous day.
In a related development, the naira on Thursday June 11, 2020, stabilized at the parallel market otherwise known as the black market as it exchanged for N450 to a dollar, which was the same rate that was recorded the previous day.
The stability of the naira at the black market can be attributed to a drop in demand for foreign exchange, especially by speculators at the market.
Despite the gains recorded by the naira at the I&E window and the drop in demand for dollars, the $12.45 million turnover on Thursday for over-the-counter spot market is a huge drop from the $300 million daily turnover that was recorded last year.
Chike Olisah is a graduate of accountancy with over 15 years working experience in the financial service sector. He has worked in research and marketing departments of three top commercial banks. Chike is a senior member of the Nairametrics Editorial Team.
You may contact him via his email- chike.olisah@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
Naira gains against the dollar at I&E window, forex liquidity up by 242%
Forex shortages have persisted since the crash in oil prices coincided with the global lockdown.
Forex turnover at the Investor and Exporters (I&E) window recorded a huge increase on Monday, June 29, 2020, as it rose by 242%, a significant increase from what was recorded on Friday, June 26, 2020, in the foreign exchange market. This is according to data from the FMDQOTC, an exchange where forex is traded by foreign investors and exporters.
According to the data tracked by Nairametrics, forex turnover increased from $35.92 million on Friday, June 26, 2020, to $122.89 million on Monday, June 29, 2020, representing a significant increase of 242% a day on day. While the percentage increase in turnover appears huge, it still falls short of the $200 million recorded in January 2020.
Although there seems to be an improvement in liquidity in the foreign exchange market, the volatility and uncertainty of the market remain due to liquidity shortages across markets.  Liquidity remains quite tight in the foreign exchange market, with the average turnover in the I&E market significantly down to about $45.5 million in the month of May compared to $297.5 million that was recorded in January.
Several reports tracked by Nairametrics indicate that the accumulated demand for forex in the market could be between $1.5 and $5 billion as supply shortages persist. Forex shortages have persisted since the crash in oil prices coincided with the global lockdown due to COVID-19. The rise in demand and contrasting drop in supply has called for another round of devaluation, which the CBN has insisted it has plans to implement. A devaluation last occurred in March. The activities of the speculators seem to have continued unabated.
Speculators have thus patronized the parallel market, otherwise known as the black market, thereby widening the gap between it and the I&E window. The CBN maintains that the perceived demand cannot be substantiated as the lockdown induced by the COVID-19 pandemic suggest demand should be low due to travel restrictions and drop-in economic activities.
The further decline in liquidity could further fuel speculations in the black market where the exchange rate has traded at a premium of N60 over the last few weeks.
In related news, the exchange rate on the I&E window continued with its positive performance as it appreciated on Monday, closing at N386 to a dollar, compared to the N386.33 to a dollar that was reported on Friday, June 26, representing a 33 kobo gain. The opening indicative rate was N386.86 to a dollar for Monday. This represents a loss of 50 kobo when compared to the N386.36 opening rate recorded on Friday.
At the black market where forex is traded unofficially, the naira remained stable as it exchanged for N460 to a dollar on Monday. This was the same exchange rate that was recorded on Friday last week.
Nigeria continues to maintain multiple exchange rates comprising the CBN official rate, the BDC rates, and the NAFEX (I&E window). Nairametrics reported last week that the government is mulling unifying the multiple exchange rates in a bid to increase the amount available for state governments to share.
The stability of the exchange rate in the foreign exchange market can be attributed to a relative drop in demand for the dollar and improvement in forex liquidity. There still appears to be some uncertainty in the foreign exchange market as it is still not clear when the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) will resume sales of dollars to Bureau De Change Operators (BDCs).
The planned opening of the airports for flight operations by the federal government will act as a boost to the CBN’s intervention in the BDC segment of the market.
The World Bank had also applauded the CBN’s plan to unify its multiple exchange rate as that will help attract foreign investment to boost sustainable economic recovery and also support the various reforms being introduced by the government.
