Rs 3 lakh crore MSME relief package to provide limited respite: Report
In a notice to its NRS consumers on Tuesday the maharatna firm said that “it has been observed that several non-power plants in India are importing coal from different countries for blending purposes or direct use.
In view of the above, it requested NRS consumers to meet their requirement against import substitution through various e-auction schemes available, like spot e-auction and exclusive e-auction, regularly being conducted by subsidiaries of CIL, who have been advised to offer sufficient quantities to meet any additional requirement.
“Therefore, consumers are requested to contact CIL coal companies for placing their demands through e-auctions,” the notice said.
CIL has been mandated by the government to replace at least 100 million tonne (MT) of imports with domestically-produced coal in the ongoing fiscal.
The centre had earlier also asked power generating companies, including NTPC , Tata Power, Reliance Power to reduce the import of dry-fuel for blending purposes and replace it with domestic coal.
The power sector is a key coal consumer. Prime Minister Narendra Modi had also given directions to target thermal coal import substitution, particularly when a huge coal stock inventory is available in the country this year.
Coal Minister Pralhad Joshi had earlier written to state chief ministers asking them not to import dry-fuel and take domestic supply of fuel from CIL, which has the fuel in abundance.
The country’s coal imports increased marginally by 3.2 per cent to 242.97 million tonnes (MT) in 2019-20.
India is planning to bring ‘avoidable coal imports’ to zero by 2023-24 amid abundance of the fuel stock.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
