CHICAGO--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Northern Trust (Nasdaq: NTRS) announced today the appointment of two senior business development executives to its Global Foreign Exchange Solutions practice in North America. These strategic hires bolster Northern Trust’s commitment to providing leading FX capabilities to clients globally.
David Byne and William Hartnett will be responsible for driving growth across the full range of FX solutions at Northern Trust, including algorithmic trading, CompleteFX™ (outsourced end-to-end FX dealing service), and Currency Management.
Based in New York City, Byne brings almost 15 years of foreign exchange experience to Northern Trust. Before joining Northern Trust, Byne held a number of FX-related positions at Credit Suisse and Citi, among others.
Hartnett, based in Chicago, has more than a decade of foreign exchange experience, serving in several trading and sales roles before transitioning to business development. Prior to Northern Trust, Hartnett served as an FX options trader on the Chicago Board of Trade and at Fifth Third Bank.
“The global FX market is vastly more complex and sophisticated than it once was, necessitating new processes and tools to remain competitive as an investment manager,” said John Turney, head of Global Foreign Exchange at Northern Trust Capital Markets. “We have invested heavily in our FX capabilities in recent years to ensure that our clients are equipped with the solutions they need to trade across global markets. The expansion of our business development team underscores our ongoing commitment to expand the breadth and depth of our service offering.”
Northern Trust Global Foreign Exchange, part of Northern Trust Capital Markets, provides 24/5 global coverage, through a comprehensive suite of FX services. This includes CompleteFX, the FX Algo Suite, Currency Management services, and principal dealing via desks in Chicago, London and Singapore.
Northern Trust Capital Markets provides brokerage, securities lending and transition management services, in addition to FX. It is a division of Corporate & Institutional Services, which provides asset servicing, fund administration and middle office solutions to institutional asset managers and asset owners around the globe.
Northern Trust Corporation (Nasdaq: NTRS) is a leading provider of wealth management, asset servicing, asset management and banking to corporations, institutions, affluent families and individuals. Founded in Chicago in 1889, Northern Trust has a global presence with offices in 21 U.S. states and Washington, D.C., and across 23 locations in Canada, Europe, the Middle East and the Asia-Pacific region. As of September 30, 2019, Northern Trust had assets under custody/administration of US $11.6 trillion, and assets under management of US $1.2 trillion. For 130 years, Northern Trust has earned distinction as an industry leader for exceptional service, financial expertise, integrity and innovation. Visit northerntrust.com or follow us on Twitter @NorthernTrust.
Northern Trust Corporation, Head Office: 50 South La Salle Street, Chicago, Illinois 60603 U.S.A., incorporated with limited liability in the U.S. Global legal and regulatory information can be found at http://www.northerntrust.com/disclosures .
