The NZD/USD is in no position to change the main trend to down, but there is room for a near-term correction into .6074.
The New Zealand Dollar posted a volatile two-sided trade on Friday before closing lower for the session. The kiwi hit its highest level since March 12 early in the session before drifting lower as traders cautiously awaited an important press conference by U.S. President Donald Trump on the U.S. response to a Chinese national security law for Hong Kong and its potential impact on an already fragile global economy .
The Kiwi tried to mount a late session rally in conjunction with a surge in demand for U.S. equities after President Trump signaled no changes to the trade deal with China despite rising tensions, however, the buying stalled and the currency inched lower for the session.
Although Trump did not indicate the U.S. would pull out of the Phase One trade agreement reached with China earlier this year, easing trader concerns for the time being.
On Friday, the NZD/USD settled at .6207, down 0.0005 or -0.08%.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. However, Friday’s slightly lower close may be an early sign that momentum may be getting ready to shift to the downside. A trade through .6240 will signal a resumption of the uptrend. The main trend will change to down on a move through the nearest main bottom at .5921.
The main range is .6448 to .5469. Its retracement zone at .6074 to .5858 is controlling the longer-term direction of the NZD/USD. Holding above this zone will support the upside bias. Its Fibonacci level at .6074 is the nearest support level.
The NZD/USD is in no position to change the main trend to down, but there is room for a near-term correction into .6074. Taking out Friday’s low at .6170 will be the first sign of weakness. This move will also make .6240 a new minor top.
The trigger point for a potential acceleration to the downside is the May 27 low at .6149.
Taking out .6240 will signal a resumption of the uptrend. If this move is able to generate enough upside momentum then we could see an eventual test of the March 9 main top at .6448.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
