The early downside momentum on Friday indicates sellers have their eyes set on the main bottom at .6381.
The New Zealand Dollar is trading lower for a second session as investors continue to react to the weak growth report released earlier in the week. A stronger U.S. Dollar is also weighing on the Kiwi, but steady demand for risky assets and a dip in 10-year U.S. Treasury yields may be helping to underpin the currency.
At 03:41 GMT, the NZD/USD is trading at .6422, down 0.0006 or -0.09%.
New Zealand’s gross domestic product suffered its biggest fall since 1991 as the coronavirus pandemic began to bite in the first quarter.
Gross domestic product fell 1.6 percent from the fourth quarter, Statistics New Zealand said on Thursday in Wellington. Economists expected GDP would shrink 1 percent. From a year earlier, the economy fell 0.2 percent – the first annual contraction since 2009.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart; however, momentum is trending lower. The main trend will change to down on a trade through .6381. A move through .6585 will signal a resumption of the uptrend.
The minor trend is down. This is controlling the downside momentum. A trade through .6507 will change the minor trend to up. This will shift momentum to the upside.
The short-term range is .6585 to .6381. Its retracement zone at .6483 to .6507 is potential resistance.
The main range is .5921 to .6585. If the trend changes to down, then its retracement zone at .6253 to .6175 will become the primary downside target.
The early downside momentum on Friday indicates sellers have their eyes set on the main bottom at .6381. A trade through this level will change the main trend to down. This could trigger an acceleration to the downside with the main 50% level at .6253 the next likely downside target.
If momentum reverses to the upside then look for renewed selling pressure on a retest of the short-term retracement zone at .6483 to .6507.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
