NZD/USD Forex Technical Analysis – Reversal Top or Breakout Over .6448?
The direction of the NZD/USD on Thursday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to yesterday’s close at .6426.
The New Zealand Dollar is edging lower on Thursday after yesterday’s rally to .6444 stopped just short of the March 9 main top at .6448. The price action suggests investors are squaring positions ahead of a key announcement about stimulus by the European Central Bank later in the day. Mixed demand for risk in Asia is also weighing on the Kiwi.
At 04:34 GMT, the NZD/USD is trading .6417, down 0.0008 or -0.13%.
The Kiwi has been supported lately by strength in commodity prices and gains in world stock markets as more economies re-open. While some overshoot if expected, most traders believe the currency will be supported by the country’s continued success in containing the coronavirus.
The Kiwi has also been supported by a plunging U.S. Dollar, which has been losing value for weeks as the greenback loses its appeal as a safe-haven asset.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. Taking out yesterday’s high at .6444 will signal a resumption of the uptrend, while overcoming the swing top at .6448 will reaffirm the uptrend.
The prolonged move up in terms of price and time puts the NZD/USD in a position to post a potentially bearish closing price reversal top. This won’t change the main trend to down, but if confirmed, it could lead to the start of a 2 to 3 day correction.
The direction of the NZD/USD on Thursday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to yesterday’s close at .6426.
A sustained move over .6426 will indicate the presence of buyers. Overcoming .6448 will indicate the buying is getting stronger. This could trigger a short-term acceleration to the upside.
A sustained move under .6426 will indicate the presence of sellers. Taking out .6360 will indicate the selling is getting stronger.
Taking out .6444 then closing lower for the session will form a potentially bearish closing price reversal top. If confirmed then look for the start of a 2 to 3 day correction.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
