If today is a “risk-on” session then look for the Forex pair to rise as this would encourage investors to shed safe-haven U.S. Dollar positions.
The New Zealand Dollar is inching higher against the U.S. Dollar on Friday, and in a position to end a choppy week with a slight gain as surging coronavirus infections cast a shadow over encouraging economic data in the U.S. and Europe and checked hopes for a swift global recovery.
A rise in U.S. equity futures early Friday and small gains in Asia and Europe are helping to push up demand for higher risk currencies, dampening the U.S. Dollar’s safe-haven appeal.
At 06:04 GMT, the NZD/USD is trading .6441, up 0.0010 or +0.16%.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. A trade through .6381 will change the main trend to down. A move through .6533 will signal a resumption of the uptrend.
The minor range is .6585 to .6381. Its pivot at .6483 is controlling the near-term direction of the NZD/USD.
The short-term range is .5921 to .6585. If the main trend changes to down then its retracement zone at .6253 to .6175 will become the primary downside target.
Fundamentally, the direction of the NZD/USD will be determined by investor demand for risk. If today is a “risk-on” session then look for the Forex pair to rise as this would encourage investors to shed safe-haven U.S. Dollar positions.
A “risk-off” session will put renewed pressure on the Kiwi especially since the Reserve Bank of New Zealand made dovish comments on monetary policy earlier in the week.
Overtaking .6483 will indicate the return of buyers. This could trigger a surge into .6533. Overtaking this price will also be a sign of strength.
A failure to overcome .6483 will signal the return of sellers. However, the trigger point for an acceleration to the downside is .6381. If this price is taken out, we could see an eventual break into the short-term 50% level at .6253.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
