Crude oil prices moved higher on Thursday, recovering from losses in the previous two sessions, despite continued concerns about energy demand outlook in the wake of reports showing a surge in new coronavirus cases.
Data showing a bigger than expected increase in U.S. durable goods orders contributed to oil’s uptick.
Uncertainty about the pace of recovery after the IMF report said the global economy will see a more severe contraction this year than earlier forecast weighed on crude oil prices earlier this week.
West Texas Intermediate crude oil futures for August ended up $0.71 or 1.9% at $38.72 a barrel.
Brent crude futures moved up $0.74 or about 1.8% to $41.05 a barrel.
Traders also reacted positively to assurance by White House Economic Advisor Larry Kudlow who said the economy is unlikely to be shut again.
The Commerce Department said durable goods orders spiked by 15.8% in May after plunging by a revised 18.1% in April. Economists had expected durable goods orders to surge up by 10.9% compared to the 17.7% nosedive that had been reported for the previous month.
Excluding a significant rebound in orders for transportation equipment, durable goods orders jumped by 4% in May after tumbling by 8.2% in April. Economists had expected a 2.5% increase.
Despite recent data showing an increase in crude production from U.S. shales, the major oil producers’ compliance with agreed production cuts supported oil’s rise.
Risk Disclaimer - By using this web site you agree to its terms and conditions.
All materials, including but not limited to articles, directories, photos, lists, etc., on this website are the sole property of ForexTV or the respective copyright holders and are intended for informational/educational purposes using hypothetical and sometimes anecdotal illustrations. The unauthorized use of any and all materials is prohibited and restricted by copyright law. Any use of materials on this site must be approved in advance by ForexTV.
Before deciding to invest in foreign exchange you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. The possibility exists that you could sustain a loss of some or all of your initial investment and therefore you should not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. You should be aware of all the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial advisor if you have any doubts. Forex (or FX or off-exchange foreign currency futures and options) trading involves substantial risk of loss and is not suitable for every investor. The value of currencies may fluctuate and investors may lose all or more than their original investments. Risks also include, but are not limited to, the potential for changing political and/or economic conditions that may substantially affect the price and/or liquidity of a currency. The impact of seasonal and geopolitical events is already factored into market prices. The leveraged nature of FX trading means that any market movement will have an equally proportional effect on your deposited funds and such may work against you as well as for you. Past results are no indication of future performance. Information contained this web site is intended for informational purposes only and was obtained from sources believed to be reliable. Information is in no way guaranteed. No guarantee of any kind is implied or possible where projections of future conditions are attempted.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Accept Cookie Policy
