The sultanate has recorded the least infections, currently standing at 55, among the six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council
MUSCAT: Oman on Sunday banned public gatherings in the Gulf Arab state, limited staffing at state entities and shut currency exchange bureaus as part of measures to fight the coronavirus spread.
Authorities also asked the private sector to facilitate remote working and urged commercial businesses and individuals to limit cash transactions, state TV reported.
The sultanate has recorded the least infections, currently standing at 55, among the six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council where the total number of cases of the virus has crossed 1,500 with three deaths.
The region has expanded measures to combat the spread of the disease, with Kuwait taking some of the most drastic steps including suspending international flights.
Authorities also asked the private sector to facilitate remote working and urged commercial businesses and individuals to limit cash transactions.
Kuwait on Saturday imposed a partial curfew nationwide and extended a suspension of government and private institutions and businesses for two weeks.
Authorities in the UAE have encouraged people to stay at home and work remotely.
Kuwait, which reported 12 more cases on Sunday to take its tally to 188, on Saturday imposed a partial curfew nationwide and extended a suspension of government and private institutions and businesses for two weeks.
Some supermarkets in Kuwait are allowing only 50 shoppers at a time and taking their temperature, a Reuters witness said.
Authorities in regional business and trade hub the United Arab Emirates have encouraged people to stay at home and work remotely, but has yet to declare an official suspension of work.
The UAE over the weekend reported two deaths linked to the virus, its first fatalities. Bahrain has recorded one death.
Qatar, which has the highest number of cases in the Arab Gulf region at 481, said on Saturday it would set up patrols and checkpoints to ensure a ban on all public gatherings.
