prolonged process even in developed countries.
for a long period of time. Economic and financial consequences largely depend
on the pandemic period and the restrictive measures duration.
peseta would have shown in March. Moreover, unlike the US dollar, these
currencies were not often used as reserve ones.
alarming situation is in the US, where Donald Trump declared a major emergency
in all 50 states. If the situation deteriorates, the US economy will stagnate.
segment is expected to be damaged first after the real sector. The share of bad
loans is likely to snowball. It is obvious that millions of the US citizens and
US president's administration to meet its financial obligations.
such terrible conditions, the US dollar may keep its current position. The fact
of already cheap energy resources. This, in turn, may eliminate the speculative
oil prices drop, the US currency gains ground. During the pandemic peak in the
US, oil priced at even $10-12 a barrel would not boost the dollar. However,
this level could be enough to prevent it from falling.
dollar and may be the euro. Oil cannot be used for that purpose. Germany is the
main supporter of the single currency. It once again proved that it is Germany
that defines the euro's value.
developing countries may face rather gloomy future. The fact is that investors
are likely to buy stable currencies, including the US dollar and the euro , or safe-haven assets such as gold and some currencies, including the Swiss franc and the
minor importance in this issue.
rather calm, the trade during the pandemic is still exciting. There are not a
allows market participants to gain money even within one day.
coronavirus have the following influence on quotes. If a number of new virus
cases advances, there is greater demand for safe-haven assets and currencies.
If a number of infected people reduces, investors switch to currencies of
the US dollar , the situation is a bit different. If
there is a jump in a number of infected people, the greenback drops by 1-2%.
However, it usually quickly recoups its loses.
This article was written by InstaForex Group.
