The new framework is valid from November 14, 2019 to November 13, 2022.
Under the framework for 2019-22, the central bank will continue to offer swap arrangement within the overall corpus of $2 billion.
NEW DELHI: With an objective to strengthen financial stability and economic cooperation, the Reserve Bank of India on Tuesday revised the framework on currency swap arrangement for SAARC countries till 2022.
A currency swap between countries is an agreement to exchange currencies with predetermined terms and conditions.
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, the Maldives , Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are part of SAARC grouping.
Under the framework for 2019-22, the central bank will continue to offer swap arrangement within the overall corpus of $2 billion.
The framework is valid from November 14, 2019 to November 13, 2022.
Based on the terms and conditions of the framework, the RBI would enter into bilateral swap agreements with SAARC central banks, who want to avail swap facility. Earlier, the SAARC currency swap facility came into operation on November 15, 2012 with an intention to provide a backstop line of funding for short term foreign exchange liquidity requirements or balance of payment crises till longer term arrangements are made.
“The drawals can be made in US dollar, euro or Indian rupee . The framework provides certain concessions for swap drawals in Indian Rupee . The currency swap facility will be available to all SAARC member countries, subject to their signing the bilateral swap agreements,” RBI said in a release.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
