Comments on the draft report are invited till July 31, RBI said.
MUMBAI: An internal working group at the Reserve Bank of India ( RBI ) has recommended extending trading hours for both currencies and short-term loan products, citing the need to integrate with global exchanges.
The special central bank committee has suggested extending the Over-the-Counter forex exchange-traded currency derivatives markets to 9 PM instead of 5 PM now. In the money markets, trading is proposed to be stretched by an hour.
The draft report, if accepted, should help increase market volumes, drawing more overseas participants.
“Gradual integration of the Indian economy with the global economy and increased interest of foreign investors in Indian markets aided by a liquid USD/INR forex market have led to growing volumes in rupee trades in the offshore markets,” the committee said in the RBI draft report.
Volumes in the offshore currency futures markets have steadily increased during last 3-4 years vis-à-vis on-shore exchanges, it said.
The market share of domestic exchanges in US dollar and rupee futures has come down from about 74 percent in 2014-15 to 56 percent in 2018- 19.
Money market trading hours may also be stretched. The inter-bank call money market, which now operates between 9AM and 5PM, is proposed to be closed at 6PM.
“The group has recommended extension of timings for both collateralised and uncollateralised segments of the money market,” the committee said.
The repo market, which now closes at 2.30 PM, may extend by another hour. The repo is the rate at which banks borrow from the central bank.
The group has also recommended that the settlement time of primary auction or Open Market Operation be shifted to around 4 PM from around noon.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
