RBI said banks may charge their retail customers a pre-agreed flat fee towards administrative expenses.
Mumbai: The Reserve Bank of India said electronic trading platform for buying/selling foreign exchange by retail customers of banks, FX-Retail, is ready for rollout by the Clearing Corporation of India (CCIL) on August 5.
“The issue of transparent and fair pricing for retail users (individuals and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises) in the foreign exchange market has been raised in various fora and in public interactions,” RBI said in a release.
“Such a mechanism will provide transparency while enhancing competition and lead to better pricing for retail customers,” the central bank added.
RBI said banks may charge their retail customers a pre-agreed flat fee towards administrative expenses, which should be publicly declared. Overall, this would bring down the total cost faced by the retail customer in the foreign exchange market. Facilitating direct access of retail customers to the market, rather than through price-setting by their banks, would also bring down the risk that banks face in warehousing transactions.
The FX-Retail platform can be accessed by any customer of a bank who needs to purchase or sell US Dollar against the Rupee for delivery on cash basis -- same day, tomorrow basis - next day or spot basis -- two days after the date of transaction.
There is no cap on the number of transactions per customer during a day, and the total amount of transactions of a customer shall be subject to the limit assigned by its bank. The central bank prescribed that the size of a single transaction is not allowed to exceed $5 million.
CCIL will not levy transaction charges if such transactions do not exceed $50,000 per day, RBI said.
A transaction charge of 0.0004 per cent shall be charged by the CCIL for transactions more than $50,000.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
