Expressed in dollar terms, foreign currency assets include effect of appreciation or depreciation of non-US units like the euro, pound and yen held in the foreign exchange reserves.
The continued inflow of funds by foreign investors despite a slowdown in economic growth has fuelled the rise in forex reserves. (Representational Image)
The country’s forex reserves jumped substantially by $5.942 billion to touch a life-time high of $507.644 billion in the week to June 12, helped by a significant jump in foreign currency assets (FCA), the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) data showed.
In the previous week ended June 5, the foreign exchange reserves had crossed the half-a-trillion mark for the first time, after it surged by a massive $8.22 billion and reached $501.703 billion, according to the weekly data released by the RBI.
In the reporting week, the foreign currency assets, a major component of the overall reserves, rose by $5.106 billion to $468.737 billion. Expressed in dollar terms, the foreign currency assets include the effect of appreciation or depreciation of non-US units like the euro, pound and yen held in the foreign exchange reserves.
The gold reserves in the reporting week rose by $821 million to $33.173 billion, the RBI data showed.
The special drawing rights with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) was up by $12 million to $1.454 billion. The country’s reserve position with the IMF also rose by $3 million to $4.280 billion during the reporting week, the data showed.
The rising forex reserves give a lot of comfort to the government and the RBI in managing India’s external and internal financial issues at a time when economic growth may contract in 2020-21. It’s a big cushion in the event of any crisis on the economic front and enough to cover the import bill of the country for a year. The rising reserves have also helped the rupee to strengthen against the dollar. Reserves provide a level of confidence to markets that a country can meet its external obligations, demonstrate the backing of domestic currency by external assets, assist the government in meeting its foreign exchange needs and external debt obligations and maintain a reserve for national disasters or emergencies.
Experts say that in times of dwindling economic activity and growth, the rising forex reserves provide a lot of strength as they now cover one year of import expenditure.
📣 The Indian Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel (@indianexpress) and stay updated with the latest headlines
For all the latest Business News , download Indian Express App.
