| Source: Sabina Gold & Silver Corp.
VANCOUVER, British Columbia, June  30, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Sabina Gold & Silver Corp. (SBB.T/SGSVF.OTCQX), (“Sabina” or the “Company”) is pleased to provide an update on the permitting and authorization status of its first mine at the Back River Gold Project (the “Project” or “Back River”) in Nunavut, Canada.
On June 25, 2020 Sabina received its final operational approval for the placement of the tailings into the Project’s proposed tailings storage facility. Sabina is now in possession of all major authorizations for not only the construction, but also the operations of the Back River Project.
“While we have been permitted for construction and have been shovel ready for some time, this final authorization enables full operations at Back River,” said Bruce McLeod, President & CEO “this is the culmination of a rigorous process spanning several years and could not have been accomplished without significant engagement with all stakeholders. It is also important to remember, that while the mine plan in our Feasibility Study is focused on a 3,000 tonne per day operation with four mining areas, permitting was advanced on the basis of the previous 6,000 tonne per day feasibility at the Goose project providing  significant future project flexibility. We continue to work to de-risk and advance the project and look forward to getting back into camp next week.”
In December 2017, following an extensive environmental assessment process that spanned several years, Sabina received approval from the Minster of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada and was granted its Project Certificate by the Nunavut Impact Review Board.
In November 2018, Sabina received its Type A Water License (expiry date of 2031) from the Nunavut Water Board which enables the use and disposal of water at the Project, as well as approval to construct and operate fuel management facilities, waste rock and tailings storage facilities, and numerous other pieces of infrastructure.
In December 2017, Sabina commenced the process under the Metal and Diamond Mines Effluent Regulation (“MDMER”) to operate the tailings storage facility as contemplated in the Feasibility Study. Under Schedule 2 of MDMER, waterbodies frequented by fish must be approved and listed in the Regulations if a deleterious material is proposed to be placed in the waterbodies. Sabina received approval to use the primary tailings storage facility on June 25, 2020. While the Project has been shovel ready for construction, this final authorization is a milestone that enables full operations at the first mine at Back River.
Sabina has also negotiated a renewable 20 year Land Use Agreement and Impact and Benefits Agreement with the Kitikmeot Inuit Association. These agreements enable access to the site and benefits to flow to the Inuit until 2038.
Sabina Gold & Silver Corp. is well-financed and is an emerging precious metals company with district scale, advanced, high grade gold assets in one of the world’s newest, politically stable mining jurisdictions: Nunavut, Canada.
Sabina released a Feasibility Study on its 100% owned Back River Gold Project which presents a project that has been designed on a fit-for purpose basis, with the potential to produce ~200,000 ounces a year for ~11 years with a rapid payback of 2.9 years (see “Technical Report for the Initial Project Feasibility Study on the Back River Gold Property, Nunavut, Canada” dated October 28, 2015).
The Project received its final Project Certificate on December 19, 2017. The Project received its Type A Water License on November 14, 2018 and is now in receipt of all major authorizations for construction and operations.
In addition to Back River, Sabina also owns a significant silver royalty on Glencore’s Hackett River Project. The silver royalty on Hackett River’s silver production is comprised of 22.5% of the first 190 million ounces produced and 12.5% of all silver produced thereafter.
The Company currently has approximately $75 million in cash.
This news release has been authorized by the undersigned on behalf of Sabina Gold & Silver Corp.
