We charge a US$50 fee on accounts which have not supplied a mandatory W-8 or W-9 form prior to the dividend ex-date of a qualifying trade on a US-incorporated stock. We do not apply this fee to accounts with up-to-date documentation or accounts which have not entered into qualifying trades. We will notify you if you have entered into a qualifying trade and need to complete a form.
1 Additional services include but not limited to the following optional services: Arranging AGM attendance and receiving hard copies of company reports.
There may be additional charges and taxes for particular instruments that you trade that are charged by the particular market. Please call us on on 1800 601 734 for further details.
We may charge you a fee if we are required to perform a service on your behalf that is not set out in our product details.
There may be additional charges for particular currency withdrawals. Please call us on on 1800 601 734 for further details.
To determine whether a particular charge applies, please call our helpdesk before you trade.
Commission charges are calculated as a flat fee, a percentage of the transaction value or as cents per share for US shares. Where we offer trading on shares that are dual-listed and fully fungible for settlement on both exchanges, the commission charges relevant to the country where the primary listing is held will apply.
We will let you know in writing which commission rates apply at the time you open your account.
Trading hours are as follows:
European shares: Market hours vary depending on the relevant exchange, please call our helpdesk on 1800 601 734 for details
Orders may operate differently depending on the third party we send your Order to, in particular in relation to pre- and post-market sessions for US shares. Some US shares may be visible outside of normal market hours but are not currently tradable on our platform. If you would like further details about how Orders work or on the ability to trade US shares outside of normal market hours, please contact one of our dealers
You may be subject to additional trading fees or taxes depending on the country where the share is listed.
