Forex trading (also known as foreign exchange trading or simply FX trading) has grown substantially over the past decade. This used to be a market just for large institutional investors who had deep pockets and access to the banks. Now, retail brokers have sprung up, offering people like us access to buying and selling many different currencies.
It is a completely separate asset class to traditional stock investing which we mostly speak of here at the Motley Fool. Yet in a hushed whisper, could it be that forex trading may offer me better returns and should it demand more of my attention?
Having been around financial markets for longer than I care to mention, and having good friends who trade forex regularly, the main danger for most retail forex trading is the use of leverage.
For most brokers, they use what is known as margin lending/trading, whereby you only have to deposit a small sum in order to have large size positions in the market. For example, if you had £1,000 in your account, and a margin rate of 100:1, you could put on a position worth a notional amount of £1,000,000!
Getting to understand your actual position size is something that most retail investors don’t get round to, and therefore only a small move in the currency markets can wipe out your entire account balance. But wait, I hear someone say, only a small move in your favour can make you large profits. True, but being exposed either way to such a high level of risk/reward is not informed trading. It is mostly luck (or I should say, gambling).
You can trade stocks on leverage too, but mostly they are traded 1:1, so your £1,000 only buys you £1,000 of a stock. The vast majority of forex trading is on leverage.
Putting leverage to one side, I do think that you can be smart and make money from forex trading. What is even better is to potentially combine forex and stocks together.
You can do this in various different ways. For example, you could buy into a company that has a high concentration of manufacturing operations in another country (and thus another currency). If you believe the local currency could weaken in value, then the firm will benefit from the cheaper currency via wage costs and material costs.
Alternatively, you could buy into a FTSE 100 ETF, which is denominated in a different currency. The denomination of an ETF simply means what currency you need to pay in order to buy it. Most FTSE 100 ETF’s are in British pounds, as the companies on the index are listed in pence.
However, you can buy an ETF in US dollars, or euros. By buying an ETF in a different currency, you are exposed to the currency movements between that currency and the British pound.
In conclusion, the fact that most forex is traded on leverage makes me worried that even a small move in currency can have a big effect on my cash balance. However, I don’t think that investors should shun forex trading all together. I think that smart investors can look to play the forex market alongside stock investing, either indirectly via the specific firms they invest in, or directly by holding a product that is denominated in a different currency.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Jonathan Smith and The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
