Shares of Southwest Airlines Co. rallied 1.5% in morning trading Monday, after Goldman Sachs analyst Catherine O’Brien swung to bullish from bearish on the air carrier, citing an improving outlook for the long-term demand for air travel. O’Brien raised her rating on Southwest to buy from sell, and boosted her stock price target to $47, which is 45% above Friday’s stock closing price, from $35. She said that while current traffic trends are below her previous forecasts, she believes Southwest’s mostly domestic network and relatively strong balance sheet will drive a “faster recovery post-COVID-19” in profitability relative to the airline industry over the longer term. O’Brien said her previous bearish view was based on Southwest’s need to invest in technology over several years, which was expected to put pressure on margins. Southwest’s stock has been underperforming its peers and the broader stock market of late, as it has lost 10.3% over the past three months through Friday, while the U.S. Global Jets ETF has gained 2.5% and the S&P 500 has advanced 18.2%.Market Pulse Stories are Rapid-fire, short news bursts on stocks and markets as they move. Visit MarketWatch.com for more information on this news.
Risk Disclaimer - By using this web site you agree to its terms and conditions.
All materials, including but not limited to articles, directories, photos, lists, etc., on this website are the sole property of ForexTV or the respective copyright holders and are intended for informational/educational purposes using hypothetical and sometimes anecdotal illustrations. The unauthorized use of any and all materials is prohibited and restricted by copyright law. Any use of materials on this site must be approved in advance by ForexTV.
Before deciding to invest in foreign exchange you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. The possibility exists that you could sustain a loss of some or all of your initial investment and therefore you should not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. You should be aware of all the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial advisor if you have any doubts. Forex (or FX or off-exchange foreign currency futures and options) trading involves substantial risk of loss and is not suitable for every investor. The value of currencies may fluctuate and investors may lose all or more than their original investments. Risks also include, but are not limited to, the potential for changing political and/or economic conditions that may substantially affect the price and/or liquidity of a currency. The impact of seasonal and geopolitical events is already factored into market prices. The leveraged nature of FX trading means that any market movement will have an equally proportional effect on your deposited funds and such may work against you as well as for you. Past results are no indication of future performance. Information contained this web site is intended for informational purposes only and was obtained from sources believed to be reliable. Information is in no way guaranteed. No guarantee of any kind is implied or possible where projections of future conditions are attempted.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Accept Cookie Policy
