South Korea finance ministry to monitor financial markets, liquidity flows
Economy 18 hours ago (Jun 29, 2020 07:30PM ET)
SEOUL (Reuters) - South Korea will set up a channel to provide foreign-currency funds to local financial firms through repurchase agreements to prevent any temporary shortage in liquidity from developing into a systemic risk, Vice Finance Minister Kim Yong-beom said on Tuesday.
Authorities also will continue to monitor financial markets and liquidity flows as the economic impact from the coronavirus pandemic persists, he told a meeting, noting other risks including U.S.-China tensions could heighten volatility.
South Korea finance ministry to monitor financial markets, liquidity flows
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read Investing.com's comments guidelines and agree to the terms described.
