Shares of Spotify Technology SA are down 2.6% in Monday morning trading after Guggenheim analyst Michael Morris downgraded the stock to sell from neutral. While he sees comparisons to Netflix Inc. , especially as Spotify dives deeper into original podcasts, Morris also worries that “the market is now pricing shares for blue-sky growth, which has made the risk-reward unattractive even as Spotify pursues attractive and achievable opportunities.” He raised his price target to $223 from $170 in conjunction with the downgrade, a target change that he said was based on a 10% discount to his Netflix target valuation, blending 5 times 2024 estimates for net revenue and 19 times 2024 estimates for enterprise value to operating income before depreciation and amortization. “We expect investors to compare Spotify to Netflix in grounding valuation; however, we see the Netflix operating model as significantly more unique (global video product capability, >$80 billion to be invested in controlled video content over the next five years) and scalable (no variable label royalty payout), which is why we apply a discount for Spotify,” Morris wrote. Spotify shares have more than doubled over the past three months as the S&P 500 has risen 18%.Market Pulse Stories are Rapid-fire, short news bursts on stocks and markets as they move. Visit MarketWatch.com for more information on this news.
Risk Disclaimer - By using this web site you agree to its terms and conditions.
All materials, including but not limited to articles, directories, photos, lists, etc., on this website are the sole property of ForexTV or the respective copyright holders and are intended for informational/educational purposes using hypothetical and sometimes anecdotal illustrations. The unauthorized use of any and all materials is prohibited and restricted by copyright law. Any use of materials on this site must be approved in advance by ForexTV.
Before deciding to invest in foreign exchange you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. The possibility exists that you could sustain a loss of some or all of your initial investment and therefore you should not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. You should be aware of all the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial advisor if you have any doubts. Forex (or FX or off-exchange foreign currency futures and options) trading involves substantial risk of loss and is not suitable for every investor. The value of currencies may fluctuate and investors may lose all or more than their original investments. Risks also include, but are not limited to, the potential for changing political and/or economic conditions that may substantially affect the price and/or liquidity of a currency. The impact of seasonal and geopolitical events is already factored into market prices. The leveraged nature of FX trading means that any market movement will have an equally proportional effect on your deposited funds and such may work against you as well as for you. Past results are no indication of future performance. Information contained this web site is intended for informational purposes only and was obtained from sources believed to be reliable. Information is in no way guaranteed. No guarantee of any kind is implied or possible where projections of future conditions are attempted.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Accept Cookie Policy
