Stocks continue to run higher. Major indices making new session highs
The major US indices are squeezing to the upside with the NASDAQ index leading the way.
The numbers are currently showing:
Although higher, there is some work to do from a technical perspective.  For the NASDAQ index, the pair is approaching its 100 hour moving average at 9268.09 (blue line in the chart above). The 50% retracement of the move down from Monday's high is also near that level at 9267.599. The combination should give traders cause for pause against that area.
In trading yesterday the pair gapped below the 100 hour moving average line but found support buyers ahead of its 200 hour moving average (green line currently at 9102.122).  Holding the level is a positive from a technical perspective.
Other risk on flows are picking up along with the stocks:
Spot gold is down $-12.20 or -0.77% at $1569.80. Gold tends to rise during "risk off" market conditions and falls during "risk on" periods.
WTI crude oil futures are up $0.56 or 1.04% at $53.70. Crude oil has been hit on expectations for slower growth. That fear is abating at least for now.
US yields are ticking higher and trading near high yields for the day as flight to safety of treasuries slows:
The USDJPY is also getting in the act and trades at its highest level of the day (and the week).  The falling 100 hour moving average currently comes in at 109.32. Also at that level is the 38.2% retracement of the move down from the high price on January 17. That level would be a key target on the topside.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
