Equity indices continued their journey downwards on the first day of the fiscal year 2021 on Wednesday.
NEW DELHI: Indian equity, currency, commodity and bond markets will be closed for trading on Thursday, April 2, on account of Ramnavami. The bourses will reopen for trading on April 3, Friday.
Equity indices continued their journey downwards on the first day of the fiscal year 2021 on Wednesday. BSE’s 30-share Sensex dropped 4.08 per cent or 1,203 points to close at 28,265, while NSE’s 50-share Nifty shed 3.89 per cent or 334 points to close at 8,264.
Banks and IT sectors led the bluechip losers. Equity inventors lost Rs 3.2 lakh crore.
“Investor confidence is continuously being impacted due to mounting fear of global recession , rising cases of Covid-19 and weak macros. We reiterate our cautious view on markets and suggest keeping extra care for stock selection and risk management,” said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking.
World markets also fell on Wednesday as the coronavirus threat ensured an ugly start to the second quarter for equities and commodities.Traders headed for the safety of government bonds, the dollar and gold.
Tokyo's Nikkei slumped 4.5 per cent after the worst plunge in factory activity in almost a decade.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
