Stock Pick Update: April 29 – May 5, 2020
The main point of this publication is to provide the top 5 long and top 5 short candidates (our opinion, not an investment advice) for this week, we will focus solely on the technicals.
The broad stock market has extended its over-month-long uptrend in the last five trading days (April 22 – April 28). On March 23 it sold off to new medium-term low of 2,191.86. It was a stunning 35.4% below February 19 record high of 3,393.52. The corona virus and economic slowdown fears have erased more than a third of the broad stock market value! Then we saw huge come-back rally, as the S&P 500 index got back close to 2,900 mark. Is this a new uptrend or just upward correction before another leg down? We will likely see more short-term volatility.
The S&P 500 index has gained 2.71% since last Wednesday’s open. In the same period of time our five long and five short stock picks have gained 2.68%. So stock picks’ return was basically in line with the broad stock market. However, our long stock picks have gained 5.17% and they were relatively much stronger than the index. Short stock picks have resulted in a gain of 0.18%. The overall results remain relatively better than the S&P 500 index over last weeks.
If stocks were in a prolonged downtrend, being able to profit anyway, would be extremely valuable. Of course, it’s not the point of our Stock Pick Updates to forecast where the general stock market is likely to move, but rather to provide you with stocks that are likely to generate profits regardless of what the S&P does.
This means that our overall stock-picking performance can be summarized on the chart below. The assumptions are: starting with $100k, no leverage used. The data before Dec 24, 2019 comes from our internal tests and data after that can be verified by individual Stock Pick Updates posted on our website.
Below we include statistics and the details of our three recent updates:
Let’s check which stocks could magnify S&P’s gains in case it rallies, and which stocks would be likely to decline the most if S&P plunges. Here are our stock picks for the Wednesday, April 29 – Tuesday, May 5 period.
We will assume the following: the stocks will be bought or sold short on the opening of today’s trading session (April 29) and sold or bought back on the closing of the next Tuesday’s trading session (May5).
We will provide stock trading ideas based on our in-depth technical and fundamental analysis, but since the main point of this publication is to provide the top 5 long and top 5 short candidates (our opinion, not an investment advice) for this week, we will focus solely on the technicals. The latter are simply more useful in case of short-term trades.
First, we will take a look at the recent performance by sector. It may show us which sector is likely to perform best in the near future and which sector is likely to lag. Then, we will select our buy and sell stock picks.
There are eleven stock market sectors: Energy, Materials, Industrials, Consumer Discretionary, Consumer Staples, Health Care, Financials, Technology, Communications Services, Utilities and Real Estate. They are further divided into industries, but we will just stick with these main sectors of the stock market.
We will analyze them and their relative performance by looking at the Select Sector SPDR ETF’s.
Based on the above, we decided to choose our stock picks for the next week. We will choose our top 3 long and top 3 short candidates using trend-following approach, and top 2 long and top 2 short candidates using contrarian approach:
Summing up, the above trend-following long stock picks are just a part of our whole Stock Pick Update. The Energy, Health Care and Materials sectors were relatively the strongest in the last 30 days again. And they all have gained more than the S&P 500 index in the same period. So that part of our ten long and short stock picks is meant to outperform in the coming days if the broad stock market acts similarly as it did before.
We hope you enjoyed reading the above free analysis, and we encourage you to read today’s Stock Pick Update – this analysis’ full version. There, we include the stock market sector analysis for the past month and remaining long and short stock picks for the next week. There’s no risk in subscribing right away, because there’s a 30-day money back guarantee for all our products, so we encourage you to subscribe today.
Check more of our free articles on our website – just drop by and have a look. We encourage you to sign up for our daily newsletter, too – it’s free and if you don’t like it, you can unsubscribe with just 2 clicks. If you sign up today, you’ll also get 7 days of free access to our premium daily Gold & Silver Trading Alerts. Sign up for the free newsletter today!
