Global System-in-Package Die Technologies Market: Snapshot
The escalating popularity of miniaturization in the electronic industry is augmenting the demand in the global system-in-package (SiP) die technologies market. SiP enables the arrangement of several active electronic components in a single unit to function together and provide multiple opportunities to develop advanced and yet cheaper electronic products. The need to control rising costs, rise in the number of semiconductor fabrication plants (fabs), emergence of advanced and compact consumer electronic devices, design complexities in system-on-chip (SoC), and escalating number of the Internet of Things (IoT) devices are some of the key factors that are expected to significantly increment the demand in the global system-in-package die technologies market.
In the recent past, the field of electronics devices has seen multi-fold change, wherein feature phones are quickly replacing smartphones as well as laptops and tablets are replacing personal computers. In addition to that, the growing popularity of the smart homes concept, wherein electronic devices can be controlled and monitored with the help of mobile applications, will add to the prosperity of the SiP technologies market in the near future.
On the other hand, high inventory levels in supply chain and fluctuations of foreign exchange rates are two of the primary factors that are expected to challenge the SiP technology market from attaining its full potential in the near future. Additionally, heavy investment required to enter this market is restricting several prospect vendors, which would eventually improve the technology and reduced cost for the end users. The growth of outsourced semiconductor assembly and test (OSAT) vendors, emergence of fan-out wafer level packaging platform (FOWLP), and increasing need for automation in the flourishing automotive industry are a few latest trends in the global SiP die technologies market.
Global System-in-Package (SiP) Die Technologies Market: Overview
The global system-in-package (SiP) die technologies market holds out tremendous promise in the near future. SiP is a packaging technique that entails mounting a number of electronic sub components on to a single substrate along with other passive components. The unique perceived benefit of SiP is that it is not simply an IC package with multiple dies; but also contains fully functional systems or subsystems in the IC package.
The report by TMR Research contains important facts and figures associated with the global market for system-in-package (SiP). It collates past data and current market events and trends to gauge the future prospects of the market. The report furnishes an insightful peek into the market after using analytical tools such as Porter’s Five Forces analysis and SWOT analysis. The research study involved extensive use of secondary sources such as directories and databases, along with other government and private websites to identify and collect information useful for the technical, market-oriented, and commercial study of the global protective coating resins market. It also gathered useful inpiuts from industry experts.
Global System-in-Package (SiP) Die Technologies Market: Drivers and Restraints
The TMR report provides a detailed qualitative analysis of the different growth drivers and restraints impacting the market dynamics. The primary advantage of SiP is its uncomplicated design. This coupled with other factors such as less space required by it, has led to its growing array of functionalities ever since its emergence in the market. All these, coupled with continuous improvement in technologies making SiPs more efficient has also boosted their offtake.
One factor, countering growth in the global system-in-package (SiP) die technologies market is the significant challenges in being able to promise form yield maximization. The latter largely involve minimal complex design considerations, whereas for SiP, an effective subsystem or system, the interconnection and integration are considerably more complex.
Global System-in-Package (SiP) Die Technologies Market: Segmentation
To study the market in-depth, the report segments the global system-in-package (SiP) die technologies market based on different parameters. For example, depending upon end use, it divides the market into consumer electronics, retail, defense and surveillance, industrial and automotive, energy, scientific research, medicine, telecommunications, and instrumentation. Depending upon the type of raw material used, it segments the market into compound semiconductors and Silicon. Geography-wise, it divides the market into Europe, North America, APAC and the Rest of the World. Further, depending upon the packaging technologies, it classifies the market into pin grid array, ball grid array, surface mountpackage, flat packages, and small outline packages.
Global System-in-Package (SiP) Die Technologies Market: Vendor Landscape
A detailed assessment of the current vendor landscape is included in the report. It not only profiles the top-notch players operating in the market, but also brings to the fore their strengths and weaknesses as well. Some such prominent players profiled in the report include Ase Inc., Amkor Technology Inc., Chipmos Tech. Inc., Chipbond Technology Corporation, Fujitsu Ltd., Jiangsu Changjiang Electronics Technology Co., Nanium SA, Qualcomm Incorporated, Powertech Technologies Inc., Stats Chippac Ltd, and Toshiba Corporation.
