If an exporter booked a contract at 72 and in the absence of dollars delivery in March when the rate is 76, he may have to book a loss at 76 despite the fact that his bookings were based on confirmed orders.
Losses in forex contracts could run into crores of rupees for the exporters that had used anticipated dollar receivables to enter into contracts with banks.
Mumbai: India’s $108-billion textiles industry, which helps the likes of Gap and Macy’s stock their store shelves, is seeking a bailout package on their foreign exchange liabilities after the lockdown prompted cancellation of orders that were to fetch payments in dollars .
Losses in forex contracts could run into crores of rupees for the exporters that had used anticipated dollar receivables to enter into contracts with banks. To cover the hedging liabilities, the industry is seeking benefits similar to the moratorium extended to borrowers, who now have a three-month grace period on repayments.
“Export assignments are either getting cancelled or delayed, bringing financial troubles for local manufacturers,” said Sanjay Jain, ICC National Textile Committee chairman. “We have approached the government and the central bank seeking relief measures. Otherwise, it will trigger job losses. We cannot blame banks, which will abide by the guidelines laid out for currency covers.”
Textile exporters book forward contracts against overseas receivables to protect their cost or to earn premiums. On shipment, they provide documents to banks booking the contracts. Due to cancellation and delays, they are unable to provide the bill of lading and other documents.
If exporters are not able to ship, they do not receive the money from overseas buyers. In such cases, they have to unwind those forwards deals booked up to six months in advance at a loss of 2-4 rupees/unit of dollar, dealers said.
“Textile exporters should be given some flexibility to manage their dollar delivery in the form of some extensions so they do not have immediate cash flow problems considering (that the lockdown is) no fault of theirs,” said Abhishek Goenka, CEO, IFA Global.
If an exporter booked a contract at 72 and in the absence of dollars delivery in March when the rate is 76, he may have to book a loss at 76 despite the fact that his bookings were based on confirmed orders.
“If the rupee maintains its bearish bias due to dollar shortage and heads another 4-5% south, it could accelerate problems for them,” Goenka said.
The rupee lost about a percentage point Monday to close at 75.59 per dollar, reflecting the weakness in equities and bonds. The local unit was at 74.85 last Friday. India’s textiles industry provides direct employment to about 50 million people, and indirect jobs to another 60 million people.
