The Armchair Trader team are delighted to be supporting the Global Forex Awards 2020 as a media partner for the event this year.
Following the successes of the inaugural Global Forex Awards in 2019, the 2020 awards will now be split into two separate events.
The first event is the Global Forex Awards 2020 – B2B which are a celebration of businesses from around the world pushing the boundaries of innovation in B2B forex trading solutions. The awards will champion the best performing providers of liquidity, CRM, customer experience, execution, partnerships, platforms and performance, as well as other crucial elements of the B2B forex trading eco-system.
The self-nomination period for these awards opens on 2 March 2020 and closes on 27 March 2020. Companies will be able to self-nominate their interest in the awards in the specific award categories they are relevant to.
Have you tried algorithmic trading?
From 1 April 2020 until 29 April 2020 we will conduct an official public voting process. During this period of time we will engage with forex companies and relevant trading communities encouraging them to vote for their preferred choice of forex businesses/brands from the list of nominees.
Winners will be announced at an official winners’ lunch in London, UK on 5 June 2020.
To find out more about these awards and the nomination process, you can visit https://www.globalforexawards.com/b2bawards
The second event will be the Global Forex Awards 2020 – Retail which has approximately 50 award categories rewarding forex Retail businesses both globally and regionally. The awards champion cutting-edge technology, low-cost trading, comprehensive market research tools, advanced educational programs and world-class customer service for direct to consumer/trader businesses.
The self-nomination period for these awards opens on 29 May 2020, voting will commence on 29 June 2020 and the winners will be announced at an official winners’ party in Limassol, Cyprus on 24 September 2020.
The independent nomination and public voting processes mean that all Global Forex Awards winners will have one thing in common…. they will have been chosen by real forex trading customers from around the World.
To find out more about both awards, visit https://www.globalforexawards.com
