IG has been around forever, and interestingly, was the first of its kind at the time. Today, IG is a leading forex provider, with competitive fees, superb educational material and research, and a huge variety of assets.
IG has a minimum of 0.6 pips for EUR/USD trading, which is relatively low in comparison to the industry average of 70 pips. With this, you can trade on forex, cryptocurrency exchanges, individual equities, all stock sectors, bonds, and commodities.
You can also trade on interest rates through their mobile and browser-based platform. But note: there are steep, monthly inactivity fees after two years. See our IG review for more about their fee structure.
After the company’s expansion to the US in February 2019, U.S traders can now access IG US’s tools and services, however the product selection is currently focused on forex only.
The broker caters specifically to forex traders in several ways, including offering higher volume forex traders access to an aggressive rebate program.
While the company’s L2 Dealer offers professional forex traders direct market access (DMA) that bypasses IG’s dealing desk. This platform is easy to use and customizable.
In addition to being a leading forex broker, IG is the largest CFD dealer due to its trading revenue numbers. Most of the UK has a large number of financial spreads in CFDs. IG also offers six cryptocurrencies to trade as CFDs or spread bets but bitcoin has a 40-pip spread which is above the industry average.
Traders can relish in the company’s extensive educational material. DailyFX Forex University offers informative, and accessible information for all levels. Its touch of humour lifts what can be a complex subject. Traders can take enjoyment out of articles with titles including, Meet Your Subjects in reference to forex pairs, and How to Stay in School, a piece about risk management.
The IG Academy can help develop any traders knowledge of CFDs, spread betting, and forex trading. The courses can be completed in your own time, and includes interactive exercises and quizzes to liven it up and test your ability.
IG’s webinar archive includes an array of previously aired sessions, allowing you to catch up on ones that catch your eye, and if you want to add some into your schedule in the future you can visit the company’s webinar calendar to see all their upcoming sessions.
Customer support is helpful and friendly and can be contacted by phone, live chat, email, and social media, including Twitter. New clients and existing contacts have separate numbers, and the team is available 24 hours a day Monday to Friday.
There is no social/copy platform available, or any client positioning data for forex, CFDs, or spread bets but traders should note that forex positioning data is available within the IG Client Sentiment at DailyFX.com.
Overall, IG is suited to both smaller traders and professional traders. There is a minimum deposit required if/when funding by card depending on the country and currency.
For U.K forex traders it’s $250, and U.S traders it’s £250. If you’d like to give the platform a test drive, IG offers a demo account, or alternatively you can sign open a forex account in just 3 simple steps and get started on your forex journey.
CMC Markets provides low-cost services and outstanding easy-to-use research tools.
As a publicly-traded company with regulations in four tier-1 jurisdictions, CMC Markets is considered a safe and low-risk forex and CFD brokerage. It’s also considered the most low-cost option for forex and active trading.
CMC Markets is best suited to active traders as well as beginners. The platform has a variety of educational resources and tools to help you learn about forex trading and CFDs, and a responsive and helpful customer service team.
However, the firm also caters to more advanced and active traders who want to take advantage of their 0.7 pip minimum for Forex.
The truth is, CMC Markets has a low spread offering with very low trading costs overall. With its highly competitive pricing, the average spreads for EUR/USD go as low as 0.7 pips and typical spreads out to 0.81 pips. That said, this information can change so, make sure to check out the fees section yourself for any updates.
In addition, active traders are a focus for CMC Markets and are looked after. A liquidity rebate ranging from $5 to $10 million is available for those who trade at extremely high volumes. There’s also VIP discounts available for high net worth clients.
Traders also like the Guaranteed Stop-Loss Order (GSLO) that CMC Markets offers. This means that you can set risk thresholds for all of your positions, and you are guaranteed to close the trade exactly as you specify. While most brokers charge for GSLOs, CMC Markets actually refunds this cost to you.
You don’t need any minimum balance to trade with CMC Markets, and a demo account is available to practice trading before signing up to a live account. The platform provides you with charting tools and over 79 technical indicators.
You can also access pattern recognition and social-trading tools on the Next Generation platform, but it’s a little behind on the main platform. You can switch over to their MT4 platform for automated trading, but this area has a higher learning curve.
Read our CMC markets review to learn more about the broker.
OANDA’s low-cost online trading services provide great opportunities for experienced forex traders.
If you have been forex trading in the US, then you know OANDA. It’s one of just two brokerages available in the US. It also serves customers in Canada, UK, Singapore, and Australia. In addition, it has the reputation of being the most trusted retail forex platform.
Very safe and regulated under FCA, CFTC, IIROC, ASIC, and Monetary Authority of Singapore
Little to no new education resources, very disorganized
OANDA has been around since the beginning of retail forex. While it was developed within academia, the company has grown and built a reputation for being a trustworthy exchange.
As a forex broker, it has more product offerings, better technology, and a dedicated customer base that spans the globe. Since OANDA has been around since the 1990s, they have the most historical data and offer the latest trading technology for forex traders.
You don’t need to have an account minimum to trade with OANDA . The quality of trade executions is considered high by most traders, and it has clear pricing and fee structures, which make it more trustworthy overall as a forex broker. You can access a variety of apps online and via mobile, including their MetaTrader 4 app.
Numerous asset classes and superior analysis tools are the main features provided by London Capital Group.
You can never lose more than the amount you have on deposit with London Capital Group, and you can trade in a variety of asset classes including all indexes, forex, cryptocurrencies, bonds, commodities, and stocks.
LCG’s main strength is that you can trade a variety of asset classes globally, and they do not charge commissions. The broker is well known for forex and cryptocurrency exchanges, but it also has a very competitive low spread. With a number of ways to access their online brokerage, you also never have to worry about losing track of your investments.
With its mobile app and browser platform, LCG is one of the more high-tech forex platforms available for mobile. However, they lose some points because they don’t offer a way to test strategies or automate your orders. That said, they do provide other benefits. For example, account holders can never go into the negative due to the company’s protection.
In our review , we found LCG to have great customer service options. You can chat or call with their customer support team, and they are quick to respond to most requests.
Saxo Bank provides Forex traders with numerous trading instruments and advanced research tools.
If you can afford the $10,000 minimum deposit, then Saxo Bank offers an excellent trading platform with amazing research tools, 40,000 different assets to trade, and competitive pricing.
40,000 trading instruments across forex, CFDs, stocks, ETFs, and mutual funds
Out of all the forex brokerages, Saxo Bank is probably the most exclusive, but due to its low-risk, highly trusted platform, it’s considered to be one of the best by today’s forex traders. You can trade in forex with 182 currency pairs and 35,000 CFDs. It also offers social trading and copy trading. However, there is no cryptocurrency trading allowed.
As far as account types, there are classic, platinum, and VIP accounts. To join Saxo Bank, the biggest drawback is that you are required to deposit $10,000 just for an entry-level classic account.
The average spread for Saxo Bank was rated at 0.6 pips as of October 2019. Spread-only pricing is a major priority for this brokerage, so you won’t pay any commissions.
However, for volume-based pricing, the commissions are different. You are expected to pay a commission of 0.5 pips in these cases. This is still relatively low for active traders who would primarily use this type of trade.
With a variety of tools like SaxoTraderGo and SaxoTraderPro, you’ll get over 55 technical indicators for charging and about 20 different drawing tools, which includes Auto Chartist’s trade signals.
You’ll have to subscribe and upgrade to gain access to SaxoTraderPro, but when you do there is a larger selection of trading features, including support for six monitors, streaming time and sales, and algorithmic, automated orders.
For more information about SaxoTraderPro and Saxo’s other broker offerings, read our in-depth review.
TD Ameritrade enables Forex brokers to low-cost trade with a great number of currency pairs.
You can trade with nearly 80 currency pairs on TD Ameritrade , but it’s the tools, research, and streaming data on the thinkorswim platform that makes this a top choice for US forex traders.
Very stable and trusted platform, founded in 1975
Best in class rating for platform and tools, mobile trading, and research
