Market volatility, volume and system availability may delay account access and trade executions.
No Margin for 30 Days. Certain ETFs purchased commission free that are available on the TD Ameritrade ETF Market Center will not be immediately marginable at TD Ameritrade through the first 30 days from settlement. For the purposes of calculation the day of settlement is considered Day 1.
Short-Term Trading Fee (Holding Period for 30 Days). ETFs available commission-free that participate in the ETF Market Center may be subject to a holding period that commences with any purchase and extends through the following THIRTY (30) calendar days. An account owner must hold all shares of an ETF position purchased for a minimum of THIRTY (30) calendar days without selling to avoid a short–term trading fee where applicable. There is no limit to the number of purchases that can be effected in the holding period. Any order to sell within THIRTY (30) calendar days of last purchase (LIFO – Last In, First Out) will cause an account owner's account to be assessed a short–term trading fee of $13.90, where applicable. For the purposes of calculation, the day of purchase is considered Day 0. Day 1 begins the day after the date of purchase. The short–term trading fee may be applicable to each purchase of each ETF where such ETF is sold during the holding period. The short–term trading fee may be more than applicable standard commissions on purchases and sells of ETFs that are not commission-free.
Taxes related to TD Ameritrade offers are your responsibility. All Promotional items and cash received during the calendar year will be included on your consolidated Form 1099. Please consult a legal or tax advisor for the most recent changes to the U.S. tax code and for rollover eligibility rules.
198% price improvement covers market orders executed between April and June 2019 in exchange-listed stocks 1-1,999 shares in size. Statistics provided by S3 Matching Technologies, which is not affiliated with TD Ameritrade. Comparisons based on publicly available information, including published rates of Charles Schwab, Fidelity and E*TRADE.
Price improvement is not guaranteed. Price improvement percentage is calculated by dividing executed market orders receiving price(s) better than the National Best Bid and Offer (NBBO) at the time of order routing by the total number of orders executed. Price improvement savings is the difference between the order execution price and the NBBO at the time of order routing, multiplied by executed shares.
FRED® is a registered trademark of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The Economic Data tab uses the FRED® API but is not endorsed or certified by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. FRED® API and data ©Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 2016. All rights reserved. By using the FRED® data, you are agreeing to be bound by the FRED® API Terms of Use, available at research.stlouisfed.org/fred_terms.html.
†TD Ameritrade does NOT make any recommendation to buy, sell, or hold any security via a social media post or chat. And we encourage you to thoroughly research any "recommendation" you might view in a third-party post or chat.
**The paperMoney software application is for educational purposes only. Successful virtual trading during one time period does not guarantee successful investing of actual funds during a later time period as market conditions change continuously.
***Portfolio Margin will only be approved for accounts of qualified traders who can support the risks associated with greater leverage ability.
***Use of Portfolio Margin involves unique and significant risks, including increased leverage, which increases the amount of potential loss, and shortened and stricter time frames for meeting deficiencies, which increase the risk of involuntary liquidation. Client, account, and position eligibility requirements exist and approval is not guaranteed. Carefully read the Portfolio Margin Risk Disclosure Statement , Margin Handbook , and Margin Disclosure Document for more details.
Third-party research and tools are obtained from companies not affiliated with TD Ameritrade, and are provided for informational purposes only. While the information is deemed reliable, TD Ameritrade does not guarantee its accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose, and makes no warranties with respect to the results to be obtained from its use. Please consult other sources of information and consider your individual financial positions and goals before making an independent investment decision.
Backtesting is the evaluation of a particular trading strategy using historical data. Results presented are hypothetical, they did not actually occur and they may not take into consideration all transaction fees or taxes you would incur in an actual transaction. And just as past performance of a security does not guarantee future results, past performance of a strategy does not guarantee the strategy will be successful in the future. Results could vary significantly, and losses could result.
Options are not suitable for all investors as the special risks inherent to options trading may expose investors to potentially rapid and substantial losses. Options trading privileges subject to TD Ameritrade review and approval. Not all account owners will qualify. Please read Characteristics and Risks of Standardized Options before investing in options before investing in options.
Spreads and other multiple-leg option strategies can entail substantial transaction costs, including multiple commissions, which may impact any potential return.
Futures and futures options trading is speculative, and is not suitable for all investors. Please read the Risk Disclosure for Futures and Options prior to trading futures products.
The risk of loss in trading forex can be substantial. Clients must consider all relevant risk factors, including their own personal financial situation, before trading. Trading foreign exchange on margin carries a high level of risk, as well as its own unique risk factors. Forex investments are subject to counter-party risk, as there is no central clearing organization for these transactions. Please read the following risk disclosure before considering the trading of this product:
The #1 trading app accolade applies to thinkorswim mobile―also known as TD Ameritrade Mobile Trader. Mobile leadership claim based on analysis of publicly available competitor data concerning number of mobile users and daily average revenue trade levels.
††Rolling strategies can entail substantial transaction costs, including multiple commissions, which may impact any potential return.  You are responsible for all orders entered in your self-directed account.
TradeWise and TD Ameritrade, Inc. are separate but affiliated firms. Advisory services are provided exclusively by TradeWise and brokerage services are provided exclusively by TD Ameritrade, Inc
†††Probability analysis results from the Market Maker Move indicator are theoretical in nature, not guaranteed, and do not reflect any degree of certainty of an event occurring.
A covered call strategy can limit the upside potential of the underlying stock position, as the stock would likely be called away in the event of substantial stock price increase.  Additionally, any downside protection provided to the related stock position is limited to the premium received. (Short options can be assigned at any time up to expiration regardless of the in-the-money amount.)
Company Profile (Trefis) information/estimates provided by Insight Guru, a separate and unaffiliated firm. Stock prices are impacted by numerous factors and estimates of prices in the future are not guaranteed.
Past performance of a security or strategy does not guarantee that the security or strategy will be successful in the future.
This is not an offer or solicitation in any jurisdiction where we are not authorized to do business or where such offer or solicitation would be contrary to the local laws and regulations of that jurisdiction, including, but not limited to persons residing in Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, UK, and the countries of the European Union.
Brokerage services provided by TD Ameritrade, Inc., member FINRA / SIPC . TD Ameritrade is a trademark jointly owned by TD Ameritrade IP Company, Inc. and The Toronto-Dominion Bank. © 2020 TD Ameritrade.
