Gold slipped to drop and test the horizontal support level of 1,695. An upward trendline is keeping gold supported, and closing of gold prices over 1,695 support is likely to trigger buying in gold . Besides, the value of RSI and Stochastics are holding below 20, which is suggestings that the odds of bullish retracement remains strong over 1,695 support level.
On the higher side, gold's immediate resistance can be found around 1,720 and 1,735, while support continues to hold around 1,695. However, the breakout of this level may extend selling until 1,680.
Today in the early Europan session, the USD/CAD currency pair flashing green and rose to a fresh session high near the 1.4065 area in the last hours mainly due to the sharp declines in the crude oil prices which tend to weakens the commodity-linked currency – the Loonie and keeps the currency pair higher.
The broad-based U.S. dollar latest pullback from the daily lows collaborates with the currency pair's gains. As of writing, the USD/CAD currency pair is currently trading at 1.3952 and consolidates in the range between the 1.3944 - 1.4074.
The currency pair continued showing some resilience near the key 1.40 psychological mark and succeeded in regaining some positive traction during the Asian session on Tuesday. The uptick in the pair was supported by multiple factors, including a fresh decline in crude oil prices and a bullish pickup in U.S. dollar demand.
The WTI crude oil prices dropped again on Tuesday due to on-going worries about oversupply and a lack of storage space across the world. These concerns come after the largest U.S. exchange-traded fund said it would sell all its front-month crude contracts to avoid further losses, which eventually weakened the Canadian dollar .
It should be noted that the traders failed to cheer the latest optimism about the easing of coronavirus-related restrictions globally, mainly due to the latest declines in crude oil prices. As in result, the traders lost their confidence during the current cautious moo in the equity markets.
At the USD front, the U.S. dollar recovered its status as the global reserve currency due to fears about the economic recession from the coronavirus pandemic. The decreasing demand for perceived riskier assets provided an additional boost to the greenback and contributed to the pair's modest uptick.
