The US election is also expected to be a major market mover. However, its impact will come in full in the second half of the year. Therefore, this autumn and winter are expected to be the best times to trade any pairs that are correlated with US politics.
Presently, the uniqueness of the coronavirus outbreak as a forex market fundamental lies in the following factors:
It is affecting several countries and therefore several currencies all at once.
It is also impacting the commodity markets and therefore exerting an influence on all commodity currencies at the moment.
Even when the spread of the virus is contained globally and the WHO declares the world free of the disease, it will leave an economic impact that will be felt for months (if not years) to come.
The situation is extremely fluid, with updates on the changing nature of the epidemic coming hard and fast. This makes for round-the-clock volatility, which presents trading opportunities.
The currencies to invest in spring 2020 will be those of countries which are directly exposed to the economic impact of the epidemic. So, based on the latest trends and future fundamentals, the best currency pairs to trade in spring 2020 are:
Traditionally, the US dollar remains the most traded currency in the forex market. It is usually responsive to the risk-on/risk-off sentiments that creep into the market. With the coronavirus outbreak exerting a risk averse sentiment on the markets, the USD has at various times this year been the centre of safe-haven buying and risk-on selloffs. Its pairing with the safe-haven Japanese yen presents a battle of which currency is more of a risk hedging tool than the other.
The USD/JPY is now showing more volatility than it did after the Fed cut rates in July 2019.
The Swiss Franc is also well-known for its safe-haven properties and usually attracts the heaviest demand of all safe-haven currencies. The USD/CHF has dropped nearly 740 pips since the beginning of 2020 and there is still more life in this pair as the outbreak continues.
Among the currencies to invest in spring 2020 is the Canadian dollar. China is the second largest importer of crude oil. Demand for crude oil has dropped off radically, taking down the price of both the WTI and Brent benchmarks below the $40 mark and dangerously close to $30. The OPEC+ meetings held in Vienna on March 5-6 to decide on further production output yielded no results as a result of Russia’s decision not to back the plan.
Bloomberg reported on March 8 that Saudi Arabia would ramp up production to 10 million barrels; a move which has bearish implications for crude oil price.
The Canadian dollar is a commodity currency which is linked with crude oil, being the country with the second largest deposits of the black gold in its shale sands. The decision of the Bank of Canada to cut interest rates by 50 Bps on March 6 was a move aimed at shoring up the Canadian economy against the impact of the coronavirus and plunging crude prices by making the CAD cheaper and more competitive. The USD/CAD looks set to present a lot of action in the months to come.
Australia ships most of its copper and gold exports to China. A decline in Chinese factory activity and a rate cut by the Reserve Bank of Australia have weakened the Aussie dollar. There is yet more to come for the AUD/USD even when the coronavirus outbreak is over.
China’s economic recovery and the revamping of its factory activity are critical factors which could decide the direction of the AUD/USD down the road.
The coronavirus outbreak, the extent of its global spread as well as the economic impact on various key countries in the world’s commodity supply chain will be the main drivers of currency price action in the spring.
The direction of the forex market will be decided by how widely the coronavirus outbreak impacts the global economy, the response of central banks and policy makers, and the prevailing risk sentiment in the market at any given time.
Worsening of the Covid-19 global spread (in terms of number of new cases and fatalities) will exert risk aversion. Commodity currencies are expected to weaken, while safe haven currencies will continue to strengthen.
Healthcare companies are battling to find a cure or a vaccine. There is great hope that the next quarter may see the first vaccines being deployed to the hardest hit areas. If there is success, risk aversion may subside and risky assets will start to experience a recovery. For currency pairs such as the British pound, the Brexit trade talks present an added burden which may not be felt too much in Q1 and Q2 2020. But as the deadline for the talks approaches (December 31, 2020), there may be increased volatility on the GBP/USD and EUR/GBP pairs.
