Economic Times | 30 Jun, 2020 | 10.06PM IST
Nifty likely to see small pullback; protect profit on every rise
The domestic equity market witnessed some consolidation on a closing basis on Tuesday, but the session remained weaker than the previous one. Following an overnight strong closing of the US markets, Asian bourses started on a firm note this morning. The Indian market saw a strong opening, but failed to capitalise on it.
Opec, Russia seen easing oil production cuts from August: Sources
Opec and Russia will likely ease record oil production cuts from August as global oil demand recovers and prices have bounced back from their lows, four Opec+ sources told Reuters. Opec and its allies including Russia, know as Opec+, have agreed to cut production by a record 9.7 million barrels per day, or 10 percent of global demand, from May to support oil prices as demand plunged because of the coronavirus pandemic.
Direct investment rises in FY20, portfolio investment declines: RBI
Direct investment into the country rose by $19 billion while portfolio investment declined by $13.7 billion during 2019-20, according to the data on the International Investment Position (IIP) released by the Reserve Bank on Tuesday. International financial assets of Indian residents increased by $73.9 billion due to the rise in reserve assets and overseas direct investment by $64.9 billion and $13.0 billion, respectively, though other investments declined marginally during the year, the RBI said in a release.
Nifty ended flat amid volatile trade on Tuesday and in the process formed a bearish candle on the daily chart. Analysts said the index managed to hold on to the 10,300 mark, but is still in a consolidation phase. It needs to break the 10,200 level or cross 10,450 for a directional trade to emerge. Sumeet Bagadia of Choice Broking said the index has support at 10,100 level while resistance comes in at 10,500 level.
The country's foreign exchange reserves in nominal terms increased by $64.9 billion in FY20 compared to a reduction of $11.7 billion in FY19, according to RBI. This increase in reserves includes the valuation effects, the Reserve Bank of India said in a release.
Here’s who bought and sold what in some of the key bulk deals of the day. Sanjay Lunawat sold 728,861 shares of Digjam at Rs 4.77 per share on BSE, and another 5,71,148 shares at Rs 3.44 per share. Shriram Credit Company sold 1,08,42,770 shares of Empower India at Rs 19 per share. It held a 5.77 per cent stake in the company at the end of March quarter.
IDBI Trusteeship Services has approached the Bombay High Court on behalf of bondholders of GVK Power (Goindwal Sahib) against the company’s lenders for the priority over the dues of over Rs 293 crore. IDBI Trusteeship filed the case on behalf of DB International (Asia), an affiliate of Deutsche Bank, seeking the court’s intervention to get Rs 293 crore under the Trust and Retention Account (TRA) Agreement from the IDBI Bank. The bondholders are claiming that being priority lenders, they have right over the money over the banks.
The government will implement the uniform stamp duty on transfer of shares, debentures, futures, options, currency and other capital market instruments from July 1. The rationalized system through centralized collection mechanism is expected to ensure minimization of cost of collection, enhancement of revenue productivity, capital formation and ease of doing business, while reducing jurisdictional disputes.
Dow Jones dips at open on virus fears, US-China tensions
The S&P 500 and Dow Jones indexes opened lower on Tuesday as coronavirus-related worries and simmering U.S.-China tensions weighed on sentiment at the end of what is expected to be the S&P 500's best quarter since 1998. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 83.37 points, or 0.33%, at the open to 25,512.43.
Nifty forms small bearish candle, shows steady loss of strength
Nifty50 on Tuesday erased morning gains to close flat. The index formed a small bearish candle on the daily chart after forming indecisive Doji candles for two consecutive sessions. Analysts said the index is losing strength and the bias has turned negative. Nifty has immediate support at 10,190 and 10,180 levels, while the immediate hurdle is seen at 10,400 level, they said.
State-owned Oil and Natural Gas Corp (ONGC) on Tuesday reported its first-ever quarterly loss after it took an impairment on the slump in oil and gas prices. India's top oil and gas producer reported a Rs 3,098 crore loss in the January-March quarter as compared to a profit of Rs 4,240 crore in the same period a year back.
Oil-to-telecom conglomerate Reliance Industries (RIL) contributed the most to Sensex’s decline as it dropped 1.15 per cent, while private lender HDFC Bank shed 0.99 per cent. FMCG major ITC and top software exporter Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) shed 1.32 per cent and 0.93 per cent, respectively.
Below 10,170 level, Nifty could fall to 10,000 or 10,050: Shrikant Chouhan
“Markets failed to hold on to its initial gains and ended lower due to shift in US stock futures to negative territory. Major market participants stayed on the sidelines ahead of the speech from PM Modi. On Wednesday, we are expecting trending day for the market. Below 10170 level, Nifty could fall to 10000 or 10050. On the higher side, Nifty could move to 10500 if it breaches the 10410 level. In brief, 10170 and 10410 levels would be trend decider levels for the market. Also, the trend in world markets could also be influential,” said Shrikant Chouhan, Executive Vice President, Equity Technical Research at Kotak Securities.
Use dips to accumulate quality stocks: Ajit Mishra
"Markets will take cues from the PM speech on further unlocking of the economic activities amid the rising cases and we’ll see the reaction in the early trade on Wednesday i.e. July 1. Besides, the auto sales data will also be closely watched by the participants to access the pace of recovery in the economy. Nifty has been hovering within 10,200-10,400 for the last four sessions and either side break may trigger the next directional move. Meanwhile, limit your trades and use dips to accumulate quality stocks," said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking.
Markets settled unchanged amid volatility: Ajit Mishra
"Markets settled almost unchanged amid volatility, in continuation to the prevailing consolidation phase. The benchmarks opened with an uptick, taking cues from the global markets but selling pressure erased all the gains in the latter half. Consequently, the Nifty index ended flat at 10,300 levels. On the sector front, a mixed trend was witnessed as on one hand sectors like auto, capital goods and banking ended in green whereas telecom, healthcare and oil & gas ended with losses," said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking.
No one is above lockdown rules; We need people to follow rules in containment zone
Unlocking phase has increased laxity among people; Carelessess increasing during Unlock
Covid-19 recovery rate in India better than most countries: PM Modi
We are now entering Unlock 2. We are also entering the season where there are rising cases of cold, cough, and fever: PM Narendra Modi
CLOSING BELL: Sensex erases gains, ends 46 pts lower ahead of PM Modi's address; Nifty ends flat; Nestle, Maruti gain 2% each
S&P BSE AUTO biggest sectoral gainer, up 1.05%
S&P BSE OIL & GAS biggest sectoral loser, down 1.51%
