Trading involves speculating on the future price of a market via derivative products. These products take their value from an underlying asset, and do not require a trader to own the asset in order to take a position.
Traders can not only open the more traditional ‘long’ position, but they can take advantage of markets that are falling in price too – known as going ‘short’. This opens up a whole other avenue of potential profit.
When you trade, you’ll be able to take a position on a wider variety of asset classes, and you won’t need to worry about the intricacies of taking ownership of the asset – such as delivery of currencies or commodities.
With IG, you can trade a range of asset classes, including:
Shares . When taking a position on a share, it is important to research the company, the industry and the stock exchange it is listed on. Unless your provider offers out-of-hours trading , your dealing will be confined to the exchange’s opening hours
Indices . A stock index enables you to trade on the performance of a group of shares, rather than just one company. As there are many constituents that can move the market, stock indices tend to see more volatility than individual shares
Forex (FX) . This is the world’s most liquid and volatile financial market due to the vast number of currency dealers. Traders can buy and sell currencies 24 hours a day, five days a week. IG also offers weekend trading on GBP/USD
Commodities . Trading commodities provides vast opportunities for profit, but the nature of the market creates a high level of risk. The price of commodities can fluctuate constantly as the rate of their production and consumption changes
Cryptocurrency CFD trading . These digital assets can be speculated on just like physical currencies. The crypto market is known for its volatility, which can create an exciting landscape for traders but does present unique risks
Most trading takes place via derivatives products such as CFDs. This method of trading uses leverage, which means you only have to put up a small deposit to gain exposure to the full value of a trade.
While this will magnify profits, it will also magnify losses. This is why learning about the risks of trading is crucial for anyone who is starting to trade.
A CFD is an agreement to exchange the difference in the price of a market between the opening and closing of a trade. There are a variety of benefits to trading CFDs, such as:
Find out more about CFD trading or open a demo account to practise trading.
Trading timeframes are significantly shorter than investing holding times – while investors will hold positions for years, traders will hold positions for just minutes, hours, days or weeks. The time frame of a trade completely depends on the style of trading you choose to use.
Whereas investors ignore smaller market movements, and focus on the longer-term trend of the market, traders aim to open positions more frequently to take advantage of volatility around key events and intraday activity.
When you open a CFD position, you would put down a small initial deposit – the margin – which is a percentage of the full value of the trade. This is why leveraged trading is sometimes referred to as ‘trading on margin’. This initial funding is often presented as a percentage of your total trade.
So, as before, let’s say you want to buy five shares that are currently worth £100 each. If you wanted to invest, you’d have to put up all £500 to open the position. But if you decided to trade using leveraged products instead, you might only have to pay 20% of this (£100) to open the position.
The exact amount of profit a trader will be set to make will depend on the strategy they use, their risk management practices and the amount of capital they put down in the first place.
When you trade using leverage, any profits made would be magnified. You would only need to put down an initial deposit to gain full market exposure. Any subsequent profit (or loss) is then calculated using the full value of the trade, not this initial payment.
Trading can be potentially lucrative, but it is also risky – this makes it important to learn about the risks associated with trading.
While investors might seek to generate annual returns of 10%, traders will be looking to generate the same average return each month. These profits are made by being proactive in a short timeframe through the frequent buying and selling of assets – taking advantage of both rising and falling markets.
In contrast to buying and holding assets as investments, there is no dividend yield from a CFD position. Instead, positions are adjusted to reflect the change in the underlying market.
As with investing, there will be some additional charges associated with each trade. In most cases this fee is in the form of a spread, which we charge on top of the market price. The spread is the difference between the bid and ask prices and can vary depending on market conditions.
Spread charges apply to CFD trades for all markets except shares. For every shares CFD trade, you’ll pay a commission instead of a spread.
Other potential charges include overnight funding fees, guaranteed stop premiums and any extra services you choose to use, such as direct market access, advanced charting packages and data streaming.
It’s also important to be aware of the maintenance margin, which is the term for the additional funds that might be required if your open position starts to incur losses that are not covered by the initial deposit. If this happens, you could get a notification from your provider – known as a margin call – asking you to top up the funds in your account. Failure to do so can result in your position being closed and the loss to your account being realised.
CFDs come with a unique set of risks as they are leveraged products. While leverage can magnify profits, as we’ve seen, it can also magnify your losses. To help restrict your potential losses from trading, there are a variety of ways that you can manage your risk with IG.
The most common are stops and limits . Stops automatically close your position when the market moves against you by a specified amount. You can choose from three types of stop:
Basic. Closes you out as near as possible to the price level you choose. A basic stop may be affected by ‘gapping’ overnight or in times of high volatility
Guaranteed. Closes you out at the level you requested, regardless of whether the market gaps. This will incur a small premium, but only if the stop is triggered
Trailing. Moves with your position when the market moves in your favour, but locks in as soon as the market starts to move against you
Limits, meanwhile, do the opposite, closing your position when the market moves a specified distance in your favour. Limits are a great way to secure profits in volatile markets.
You can learn more about financial markets and managing your trading risk with IG Academy’s series of online courses.
A trading style is a set of preferences that determine how often you’ll place a trade and how long you will keep those trades open for. It will be based on your account size, how much time you can dedicate to trading, your personality and your risk tolerance.
There are four main trading styles:
Day trading . As the name suggests, this style involves opening and closing positions within a single day – this is so that there are no risks or charges associated with holding positions overnight
Scalp trading . This style involves opening and holding a position for a very short amount of time, from a few seconds to a few minutes at most. The aim is to take small but frequent profits
Swing trading . The aim of this style is to focus on the body of a larger move, rather than identifying the start and finish of a trend. Positions are held from days to weeks
Position trading . This style is the most similar to investing, as it involves holding positions for a longer period of time, depending on the overarching market trend. This could be months to years
