Trading is risky. Your capital is at risk.
Trading price movements of shares from companies like Apple and Volkswagen offers you access to popular company stocks without having to purchase them outright.
Whatever your investment goals may be, make the most of today’s market action and start trading stock CFDs with FXTM.
Why trade company shares as a CFD?
Unlike our stock trading service, you can go short on stock CFDs and take advantage of falling stock prices, not just rising ones
With FXTM you can trade with confidence knowing that our service is fully regulated, guaranteeing fully segregated client funds and negative balance protection. We also provide fully transparent execution statistics
The stock CFDs account has one of the lowest deposit requirements, giving you access to price action from big companies without the need to invest big portions of your capital
Trading stock CFDs allows you to benefit from the price movements, both up and down, of some of the largest and well-known US and European listed companies.
Trade price movements from major company shares, including:
All trademarks displayed belong to their respective owners, and constitute neither an endorsement nor a recommendation of those organizations. Any such use of trademarks is not intended to imply, directly or indirectly, that those organizations endorse or have any affiliation with FXTM.
How does CFD stock trading work?
A Contract for Difference (CFD) is an agreement between the buyer and the seller. It means that the seller will pay the buyer the difference between the stock’s current price and its price at the point the contract specifies. By trading CFDs on stocks, investors are speculating whether the value of the stock will rise or fall.
One of the main benefits of CFD trading is that you’re trading on the expectation of a price movement, so you don’t have to actually buy the underlying asset. Because you can take a short position (expecting the price to decrease) as well as a long one (expecting the price to increase), you can still make a profit when the share falls in value — not just when it rises.
This gives stock CFD traders greater flexibility and more opportunities to earn from market movements. By the same token, you should be aware of the potential for losses when going long or short on a stock’s price.
Combine the power of MetaTrader with FXTM’s award-winning services for an unbeatable trading experience.
We offer the industry’s leading trading platforms MetaTrader 4 and MetaTrader 5 on your PC, Mac, mobile or tablet to suit you.
These platforms are equipped with all the tools you need to maximise your trading potential, including technical indicators, interactive charts and a powerful security system.
