Economy 7 hours ago (Jun 30, 2020 10:25)
© Reuters. FILE PHOTO: Daffodils are seen flowering near the Treasury building in London, Britain
LONDON (Reuters) - Britain's finance ministry said on Tuesday it had spent more than 25 billion pounds on a furlough programme that is supporting 9.3 million jobs.
In a weekly update, the Treasury said claims under its Job Retention Scheme - which pays 80% of salary costs for furloughed staff - had risen to 25.5 billion pounds as of June 28 from 22.9 billion pounds the week before.
Banks had lent small businesses 29.5 billion pounds of 100% state-backed loans, up about 1.5 billion pounds from the previous week. Larger firms had received 11.1 billion pounds from the government's main lending scheme, with the biggest companies getting an extra 2.3 billion pounds.
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read and understood Investing.com UK's comment guidlines and agree to the terms described.
