© Reuters. FILE PHOTO: The nuclear reactor at Britain's Sizewell B nuclear power plant in Southwold, Suffolk, is seen during stormy weather 2/2
LONDON (Reuters) - Britain's nuclear regulator said on Tuesday it had received an application for a licence to build two nuclear reactors at Sizewell in Suffolk county, north of London, from EDF (PA: EDF ) Energy subsidiary NNB Generation Company.
The Sizewell C plant will be an almost identical copy of Hinkley Point C, which is being built in Somerset, in Britain's southwest, and would generate enough power for 6 million homes.
Britain's planning inspectorate accepted a application last week for Sizewell C that will be examined over 15 to 18 months.
EDF Energy, part of EDF, said a nuclear site licence examination, which would run concurrently to the planning application, would take a similar amount of time.
Shane Turner at the Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) said the regulator was satisfied that the planning application was complete but "there is still a lot of work to do, and we do not expect to reach a decision until at least the end of 2021."
He said the site licence required separate regulatory permission from the ONR.
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read and understood Investing.com UK's comment guidlines and agree to the terms described.
