Trading in the Forex market has become increasingly popular lately, especially in the current conditions, when making money online is about the only way to generate income.
People can trade Forex anytime, straight from home. To start trading, you need to find a reliable broker, that will provide you with a trading account, a trading platform and of course, access to the global financial market. For its services, the broker charges certain fees. This can be a commission, spread, or conversion fee.
There are many articles on the web telling you how to pick a broker and which factors to consider. Favorable trading conditions are listed as one of the most important criteria. Among these trading conditions, you may come across the so-called “Cashback program”.
The cashback service is a great perk offered by some obrokers, like AMarkets online broker. To put it simple, the term “cashback” in the Forex industry means getting part of the broker’s commission (spread) back to your trading account. By joining the AMarkets Cashback program and receiving part of the spread back, you will pay less commission, thus generating higher profits. Besides, you get cashback for all of you trades, regardless of the trading outcome. How cool is that?
But why would the broker give back part of its well-earned money? – you may wonder. Don’t worry, there’s nothing fishy about it at all. The cashback program is beneficial not only for a trader, who receives part of the spread back, thus getting more funds to trade with. It’s beneficial for the broker too since such offers increase customer loyalty and help the broker attract more active traders. The more traders – the more business for the broker.
Now that we’ve explained what cashback is, we’ve saved the best for last. While some brokers do provide cashback service, only AMarkets offers Increased cashback as an added cherry on top. Check out the rates you get with this limited-time offer and see for yourself:
The offer is available from 15.06.20 to 30.06.20.
Increased cashback will be available until 31.07.20.
Only Standard and Fixed dollar accounts on MT4 platform can join the cashback program.
Cashback is calculated based on the trading activity in Forex instruments and Metals.
To advance to the next level and receive more cashback, you need to achieve a required trading volume within a trading month.
The minimum position holding time for each trade shouldn’t be less than 3 minutes. The price change of a trade should be at least 10 pips.
Cashback is credited to a trading account connected to the program in the form of a trading bonus, for closed transactions daily.
If you withdraw funds from the trading account connected to the program or fail to reach the turnover required to move to the next level, your account will be returned to the first level of the program.
Don’t miss out on this great opportunity. Trade with increased cashback from AMarkets , unlock new levels of cashback, return more money to open new trades and pay less commissions!
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
