U.S. Dollar Index (DX) Futures Technical Analysis – Strengthens Over 99.250, Weakens Under 98.130
Trader reaction to the retracement zone at 99.245 to 93.130 will determine the near-term direction of the June U.S. Dollar Index over the near-term.
The U.S. Dollar fell against a basket of major currencies on Friday, helping to contribute to its biggest weekly decline in four years, as trillions of dollar’s worth of stimulus efforts by governments and central banks during the coronavirus epidemic helped temper a rout in global markets. What this basically means is the U.S. Federal Reserve took action earlier in the week that guaranteed enough U.S. Dollars would be around to soften a credit crunch. Too much supply, lower demand weighed on the greenback.
On Friday, June U.S. Dollar Index futures settled at 98.537, down 0.916 or -0.92%.
The U.S. Dollar lost 0.99% against the Euro, 2.31% versus the British Pound, 1.47% against the Japanese Yen, 0.14% versus the Canadian Dollar and 1.30% against the Swiss Franc.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. A trade through 103.960 will signal a resumption of the uptrend. The main trend will change to down on a move through the last main bottom at 94.530.
The short-term range is 94.530 to 103.960. Its retracement zone at 99.245 to 98.130 was the first downside target. The index closed inside this zone on Friday.
The major upside target and retracement zone is 101.495 to 108.145. This zone stopped the rally last week at 103.960. Needless to say, this zone is controlling the longer-term direction of the index.
Trader reaction to the retracement zone at 99.245 to 93.130 will determine the near-term direction of the June U.S. Dollar Index over the near-term.
A sustained move over 99.245 will indicate the return of buyers. This could lead to a quick rebound rally with the major 50% level at 101.495 the next likely upside target.
A sustained move under 98.130 will indicate the selling is getting stronger. This could trigger an acceleration to the downside since the next major target is the March 9 main bottom at 94.530.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
