U.S. sanctions likely to have impact on Huawei as a provider, British minister says
Economy 2 hours ago (Jun 30, 2020 15:30)
LONDON (Reuters) - U.S sanctions designed to restrict the ability of China's Huawei[HWT.UL] to source advanced microchips for 5G equipment is likely to have an impact on the viability of the supplier for Britain, the country's media secretary Oliver Dowden said.
Britain granted Huawei a limited role in its future 5G networks in January but officials at the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) have since been studying the impact of the U.S. measures that were announced in May.
"We have, since the middle of May, had the U.S. sanctions in respect of Huawei, so clearly given that those sanctions are targeted at 5G (...) it is likely to have an impact on the viability of Huawei as a provider for the 5G network," he told a parliamentary select committee.
Dowden said the government was in the latter stages of reviewing the NCSC analysis. "Off the back of that we will determine what policy measures if necessary need to be taken in response."
U.S. sanctions likely to have impact on Huawei as a provider, British minister says
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read and understood Investing.com UK's comment guidlines and agree to the terms described.
