The direction of the USD/JPY the rest of the session on Friday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the main 50% level at 106.706.
The Dollar/Yen is trading slightly lower on Friday, pressured by a slight dip in demand for higher risk assets and lower 10-year U.S Treasury yields. Volume is light in the early trade as traders grappled with disappointing unemployment data and rising coronavirus cases.
On Thursday, the U.S. reported initial jobless claims which totaled 1.5 million for the week-ending June 12, topping a Dow Jones estimate of 1.3 million. Meanwhile, the number of coronavirus cases continues to rise in certain parts of the U.S. Texas, California, Arizona and Florida all reported its biggest-ever one-day increase.
At 04:43 GMT, the USD/JPY is trading 106.844, down 0.135 or -0.13%.
Investors are moving some money into the safety of the Japanese Yen because of the fear that a resurgence in coronavirus cases could lead to states retaking stricter quarantine measures to curb the spread, thus thwarting expectations of a smooth economic recovery.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. A trade through 106.577 will change the main trend to down. A move through 107.641 will signal a resumption of the uptrend.
The main range is 112.226 to 101.185. Its retracement zone at 106.706 to 108.008 is controlling the near-term direction of the Forex pair. The USD/JPY has been trading inside this zone for the last nine sessions.
Based on the early price action, the direction of the USD/JPY the rest of the session on Friday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the main 50% level at 106.706.
A sustained move under 106.706 will indicate the presence of sellers. Taking out yesterday’s low at 106.671 and the main bottom at 106.577 could trigger a spike into the next main bottom at 105.987. This is a potential trigger point for an acceleration to the downside with the March 9 main bottom at 101.185 the next likely downside target.
A sustained move over 106.706 will signal the presence of buyers. If this move can create enough upside momentum then look for the rally to possibly extend into 107.641 and 108.008.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
