In our opinion, there is more downside than upside potential, but the actual move will be determined by trader reaction to 106.706 and 108.008.
The Dollar/Yen closed slightly lower on Friday as a choppy, two-sided trade in U.S. equity markets held the Forex pair in a tight trading range. Lower 10-year U.S. Treasury yields also weighed on demand for the U.S. Dollar as the spread between U.S. Government bonds and Japanese Government bonds tightened.
On Friday, the USD/JPY settled at 106.874, down 0.105, or -0.10%.
Demand for higher-yielding American assets has been growing. In April, Japan’s money managers bought the most US corporate debt in eight years and the second-highest amount of equities in five years, said the latest Treasury Department data.
The next major move in the Forex pair will come down to risk sentiment. Increasing demand for risk is likely to drive investors into the U.S. Dollar. However, a steep plunge in the global equity markets due to a second wave of COVID-19 infections will likely drive up demand for the safe-haven Japanese Yen.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. A trade through 106.577 will change the main trend to down. A move through 107.641 will signal a resumption of the uptrend.
The main range is 112.226 to 101.185. Its retracement zone at 106.706 to 108.008 is controlling the longer-term direction of the USD/JPY. The Forex pair has closed inside this zone for nine straight sessions.
The longer the USD/JPY stays inside the retracement zone and trades in a tight range, the bigger the anticipated breakout. At this time, we’re leaning to the downside since the Forex pair is hugging the lower or 50% level at 106.706.
A steep drop in global equity markets will likely be the catalyst that triggers the break through 106.577. The first level under this level is the main bottom at 105.987. This is a potential trigger point for the start of a break into 101.185.
A breakout over 108.008 could take place if there is another surge in global equity markets. However, this move could only lead to a test of the 109.849 main top.
In our opinion, there is more downside than upside potential, but the actual move will be determined by trader reaction to 106.706 and 108.008.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
