On the upside, taking out 108.088 could trigger an acceleration into 108.851 over the near-term.
The Dollar/Yen stumbled on Monday as the greenback continued to lose its appeal as a safe-haven currency. The U.S. Dollar was pressured after investors were relieved that U.S. President Trump made no move to impose new tariffs on China during a news conference on Friday where he outlined his response to Beijing’s tightening grip over Hong Kong.
On Monday, the USD/JPY settled at 107.582, down 0.211 or -0.20%.
ING analysts said the door to a weaker dollar had been opened now that new U.S. measures imposed over Hong Kong had proved less serious. Our work suggests a rangebound Dollar/Yen over the short-to-mid-term. We feel the Forex pair is not likely to make a major move until there is a major change in U.S. Treasury Bond yields or Japanese Government Bond Yields.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. A trade through 108.088 will signal a resumption of the uptrend. The main trend will change to down on a move through 105.987.
The minor trend is also up, but a trade through Friday’s closing price reversal bottom could shift momentum to the downside.
The main range is 112.226 to 101.185. The USD/JPY is currently trading inside its retracement zone at 106.706 to 108.008. This zone is controlling the longer-term direction of the currency pair.
The short-term range is 105.987 to 108.088. Its 50% level at 107.038 is another support level.
Like I said before, the USD/JPY is not likely to make a major move until something happens to interest rates. Traders don’t seem to be paying too much attention to the carry trader at this time.
On the upside, taking out 108.088 could trigger an acceleration into 108.851 over the near-term.
On the downside, the key support cluster comes in at 107.084 to 107.038.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
