In this weekly Forex forecast, I’m going to show you exactly how I’m trading EURUSD, GBPUSD, USDJPY, USDCAD, and XAUUSD through July 3, 2020.
Watch the video below, and be sure to scroll down for more commentary and annotated charts.
Did You Like That Video?
Subscribe on YouTube to get notified when I post new videos every week!
The EURUSD gave up the 1.1230 support level last week after breaking above it on June 22nd.
That area comes in near 1.1200.
The choppiness here is representative of the FX market as a whole.
June has presented very few favorable opportunities, in my opinion.
Get Instant Access to the Same "New York Close" Forex Charts Used by Justin Bennett!
That said, the biggest moves usually follow long periods of consolidation and indecision.
A view of the EURUSD monthly time frame or even the USDJPY chart below confirms that notion.
As for where EURUSD goes this week, all I can say is that support comes in around 1.1150 with resistance at 1.1230.
Other than that, the euro needs to clear this congestion for me to take any interest in a position.
Want Me To Help You Become A Better Forex Trader?
Get a Lifetime Membership Today and receive exclusive member-only content including one to two new videos every day. Save 40% in June!
GBPUSD ended last week where it started.
Following a 200 pip rally between Monday and Tuesday, sellers took over to close the pair at breakeven for the week.
Notice where GBPUSD encountered selling pressure, though.
I’ve mentioned the 1.2500 resistance area for the last couple of weeks.
As for support, I think the 1.2240 region will attract buyers based on the two levels in the chart below.
But just like EURUSD, I don’t see any favorable opportunity here.
Perhaps a daily close below 1.2240 would be enticing, but for now, I’ll stay on the sideline.
The USDJPY monthly chart below is all that matters for the pair, in my opinion.
The daily and even weekly time frames are too choppy to make any reasonable assumptions about the market’s likely future direction.
I’ve mentioned this wedge before, including in my June 2nd post.
Notice that last week bounced at the 106.00 handle, which is the exact location of wedge support.
As for which way USDJPY will break, it’s too early to tell.
I thought the market was onto something in early June, but buyers were unable to follow through.
It’s going to take a monthly close above wedge resistance or below support to confirm the breakout.
Get Access To The Same New York Close Forex Charts I Use.
DOWNLOAD the charting platform for free!
