A worker uses a crane to move a roll of aluminum at a Novelis Inc. facility in Pindamonhangaba, Brazil, in November 2015. The company has decided to review its hedge positions after automotive sales declined.
Alamos Gold Inc. last month decided to take advantage of low currency-exchange rates for the Canadian dollar and Mexican peso against the U.S. dollar. The Canadian gold miner protected more of its currency exposure and extended that cover for a longer period.
Other companies with international operations like Alamos Gold have been making such aggressive shifts in recent weeks, disrupting currency-hedging programs put in place years ago to guard against unexpected changes in exchange rates. Just a few months ago, by contrast, many said they didn’t see a need to change course because foreign-exchange rates and market forecasts were relatively stable .
Now, companies are seeing a hedging opportunity as several currencies have weakened against the U.S. dollar over the past few months. Added to that, worries about market volatility as the coronavirus pandemic rattles economies across the world are prompting a push for more protection against currency moves at the same time as companies seek to protect their liquidity from pandemic-related shocks.
“Being able to lock in currencies at lower rates gives us additional visibility on the cost side,” said James Porter,  the chief financial officer of Toronto-headquartered Alamos Gold. “It helps give us some assurance that the cash flows we project we’re going to be able to achieve.”
The news of the week in context, with Tyler Blint-Welsh.
I would also like to receive updates and special offers from Dow Jones and affiliates. I can unsubscribe at any time.
Alamos Gold’s board last month approved increasing the company’s existing hedging positions in the Canadian dollar and Mexican peso, which have declined by about 3% and 12%, respectively, against the U.S. dollar since Feb. 28. The company also extended its timeline for currency hedging to up to 24 months from 12 months, which it has not done in the roughly five years since it began hedging, Mr. Porter said.
The Morning Ledger provides daily news and insights on corporate finance from the CFO Journal team.
It is relatively easy to change currency hedging policies. Most companies need to seek approval for changes from their audit committees or other board subcommittees. Finance chiefs have been holding informal talks with audit committees in recent weeks, largely to discuss interest in the flexibility to either hedge longer or hedge more, said Amol Dhargalkar, a managing director at financial-risk adviser Chatham Financial Corp.
Companies are becoming more aggressive or more cautious with hedging depending on the pandemic’s effects on their finances and their level of visibility into future exposure, Mr. Dhargalkar and other experts said.
Some companies are choosing to expand the protection of their financial assets or, if they expect revenue to stay steady, the duration of that coverage, Mr. Dhargalkar said.
But aggressive hedging can also pose a risk. A long-term horizon can be treacherous because companies’ exposures are often unclear more than 12 months out, said Wolfgang Koester, senior strategist at Kyriba Corp., a corporate-finance software provider that advises companies on managing their liquidity.
Companies should stick to hedging their known exposures, rather than speculating about potential future exposures, Mr. Koester said. “The only thing that is sure is that volatility will come back,” he said.
MacAndrews & Forbes Ousts CFO Over Violation at Revlon June 26, 2020
Some companies are taking action to make their hedging more conservative to preserve cash and find stability by unwinding their 2020 hedges to avoid overhedged positions, meaning they have more protection than exposure, and to generate cash, Mr. Dhargalkar said.
Novelis Inc. decided to review its hedge positions after automotive sales declined and caused some of the Atlanta-based aluminum producer’s positions to become overhedged.
Novelis has long employed a defensive currency-hedging strategy in which it hedges about 85% of potential exposures for the coming fiscal year before the start of the year to remove uncertainty from the income statement, CFO Devinder Ahuja said. The company hedges currencies including the euro, the Canadian dollar and the Brazilian real, he said.
The shutdown of the auto industry and difficulty in getting auto factories back to full production have made forecasting exposures challenging, Mr. Ahuja said. Novelis’s largest auto maker customer, Ford Motor Co., had to stop production at key factories in recent weeks after attempting to restart.
“There is no straight answer,” Mr. Ahuja said. “As long as the volatility continues, we will have to deal with uncertainty and that risk that comes with over- or under-hedging.”
Some companies are sticking to their hedging strategy.
Specialty glass and ceramics maker Corning Inc. has received $1.7 billion in cash under hedge contracts it set up more than five years ago, CFO R. Tony Tripeny said on an April 28 earnings call.
The Corning, N.Y.-based company doesn’t plan to make any changes because the program was built to manage uncertainty, Mr. Tripeny said. “We’re very pleased with our hedging program and the economic certainty it provides,” he said.
Copyright ©2020 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
