What is the Forex Market?
So, you know about the stock market. You may have even traded on the stock market. Now, you want to get involved in forex trading , but first, you need to answer a couple of key questions. What exactly is forex? And what is the forex market?
These are questions that many people have. Whether you have trading experience or not, it is OK to ask questions about the forex market. Here, we will do our best to provide some answers.
Forex actually refers to foreign exchange. That is, the exchange of one currency for another. So, when we talk about forex trading, generally what we are talking about is the exchange of currencies.
The forex market is essentially the global marketplace upon which all the exchanges of these currencies happen. Anybody, a regular trader, professional trader, or institution, who wants to exchange one currency for another is active in the forex market.
As a simple example of this, when you want to take a vacation to a foreign country and you exchange your currency from one to another through an exchange location, you have completed a forex trade.
You will also often hear that the forex market is in fact, the largest trading market in the world. It is much larger than any of the global stock exchanges in terms of volume, with more than $5 trillion worth of trade taking place on a daily basis.
Where is the Forex Market and How Does it Operate?
Beyond its tremendous size when considering volume of trades, one of the most unique aspects of being involved in the forex market is the location. Unlike stock exchanges in New York, Tokyo, London, and other cities around the world that have physical locations that trading takes place, the forex market is decentralized.
This means that forex trading does not take place in one specific place, or through one main authority. The entire market is also traded electronically with transactions moving through a variety of global networks facilitated by brokers and liquidity providers.
Essentially, what this allows is for the forex market to operate around the clock and all over the world with ease. When one market closes for trading, another is open. This means that the forex market can be traded on 24 hours a day, 5 days a week as there will always be a market open in some location during these times.
With the forex market being decentralized as we mentioned, you may have some questions as to whether it is still safe to trade forex, and who regulates a decentralized trading market like this. The answer is, first and foremost, trading in the forex market is typically very safe. This ultimately depends on your broker and who regulates that broker, but the overwhelming majority are well-regulated and very secure for trading. This is of course one of the key concerns if you are thinking about trading forex and something that you should dedicate time to thoroughly investigating and confirming.
Due to the decentralized nature of the forex market, there are many regulators all over the world who oversee the operations of forex brokers in particular. Depending on the country you are based in, it may be mandatory for your forex broker to be regulated by a particular authority.
Some of the most respected regulatory bodies in the world of forex include CySEC operating within Europe, FCA who are based in the UK and are a top-tier regulatory authority there, ASIC who are Australia based, and the CFTC and NFA in the U.S. where regulatory conditions are comparatively strict. There are a host of other regulators too who typically provide trusted protection to forex traders around the world.
Each regulatory body imposes its own rules and regulations and it up to the individual forex brokers if they wish to pursue regulation from that authority. Some regulators such as CySEC employ regulations to limit the amount of trading leverage that is available, while trading of CFDs in the US is banned completely by the NFA.
The very last step, once you have gotten to know a little about the forex market and how it works, is to get involved and start trading for yourself. This requires that you choose a forex broker to sign up with.
As mentioned already, the vast majority of these brokers are recognized and well regulated around the world. This means that they all take your security as a trader very seriously. The best thing you can do as a new trader is to try out a demo account first. These often function just like the real thing, but with no risk attached. This can allow you to see if you enjoy trading with a particular broker.
Once you have checked out and verified that the broker is well-regulated by a respected authority, then getting involved in the forex market can be as simple as verifying your account and making your first deposit. Depending on how they operate, a broker may provide you access to the direct market forex rates , or they may act as a market maker themselves creating their own exchange rates . This is something that you will need to decide the benefits of based on your own trading style.
Overall, the forex market has the highest daily volume of trading in the world, far beyond that of any other trading market. That brings with it a variety of opportunities for those interested in getting involved in forex trading. Once you have stepped over the initial entry barriers and gotten to know more about the sector, it can be an excellent way to improve your trading skill and diversify any portfolio. The key is in choosing a top forex broker, but with many offering extensive forex educational sections to help you get started, the choice is all yours.
Anthony is a financial journalist and business advisor with several years’ experience writing for some of the most well-known sites in the Forex world. A keen trader turned industry writer, he is currently based in Shanghai with a finger on the pulse of Asia’s biggest markets.
What Are Carry Trades in Forex?
As you continue increasing your knowledge about forex trading and the market in general, more and more new concepts and ideas will pop up. This includes a growing range of trading technique and strategies. One such trading strategy which has been around for a very long time in the industry, is the carry trade. Here we will take a closer look at exactly what a carry is in forex, and provide all the information you need to decide if carry trading is a good strategy for you as you move forward on your trading journey.
In its most simple form, a carry trade in forex, is borrowing one currency, and using it to buy another. For example, you may borrow (sell) $100,000 Australian Dollars, and use those funds to purchase the same amount of JPY. Placing a carry trade is one of the most popular trading strategies in the entire sector, and used by many traders to benefit from the position of currencies around the world.
So, what is the benefit in borrowing one currency and using it to buy another? This comes from the difference in interest rates between the two currencies. Let’s look again at our example in more detail.
Presuming the interest rate on the Australian Dollar was 4%, and the interest rate on the JPY was 0.1%, a carry trade would be where you buy the AUD/JPY market, as here, what you are effectively doing is selling (borrowing) Japanese Yen, to purchase Australian Dollars. In the most simple of ways, you will now have placed a carry trade. Here you will earn 4% interest on the Australian Dollars you are holding, while paying 0.1% interest on the Japanese Yen you have borrowed. This should leave you in a profitable position if the rate does not change, and is known as a positive carry trade at +3.9%.
Why is Carry Trading in Forex So Popular?
From an outside perspective, even looking at our hypothetical example where there is quite a gap between the interest rates, you may wonder why placing carry trades is so popular when the potential profit may seem quite small. There are two main elements at play in the forex market though which make this a very attractive type of trading strategy.
Currency Pairs : The fact that currencies are traded in pairs make a carry trade very accessible, and convenient for all traders. The difference in interest rates has never been so easy to take advantage of as it is in forex trading, where you can directly trade low and high interest currencies in pairs.
Leverage : The availability of extensive leverage in forex makes it the ideal place to carry trade. Many forex brokers can make leverage of up to 500:1 available on certain currency pairs. This basically means that even a relatively small deposit of $1,000 can open up huge buying power of $100,000 at 100:1 leverage, or more. Dealing with such large numbers, even low percentage profits are very meaningful.
Given the fundamentals of how a carry trade works, borrowing a low interest currency, to buy a high interest currency, then this is precisely what traders are on the lookout for in the forex market when it comes to placing a carry trade. There are a couple of currencies in particular that are most popular in this regard.
As a selling currency, the Japanese Yen is always a very popular choice. This is thanks to the historically very low cost of borrowing in Japan. The country has not had an interest rate of above 0.5% in more than 20-years. Another popular choice as a selling currency may be the Swiss Franc (CHF).
On the buying side, popular choices include both the Australian, and New Zealand Dollar as countries which typically hold slightly higher interest rates, yet are recognized as quite stable currencies.
A carry trade in forex can be an excellent long-term investment strategy. You will have the potential to benefit from a carry trade even if the rates do not change at all thanks to the difference in interest rates. This makes it perfect for an investor who intends to hold the position for a long time.
Added to that, if the rate does change in your favor, then you can potentially have a sizable profit when added to the interest rate difference, and factoring in the leverage used. The fact that many brokers nowadays also cater for trading with very competitive fees and low spreads also plays to your advantage if placing a carry trade, and is something that many look out for.
With every form of trading, there is always a certain element of risk. With a carry trade, though it is seen as a low-risk strategy, there are still a couple of things to be mindful of.
The market can still move against you. A change in the market can certainly negate any benefits you have gained from the positive interest rate difference. Particularly if you decide to trade in minor, or exotic currency pairs which are less common, you should note that these markets can be highly volatile, and subject to change in a very swift fashion. Some examples include trading with the MXN (Mexican Peso), or NGN (Nigerian Naira). Both may appear attractive for a carry trade, but can be subject to intense volatility. This risk can be amplified even further if you are trading with a lot of leverage.
You should also remember that, just because there may be a positive rate difference at the moment, the monetary policy in every country is subject to change at different times. The perfect example of this would be right now, in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic, many nations have moved to cut interest rates. This has the possibility to really change the dynamics of your carry trade.
