What is the exchange rate of USD (US Dollar) / HKD (Hong Kong Dollar) on Tuesday June 30, 2020
Ready for the mid-market exchange rate of USD (US Dollar) / HKD (Hong Kong Dollar) for Tuesday June 30, 2020?
The current rates for USD (US Dollar) / HKD (Hong Kong Dollar) are available in this article. As a top finance news site the Born2Invest team has analysed the latest forex market data to bring you live information that enables you to make the right forex trading call every day.
Remember to always trade using a reputable broker. It’s also possible to apply many forex concepts to cryptocurrency trading.
Forex trading is inherently risky and there are countless forex pairs to choose from. The only way to make a profit from forex trading is to understand how the market works. Luckily for you the Born2Invest forex team has collated some forex trading tips to get you started.
Forex trades are always made using currency pairs. Whenever you buy one currency you are selling another. In every pair there is a base currency, for example USD (US Dollar) and a quote currency, which would be HKD (Hong Kong Dollar).
The price of a currency pair represents the amount of quote currency, or HKD (Hong Kong Dollar), that you will need to spend in order to purchase a single unit of USD (US Dollar), the base currency. So using the current example you would need to spend 7.750255 of HKD (Hong Kong Dollar) in order to purchase 1 USD (US Dollar).
Forex pairs can be grouped into three main categories; the majors, the commodity currencies, and the cross currencies:
Major currencies are the most commonly traded currencies on the market. Different publications will use different criteria but pretty much every list will include EUR/USD, USD/JPY, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF
ll Commodity currencies are currency pairs that are closely linked to commodities such as oil, iron ore, and coal. Common examples include AUD/USD and USD/CAD
Cross currencies include all currency pairs that don’t include USD. Examples include EUR/GBP and EUR/JPY.
What are the most traded forex pairs in the world?
