What is Margin in Forex?
When you first get involved in forex trading , there will be a variety of terms that you could come across. One of these terms is “margin”. Far from being intimidating, the margin is simply the amount of money you must contribute to open a new trade (position).
Forex trading typically involves dealing in large amounts of currency in terms of “ lots ”. 1 standard USD lot, for example, is $100,000. You do not need to put down the whole amount from your own capital, this is where the margin comes into play. Here we will go into more detail about exactly what the margin is, how margin trading within forex works, and some things you should look out for.
Do Forex Brokers Profit from the Margin?
This is a common misconception among some new forex traders. The margin is not a fee of any sort, and the top forex brokers in the industry do not make any kind of profit from the margin in that respect.
All the margin with any forex broker does is to ensure that a certain amount of your own funds are set aside to help cover the cost of any losses you may make on a position you have opened. This margin is effectively the key to enjoying the leverage in forex that your broker provides.
Analyzing the situation on a deeper level, while the forex broker does not directly profit from the margin, they do indirectly benefit from providing you this opportunity to engage in margin trading. This is something we can take a look at in the following section with the provision of some simple to follow examples.
Although not directly profiting from the margin, brokers are able to derive some indirect benefits. The first of these is that simply put, the margin makes it easier for you as a trader to get involved in the forex market . While there are still risks involved of course, the more a broker can encourage you to trade by making it as easy as possible, the more you are likely to engage.
The second key reason that sees brokers garner indirect benefit from the margin is the fact that when you are trading more, and with larger amounts, they can gain additional commissions and perhaps profit from markups on the forex spread and that of other markets beyond forex too which they likely provide trading in.
In summary then, the main benefit for a broker when it comes to the margin in forex is that you will trade more in terms of both frequency and volume.
As mentioned, the margin is the amount of your available funds that will be held against your open trades. As you open more positions, this amount continues to increase. These funds that are then essentially locked-in by the broker to secure your position are known as your used margin, while the funds still available can be referred to as available margin, or available equity.
We can then use both of these numbers together in the following formula to calculate your current margin level:
Equity/Used Margin x 100 = Margin Level.
As a forex trader, it becomes very important to know this number id you are engaging in margin trading. This is since most top forex brokers will require your margin level to be at least 100% or more in order to avoid a margin call situation. Therefore, you should ensure to keep an eye on this as you are opening new positions.
If you deposit $1,000 in a forex trading account and continue to open 1 position, a typical broker may require $50 in margin (This can be as low as $33 with CySEC regulated brokers, and even as low as $2 with some others). Following the calculation above:
In this case, then you are still well within a healthy margin level, open just a few more small trades though, and this number can change quickly.
What is a Margin Call?
The first important point to note here is that many top forex brokers have what they often refer to as “negative balance protection”. This means that before you even get to the situation of having a margin call, your positions may be automatically closed by the broker.
A margin call happens when your margin level drops below 100%. What this essentially means is that you no longer have enough funds in your account to cover the margin requirements on your open positions.
In this case, you will typically be presented with a couple of options, you could close some of your open positions, or you could deposit more funds to your account. In either case, this is probably a situation that you would prefer to avoid through careful risk management.
Margin trading can open great possibilities for you as a forex trader to engage in markets to a much higher level than you could with just your own funds. It also means that you can work well to diversify your portfolio with a number of investments in various markets. Beyond this, margin trading means you can always be in a position to make a move in the forex market if you spot an opportunity.
It is well worth remembering though, that as the largest trading market in the world by volume, the forex market can move incredibly fast. Measured in pips, these movements may seem small, and insignificant. If you are engaged in margin trading though, you should remember that your position is very much amplified. This means that even small movements in the asset price, cold mean big changes in your position.
The very best advice you can heed is to take the opportunity that a margin presents, but remain mindful and have a strong risk management strategy in place.
Anthony is a financial journalist and business advisor with several years’ experience writing for some of the most well-known sites in the Forex world. A keen trader turned industry writer, he is currently based in Shanghai with a finger on the pulse of Asia’s biggest markets.
Major currencies in the forex market are trading slightly lower today. Both the Euro, and Pound have dropped back against the Dollar as concerns over a spike in Coronavirus numbers persist. The final UK GDP figures for the first quarter released today, were also worse than expected. Meanwhile, US markets are looking quiet after a strong rally to open up the week on Monday. This may change as the day progresses and today’s testimony from the Fed Chairman is digested.
Forex trading in the GBP/USD market today was struggling below the 1.23 mark for a number of reasons. One of the major points which seems to have rocked trader confidence in Sterling is the release of GDP figures for the first quarter today. These show a 2.2% drop in GDP, worse than had been expected.
This GDP drop is the largest the nation has seen in more than 40 years. It is compounded by the fact that a double digit drop is expected in the next quarter, and also the fact that a new spike in cases has led to local lockdown in at least one British city. British leader Boris Johnson is due to speak later today where he will introduce plans to inject more than £5 billion into infrastructure in a bid to bolster the economy.
The EUR/USD is looking to end the quarter in successful territory today although that has been threatened by negative pressure which has pushed the pair down at the beginning of the day. Forex brokers noted that traders are appearing to favor a move back toward the safety of the US Dollar.
This move has largely been led by the uncertainty of the US economic situation as several states have now moved to impose renewed restrictions, or halted their reopening plans as cases of COVID-19 continue to rise again in many areas. This has been the case in New York who have slowed reopening, as well as in Texas and Florida where renewed closures have been put in place on many bars and restaurants after cases in those states showed a heavy increase.
Today’s market opening on Wall Street would appear to have hit a lull following yesterday’s great surge to begin the week. The Dow Jones rose more than 500 points yesterday to get the week off to a very positive start. The picture today, pre-market numbers have indicated, is much less active. Many could be awaiting the remarks of Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell, who will address the House Financial Services Committee later today.
These remarks are expected to raise more questions than answers though, with Powell set to comment that the path forward remains very uncertain, and reliant on successfully containing the virus.
As you gain experience trading the forex market , you will come across an increasing number of terms. One such term is a currency swap. These kind of transactions actually make up for a large amount of the volume traded on the markets, and they are commonly applied in a few situations when you are trading forex . Here we will explain in more detail exactly what currency swaps are, how they usually occur, and why they can be beneficial to certain types of traders in the sector.
In the most simple of terms, a currency swap does exactly as the name implies. It is an exchange of currency between two parties of the equivalent amount of money in another currency. There is then a contract in place to repay this money at a specified date, and exchange rate in the future. In essence, this is a currency swap. A currency swap can bear some similarity to that of currency futures, though they differ in the sense that they are held until settlement, and considered to be a large part of forex trading , whereas currency futures are traded on other exchanges.
Party A, and Party B enter an agreement to swap €1,000,000 for $1,150,000. This fills the need for the counter currency for both parties, and creates an implied EUR/USD exchange rate of $1.15.
The transaction is then completed at a future defined date, using either the original exchange rate of $1.15, or another agreed upon exchange rate. Essentially, the two parties are loaning a particular foreign currency to each other. In some cases with currency swaps, this can include the payment of interest or principal amounts on loans, though this will depend on the details of the individual agreement.
Who Typically Engages in Currency Swaps?
Currency swaps used to be the preserve of those in countries where the foreign exchange rates were extremely volatile, or as where they could be used as a mechanism to overcome currency restrictions.
While this is still the case on a more limited basis, the use of currency swaps has increased around the world as investors and companies become increasingly multinational. Here are a couple of examples of where currency swaps are most often used to good impact in today’s forex market.
Companies Doing Business Abroad: Currency swaps may be particularly beneficial to businesses who have interests abroad and need to borrow in order to conduct this business. They may not necessarily benefit from favorable loan terms from banks outside their home country. Therefore, if they can borrow money in their home country at the best terms, and conduct a currency swap with a similar company in the country they are seeking to invest, then this trade could be of benefit to all involved.
Volatile Currencies: A currency swap may be beneficial, an almost essential in some cases, for institutional and retail investors in nations where the local currency is known to be volatile. This is one of the main purposes behind engaging in a currency swap, to guard against currency risk with more volatile currencies. By engaging in a currency swap, both parties can set the terms, and have a certainty around the cost of their trade.
As we can see with these examples, currency swaps are most often used by companies, and other types of institutional investors. This is certainly a more common situation than the use of currency swaps by retail investors, although in some situations, retail forex traders can be impacted.
While currency swaps can be beneficial in the most part for the points noted above, just like any form of trading, they are not completely without risk. If you are engaging in a currency swap, here are a couple of the primary risks you can expect to encounter.
Interest Rate Fluctuation: One of the main purposes of engaging in a currency swap may be to take advantage of better interest rates in the currency that you are borrowing as part of the deal. These interest rates though are often left floating in contracts. Therefore, there is a chance that a change in the exchange rate could negate any of the cost-saving benefits you hoped to derive from the currency swap in the first instance.
Exchange Rates: With currency swaps, perhaps the most important element is the exchange rate. This is often pre-defined within the swap contract to be a set rate at the future time when the deal reaches maturity. Here again, there is a chance that the future rate is worse for one party than the original or current rate. In this case, there may be a slight loss on the swap.
The term swap fee, or forex swap is something you will also encounter if you are an online forex trader. This can also be known as the overnight fee, or rollover fee, and may sometimes be confused with the currency swap.
This is a “fee”, though it can be either positive, or negative, that is applied to positions you hold open overnight when trading through your forex broker . This amount is constantly changing, and basically represents the difference in interest rates on the currency pair which you are holding. Therefore, holding a long position in certain currency pairs will see you credited with the positive interest difference, while short positions will see this fee deducted from your balance.
Although it is typically an area of more concern for more experienced, and institutional traders, the currency swap still plays a huge role in forex trading overall, and is a very useful trade to be aware of. This is particularly true if you are looking for one of the most secure ways to deal in a large amount of foreign currency and in a situation where you wish to add some degree of security or control to the trade over a long period of time.
