Worldwide Foreign Exchange Markets, Forecast to 2025 - Insights Into Currency Swap, Outright Forward & FX Swaps, FX Options
DUBLIN, May 13, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- The "Foreign Exchange Market: Global Industry Trends, Share, Size, Growth, Opportunity and Forecast 2020-2025" report has been added to ResearchAndMarkets.com's offering.
The global Foreign exchange market is currently experiencing a healthy growth. Looking forward, the market is expected to register a CAGR of around 6% during 2020-2025.
Growing urbanization and digitalization in both the emerging and developed economies are among the key factors driving the growth of the market.
The key features of FX, such as minimal trading costs, 24x7 trading opportunities, high transactional transparency and liquidity, have favored its widespread acceptance across the globe. Furthermore, the availability of electronic platforms and the provision of improved security mechanisms for trading are also providing a boost to the market growth. Various internet-based platforms are available to the users for conveniently exchanging currencies between countries while ensuring the delivery of goods and services in a secure and centralized setting.
Additionally, various technological advancements, such as the availability of outright forward and currency option, are creating a positive outlook for the market growth. Outright forward enables the trader to lock the current exchange rate, which further protects the investor, exporter or importer from future rate fluctuations.
On the other hand, the currency option refers to a contractual document that establishes an obligation to purchase or trade currency at a specific rate.
The report has also analysed the competitive landscape of the market with some of the key players being Barclays, BNP Paribas, Citibank, Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, HSBC Holdings plc, JPMorgan Chase & Co., The Royal Bank of Scotland, UBS AG, Standard Chartered PLC, State Street Corporation, XTX Markets Limited, etc.
How has the global foreign exchange market performed so far and how will it perform in the coming years?
What are the key regional markets in the global foreign exchange industry?
What is the breakup of the market based on the counterparty?
What is the breakup of the market based on the instruments?
What are the various stages in the value chain of the industry?
What are the key driving factors and challenges in the industry?
What is the structure of the global foreign exchange market and who are the key players?
What is the degree of competition in the industry?
