The high for the day reached $21.11. The low extended to $19.90.  The low price from Monday reached $19.27. That took out the low price from March 20 at $19.46. Those levels will be eyed on for the weakness.
There was a run up in the last hour or so after talks of the White House and US oil industry leaders getting together to talk about ways to help the industry with the potential for tariffs on Saudi Arabia oil.  However the rally fizzled into the close
Technically, the 100 hour moving average (blue line in the chart above) looms at $21.25 (and moving lower), and may have led to sellers on the late day rally.  The price has been able to get above that moving average on a few occasions over the last few weeks, but is not been able to extend above the 200 hour moving average (green line in the chart above) which is currently at $22.66.  The last time the price trade above its 200 hour moving average was back on February 24.
It will take a move above both the 100 and 200 hour moving averages to give a technical tilt to the upside. Until then, the sellers remain in full control.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
