Why is AUD/CAD important to traders?
Trading AUD to CAD is popular with traders around the world. One reason for its popularity is the extent of information available on the economic and political factors of each country, any of which could influence the currency pair.
As with all currency pairings, there is a lot more to the relationship between the two than meets the eye. In the following sections, we're going to take a closer look at Australian dollar to CAD rates and help you fully understand why so many traders and investors find it to be an attractive market to trade.
Discover the largest range of forex markets and trade CFDs on the world-renowned FX pairs with Capital.com.
Theoretically you can trade forex pairs 24/7, but there are prime times to trade the AUD/CAD when the currency pair is more volatile. The AUD/CAD is generally busy between 19:00 and 04:30 (GMT).
The Australian dollar was preceded by the Australian pound. For decades, the country used sterling until it became devalued against the US dollar. In the 1960s, the country decided to move forward with the Australian Dollar – a decimal currency – instead of the old imperial system.
As the country is so close to the continent of Asia, import and export between the two countries strengthened the AUD greatly. This relationship has continued to play a prominent role in the rise and fall of AUD value.
The Canadian dollar was rolled out in the 1850s. Originally, the form of currency used was the Canadian pound, but the system was changed as the country wanted to improve and strengthen trade and relationships with the US.
Over time, the Canadian dollar has grown in strength considerably, and the economy of the country is now rated as the 9th largest in the world. Wealth and stability have driven much of this growth, along with a thriving industry of exportable goods.
The constant movement of the AUD to CAD exchange rate appeals to traders looking to profit from market volatility. This ever-shifting movement can seem confusing to some, so it is important to understand what areas to research to understand which way the market could move.
As with trading between any currency pair, it's important to understand the factors that can affect the prices of these currencies. We're going to take a closer look at how traders can actively follow the AUD to CAD trend to try and determine the best times to open and close trades.
There are several political and economic factors that come into play when trading the AUD. One important indicator to look out for is the import and export data for Australia. For decades, the price of the Australian dollar stayed strong due to the export of materials such as coal, iron ore, and other commodities.
The data available on the economic health of a country can be of great use to traders. In Australia, decisions by the central bank, the Reserve Bank of Australia, can play a significant role in determining the value of the AUD.
The Bank of Canada also plays its part in the value of the Canadian dollar. It enacts policies that try to promote economic and employment growth, although it hasn’t directly intervened in the currency since 1998.
Much like Australia, Canada is a large exporter of materials and commodities, such as wood, grain, minerals and petroleum. This is very often a factor in the growth of the Canadian dollar. Being so close to the US has strengthened the import/export industry in Canada and helps the currency maintain its position as a popular currency in the foreign exchange market.
As you may already know, trading via CFDs (contracts for difference) is one of the most popular approaches when dealing with currencies such as AUD and CAD. In these next two sections, we'll explain what a CFD actually is and why trading AUD to CAD using CFDs can be advantageous for traders and investors.
Traders from around the globe often favour using CFDs to trade the AUD/CAD pair. CFDs are a form of derivative trading and have proven to be extremely popular for dealing with currency pairs on the foreign exchange market.
