For instance, to trade the American to Canadian dollar (USD/CAD) currency pair using CFDs, you speculate on the direction of the underlying asset. If you think the US dollar will appreciate then take a long position by buying the CFDs. If you think the US dollar will lose value against the Canadian dollar then you would take a short position by selling CFDs.
CFD trading offers great opportunities with a reliable CFD broker. Sign up at Capital.com and access the most popular global markets via our web platform or our ultimate trading app.
Advanced AI technology at its core: a Facebook-like news feed provides users with personalised and unique content depending on their preferences. If a trader makes decisions based on biases, the innovative SmartFeed offers a range of materials to put him back on the right track. The neural network analyses in-app behaviour and recommends videos, articles, news to polish your investment strategy.
Trading on margin: providing trading on margin (20:1 for non-major forex pairs), Capital.com gives you access to the USD/CAD pair with the help of CFDs.
Trading the difference: by trading CFDs on USD/CAD, you speculate on the rise or fall of its price. CFDs trading is no different from traditional trading in terms of its associated strategies. A CFD trader can go short or long, set stop and limit losses and apply trading scenarios that align with his or her objectives.
All-round trading analysis: the browser-based platform allows traders to shape their own market analysis and forecasts with sleek technical indicators. For instance, a trader could choose to have USD/CAD analysis and forecasts as a big part of their feed. Capital.com provides live market updates and various chart formats, available on desktop, iOS, and Android.
Focus on safety: Captal.com puts a special emphasis on safety. Licensed by the FCA and CySEC, it complies with all regulations and ensures that its clients’ data security comes first. The company allows to withdraw money 24/7 and keeps traders’ funds across segregated bank accounts.
How is Forex different to other markets?
For somebody new to the world of the foreign exchange market, it can seem like an intimidating place. However, once you've grasped the basics,  trading on Forex is actually quite similar to other markets. There are just a few key differences.
Because there is no central exchange and it is a market driven by the world’s large financial institutions, the volumes can be huge in comparison to other markets. Not only does this lower the overall cost to traders but it also makes entering and exiting trades easy.
I keep seeing the word 'pip,' what does that mean?
A pip is merely the smallest increment of trade in the foreign exchange market. It stands for 'percentage in point.' GBP/JPY is quoted to two decimal points, so a pip is just the lowest amount that can possibly be added to (or subtracted from) this figure.
Does Capital.com take commission from my Forex trades?
The simple answer is 'no' – we at Capital.com make money through the bid-ask spread. This is different from traditional trading where a broker would earn commission on every buy and sell that the customer takes part in.
