Why is the EUR/AUD an important market?
The currency pairing of EUR/AUD is one of the most traded pairs in the foreign exchange market, representing a significant share of daily trading. It's a pairing which is popular amongst veteran traders and newcomers alike.
Find your opportunities today – trade with the largest selection of forex markets with Capital.com.
The foreign exchange market is open 24 hours a day, but UK trading specifically tends to become active around 8:00 AM, before tapering off from 5:00 PM. Throughout the day there will be times when the EUR/AUD currency pairing experiences higher volumes of trading – this usually occurs around the same time as major market announcements. So if you want to trade the euro to Australian dollar pairing this would be the best time to.
In the following sections, we're going to take a look at the history of the euro to Aus dollar (EUR/AUD) pairing, what factors can influence its movements over time, and why exactly  EUR/AUD trading remains so popular.
Despite being a relatively new forex pair, the EUR/AUD pairing has proven to be a mainstay in modern currency trading.
The euro itself was first envisioned at the beginning of the 20th century, however, it wasn't fully realised until the end of the century. First as a purely digital currency and then as physical notes and coins. This common currency - for a large proportion of Europe - quickly gained traction and was positioned as a leading world currency. Trading in the euro swiftly developed into a new and popular market.
The Australian dollar was preceded by the Australian pound in the 1960s. Australia decided to replace the old imperial system and move forward using AUD. As the country is so close to the Asian continent, import and export between the two have impacted the AUD greatly over the years.
All currency pairings are unique and influenced by a variety of factors, which we'll explore in these next two sub-sections. We'll begin with a look at what factors can influence the euro, before moving on to the Australian dollar.
Interest rates play a major part in the oscillation of the EUR/AUD exchange rate. Therefore, the European Central Bank (ECB) is one of the major bodies which investors and traders will pay close attention to when making decisions. The ECB releases monthly reports concerning rates and rate statements, which are used as indicators about possible future policy direction.
Another factor that is considered is employment numbers, which are readily available to view. Consolidated employment numbers for the region impact the pairing greatly and can be a vital source of information for investors and traders.
Many political and economic factors come into play when trading the AUD. A particularly important point to look out for is the import and export industry of Australia. For decades, the price of the Australian dollar stayed strong, due to the successful export of commodities such as coal, iron ore, and a number of others.
Obviously, the data available about the economic health of a country is always useful to traders. In Australia, the Reserve Bank of Australia plays the central role in determining the value of the AUD at any given time. Another financial point to consider is the exceptionally low-interest rates on Australian Government debt.
An individual can trade EUR/AUD with either a forex contract or alternatively, they can trade a contract for difference (CFD) on a particular currency pair, and speculate on the price difference.
A CFD is a financial instrument typically between a broker and an investor, where one party agrees to pay the other the difference in the value of a security, between the start and end of the trade. You can either hold a long position (speculating that the price will go up) or a short position (speculating that the price will fall). This is considered a short-term investment or trade as CFDs tend to be used within a limited timeframe.
