The South African Rand (ZAR) traded in a wide range against the Pound (GBP) this week as Finance Minister Tito Mboweni delivered an emergency budget in response to the coronavirus crisis.
Expectations for a dire outlook saw the Rand weaken ahead of the release of the budget on Wednesday, with the emerging market currency only finding some brief relief after the White House refuted reports the US-China trade signed back in January had been scrapped.
This downtrend in ZAR exchange rates continued upon the publication of the budget, which forecast South Africa’s deficit would balloon to a record high of 14.6% of GDP in the 2020/21 financial year and that growth would slump 7.2% for the year.
However the Rand would mounted a startling recovery in the latter half of the week, as investors digested the budget and found it to be more optimistic than some had feared.
RMB analyst Nema Ramkhelawan-Bhana, suggests: ‘The budget surprised the market positively relative to its rather dire expectations. While the revenue shortfall was worse than consensus, the Special Adjustment Budget at least renders the estimate as credible, and the expenditure overrun was lower than anticipated.’
Coupled with a modest improvement in market sentiment this helped to Rand to mount a convincing recovery and close the session almost unchanged against the Pound.
Meanwhile, the Pound (GBP) has had a bit of a shaky session this week after UK health experts urged the government in an open letter to make better preparations for a second wave of coronavirus infections.
The letter was particularly damaging for Sterling sentiment this week as it came just a day after Boris Johnson announced more businesses like pubs and hairdressers will be allowed to reopen from 4 July with the easing of the government 2m social distancing rule.
In a letter signed by the chair of the British Medical Association, the health officials warned: ‘While the future shape of the pandemic in the UK is hard to predict, the available evidence indicates that local flare-ups are increasingly likely and a second wave a real risk.’
‘Many elements of the infrastructure needed to contain the virus are beginning to be put in place, but substantial challenges remain.’
Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator said in a webcast organised by the European Policy Centre think-tank: ‘We are ready on this point, as well as on the fishing issue, governance, and some other issues where we are divergent, we are ready to work on landing zones respecting the mandate of the EU.
‘We are ready to work on operational and clever compromise but not at the price, never at the price, of any unravelling of the single market. Never.’
However, this optimism was quickly punctured by the UK’s chief negotiator David frost, as he rejected proposals which would give the EU a new right to retaliate with tariffs if the UK deviated from its rules.
Looking ahead to next week’s session, its likely we will see Brexit return as the main catalyst of movement in the Pound to South African Rand (GBP/ZAR) exchange rate as the UK and EU kick off ‘intensified’ summer talks.
While Boris Johnson has expressed his hopes that a trade deal can be reached by the end of July, the majority of analysts do not share his optimism, as a number of key issues continue to hamper negotiations.
As a result, it's safe to assume Sterling sentiment is likely to take a hit if progress remains slow next week.
Meanwhile, the Rand is likely to come under pressure at the start of next week's session with the publication of South Africa’s latest GDP figures.
These are expected to highlight the extent of the country’s current recession, with economists forecasting growth will have contracted 3.4% in the first quarter.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
