Please note that the live pricing figures displayed here are delayed by 15 seconds.
The pound’s almost physical link with Britain’s economy and sensitivity to politics makes sterling the principal arena in which sentiment on Brexit plays out. Since sterling is most liquid traded against the dollar, anything happening in the pound tends to happen to GBP/USD first and most clearly.
The volatile yen often means the pound’s moves within GBP/JPY are bigger and faster than against any other major currency. The yen’s safe-haven characteristics can also make GBP/JPY a useful gauge of the depth of sentiment for or against sterling.
The single currency’s most-liquid pair is against the dollar. Naturally, that means EUR/USD is often prone to influences from outside of the Eurozone and the UK. However, the UK’s relationship with Europe also plays an unmistakeable part in steering EUR/USD.
This is a vital part of the sterling/euro complex, with traders often recycling strategies through all major markets of the euro and pound. Additionally, as a ‘pure’ Brexit market, EUR/GBP provides a clearer insight into euro and sterling sentiment than other crosses.
The benchmark cannot escape Brexit despite the bulk of its companies’ revenues being derived in currencies other than sterling. This is because of a frequent inverse relationship between the UK100 and the pound. Hence what’s good news for the pound is often ‘bad news’ for the UK100 and vice versa, from one day to the next.
The most-traded index in Europe is also frequently at the heart of the Brexit action, though it’s worth bearing in mind that it is also strongly tied to global stock market sentiment and the fortunes of 30 giant German companies.
Britain’s biggest domestically focused bank is also top UK residential mortgage provider. The lender’s fortunes are inextricably linked with Brexit news.
Barclays’ large UKdeposit base is a key to Britain’s economy and politics, but the stock also has a large proportion of the United States, where the bank makes most of its revenues.
Britain’s biggest retailer handles more pounds than most global corporations. And since consumers often express their hopes and fears on the high street, Tesco is a sound way of gauging Britain’s mood about Brexit.
The largest residential property developer in the UK plays a similar role as Tesco. Furthermore, as immigration patterns change in relation to Brexit including the ability of its industry to source skilled workers from the EU  Barratt investors try to adjust.
