The pound is at its lowest rate since January 2017 (Picture: Science Photo Library)
Sterling has fallen by 15% against the euro since the referendum in June 2016 and took another battering today ahead of huge political showdown in Westminster today.
£1 is now worth just $1.20, or €1.10, having fallen to its lowest rate in almost three years.
This could have a big impact on day to day Brits, as experts warn it will continue to plummet in what is set to be a tumultuous week for British politics.
Boris Johnson has vowed to push for a general election if rebel MPs succeed in a bid to seize control of parliamentary proceedings to block a no-deal Brexit today.
But neither outcome looks good for the pound, as experts warn both a no-deal Brexit and snap election will weaken the currency.
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web
So, here’s a breakdown of the different ways the sterling drop will affect your day to day life.
If the pound is worth less, the cost of imported goods from overseas goes up.
Around 30% of all food consumed in the UK is imported from the EU and in some cases (such as with spinach and olives), the EU is practically the UK’s sole supplier.
Money expert Martin Lewis has warned the first things Brits will notice when the pound drops is a hike in the price of cupboard staples – from Mayonnaise to Marmite.
Unilever, the largest food manufacturer in the UK, hiked up prices in the aftermath of the Brexit vote due to the weakened pound, and economists have warned the price of imported products could continue to rise with inflation.
The weakened pounds means imported goods could become more expensive (Picture: Getty Images)
Research published by the London School of Economics estimated that the spike in inflation that followed the 2016 referendum was costing the average household £7.74 a week — a figure equivalent to £404 a year by June 2017.
However, it isn’t just food that is vulnerable to a price hike.
The Bank of England estimates that a 5% reduction in the value of the pound increases consumer prices by about 0.9% in the long term.
Some of the biggest increases will be seen in energy bills and imported goods such as laptops, TVs and toys.
Fuel, priced in dollars, could go up as the pound weakens against US currency.
Shoppers may notice the price tags in European shops like Zara increasing too.
Fears of a no-deal Brexit have sent the pound plunging to its lowest rate since the start of 2017 (Picture: Metro.co.uk)
Most people won’t notice the impact of exchange rates until they need to swap money for a holiday abroad.
When the pound falls or rises in value, it means it will buy more or less of a foreign currency because the exchange rate has changed.
The pound was trading at just below $1.50 before Britain voted to leave the EU in June 2016.
That meant £100 could get you about $150.
Most Brits will notice the difference when they exchange foreign currency (Picture: AFP)
Now, £1 is worth $1.20 – meaning £100 could get you about £120.
In terms of Euros, the pound to euro rate was about €1.32, meaning £100 could buy about €132.
If you went to exchange money at a post office today, £100 would get you just €109.
For those about to head on holiday, Martin Lewis recommends buying half your currency now and half later when the pound is (hopefully) stronger.
Martin Lewis recommends a travel debit card to avoid bad exchange rates when the pound plummets (Picture: Rex Features)
Another option to protect yourself from fluctuations is to order cash online from a specialist travel bureau, with the option of cancelling or selling  it back later down the line for free or a small fee.
Spending abroad on an interest free travel debit card like Starling is also a way to guarantee you get the best exchange rates on the day.
Got a story for Metro.co.uk?
Get in touch with our news team by emailing us at webnews@metro.co.uk . For more stories like this, check our news page .
