The pound has been on a steep downward trajectory over the past several days. Jitters have sent the value of our currency to levels not seen since 1985. I have had several friends tell me that they’re worried about the potential effect of a weak pound on their FTSE 100 portfolios.
Therefore today I want to discuss how the choppiness in the exchange rate may affect economic life in UK as well as the value of British companies in your portfolio.
Financial markets hate uncertainty. And the health and economic developments surrounding the novel coronavirus are less than certain at this point. In addition to a global equity market crash, the Covid-19 outbreak has also caused considerable volatility in exchange rate markets.
As I write, the pound-to-US dollar rate has been leading the sterling rout. On 18 March, it plunged about 5% and fell beneath 1.15. And plenty of City analysts expect it to tumble even further.
The weak pound is also a result of an increased global demand for the greenback. Most investors are well aware of how panic has set in across equity markets worldwide. And the uncertainty is clearly benefiting US bonds and the dollar at the expense of most other currencies and asset classes.
The pound had actually been suffering for about four years. Following the Brexit referendum result in June 2016, its dramatic fall started. The value of sterling relative to the US dollar fell from about $1.47 to $1.22 in just five months after the referendum.
After the referendum, it also fell sharply against other currencies, especially the euro. On 22 June 2016, the pound was about 1.30 to the euro. In November 2016, it was about 1.16. As of 21 March, it is hovering around 1.08.
Then as the no-deal Brexit fears began to recede in late 2019, sterling started showing strength and remained better supported . But the recent viral outbreak has changed the dynamics in the currency market.
In simple terms, a devaluation of the pound would make British goods cheaper to buy, potentially boosting the amount of UK exports overall.
That said, a weaker pound makes imported raw materials more expensive. And the increased costs eventually get passed down to the consumer.
But most of the companies in the FTSE 100 are multinational conglomerates and up to three-quarters of their revenue comes from overseas.
Therefore, when the pound falls, especially significantly, their sterling-denominated earnings rise considerably. The dollars and euros they are earning outside the UK become worth more pounds, leading to an increase in profitability.
The effects of exchange rate movements tend to be less clear-cut for the companies in the FTSE 250 index as they usually have a more domestic focus. So they’re more directly affected by the short-term developments in the economy and consumer sentiment.
There are many reasons for exchange rates to move on a daily basis. And it’s anyone’s guess as to how the currently weak pound may react to various national or global developments in the rest of the year.
So what can the average investor do as currencies gyrate? I’d keep calm and keep investing regularly in good companies. If you’re unsure about selecting individual companies due to increased uncertainty an industry may face, then you could buy into a FTSE 100 tracker fund.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
tezcang has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
