"We are however happy to admit that EUR/USD broke down below its recent uptrend – as ECB’s Lagarde dented the outlook for a hawkish shift under her reign" says Martin Enlund, FX analyst at Nordea. "The first 10bp rate hike isn’t priced until the spring of 2023… We continue to lean short EUR/USD. Hedging against USD weakness remains very costly. The US might keep outperforming in 2020 (we hope for a post-phase one deal ISM bounce), and if the USD strengthens it’s likely painful for fast money accounts. Various “trades of the year” are often blown out of the water by the end of January.
"EUR/USD short-term technicals are bearish according to analysts at Scotiabank in a brief on Monday, January 27. "The EUR looks on track to test the 1.1000 mark after breaking below the neckline of a head and shoulders formation during last Thursday’s session with limited price signals pointing to a rebound in the common currency. The euro has traded at the bottom of its Bollinger band for three straight sessions which should augur a move in the opposite direction, with trading around this marker usually not lasting longer than four to five days over the last year. Support is at 1.1015, while resistance stands at 1.1305 followed by 1.1050/60."
"The key data event of the week is the Fed meeting (Wed)" say FX strategists at ING. "Following the easing of trade tensions, the Fed is to reiterate the message of stability in monetary policy for now. The largely unchanged message should not lead to either a material move in the dollar or a more meaningful repricing of the US rate path. The latter was recently more driven by the China virus-related concerns (which led to lower rates globally) rather than US specific considerations. With the Fed unlikely to induce a dovish repricing of the US curve (and thus softer USD) we continue to look for a broader EUR/USD stability with a modest bearish bias towards EUR/USD 1.1000."
"The euro can be expected to be fairly immune to any political risks for the time being, but Matteo Salvini's antipathy towards the EU may nevertheless cause some turbulence. The Italian government's instability remains a key issue" says Marc-André Fongern, Head of FX Research at MAF Global Forex.
At the start of last week, euro-dollar trading remained thin as exchange rate markets were closed for Martin Luther King Day.
However, the Euro-Dollar conversion slipped in the morning before clawing back losses in the afternoon ahead of European Central Bank (ECB) head, Christine Lagarde’s speech.
EUR rates took a hit after the German Bundesbank revealed the bloc’s largest economy is predicted to have grown at the slowest pace since the debt crisis.
On Tuesday the pairing rallied after data showed German economic expectations jumped to the highest level since 2015.
Meanwhile, US President Donald Trump announced that negotiations on the second phase of a US-China trade deal would start soon, stating their relationship with China has ‘probably never been better’.
On Wednesday, the pairing remained largely muted as an easing of global tensions pushed investors away from traditional safe-haven currencies.
Markets shrugged off earlier fears that the outbreak of the coronavirus in China would put pressure on the global economy.
Thursday saw the single currency edge up against USD before slumping after the European Central Bank (ECB) left interest rates on hold.
After consistently falling short of reaching the bank’s inflation target, it sparked the ECB to launch its first strategic review since 2003 which is expected to last more than a year. This saw the EUR/USD exchange rate plummet to the lowest level in over a month.
At the end of the week’s session, the pairing hit a fresh seven-week low after data revealed Eurozone growth was left muted at the start of 2020.
January’s PMI data suggested the bloc failed to pick up the pace at the start of the New Year, as business activity expanded at the same pace that was seen in December 2019.
Meanwhile, on Friday afternoon the flash US PMI composite showed that output growth quickened to a 10-month high.
‘Nonetheless, the underlying data highlights a manufacturing sector that is not out of the woods yet, with goods producers seeing only modest gains in output and new orders. Service providers also registered a slower upturn in new business, which fed through to softer increases in output charges as part of efforts to attract new customers.’
Looking to the start of the week, the Euro (EUR) could edge up against the Dollar (USD) slightly following the release of Germany’s IFO surveys data.
If January’s business climate, current assessment and expectations surveys rise higher than expected, it will buoy the single currency.
Looking to Tuesday afternoon, the US Dollar could make gains against the Euro following the release of December’s US durable goods orders.
If orders rebound after slumping by -2% in the previous month, it could provide the ‘Greenback’ with an upswing of support.
Wednesday could also see the Euro edge higher after the release of the consumer confidence data in the bloc’s largest economy.
If German confidence rises in February, it will send EUR higher against the Dollar.
Meanwhile, the Euro could make further gains ahead of the US Federal Reserve’s monetary policy meeting.
While the Fed is expected to leave monetary policy on hold, if the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is overly dovish during the press conference, USD will fall.
Thursday could see the Dollar slide further following the release of flash Q4 inflation data.
If the American economy does not expand as much as forecast during the final three months of 2019, ‘Greenback’ will fall.
Meanwhile, at the end of the week, if Eurozone GDP data disappoints it is likely the pairing will suffer some losses.
If flash GDP is weaker than the bloc’s previous reading, the Euro US Dollar (EUR/USD) exchange rate is likely to slump on Friday.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
