Eurogroupe president Mario Centeno, seen here at an EU summit in Brussels in June 2019, said talks to find a deal to help countries using the euro currency to recover from the coronavirus pandemic would resume on Thursday. REUTERS/Piroschka van de Wouw
Finance ministers of countries using the euro currency have failed to produce a deal to help states hard hit by the coronavirus pandemic, in an impasse reminiscent of the eurozone debt crises of the early 2010s.
Finance and economy ministers who comprise the Eurogroup, the 19 European Union (EU) states using the single currency, said Wednesday they had failed to agree on how to help hard-hit EU states recover from the coronavirus epidemic .
“After 16 hours of negotiations, no deal in the Eurogroup on the economic response to the coronavirus crisis,” French Economy Minister Bruno Le Maire tweeted.
Après 16 heures de négociations, pas d’accord à l’ #Eurogroupe sur la réponse économique à la crise du #coronavirus . Nous reprenons demain. Avec @OlafScholz , nous appelons tous les États européens à être à la hauteur des enjeux exceptionnels pour  parvenir à un accord ambitieux.
— Bruno Le Maire (@BrunoLeMaire) April 8, 2020
Mario Centeno, Portuguese finance minister and president of the Eurogroup, said talks would continue, after Italy refused to abandon its plea for “coronabonds” to share the debt burden for coronavirus recovery across the EU.
“We came close to a deal but we are not there yet,” Centeno wrote on Twitter of the talks, which began via videoconference on Tuesday afternoon and continued through the night. “I suspended the Eurogroup [meeting and we will] continue tomorrow.”
After 16h of discussions we came close to a deal but we are not there yet.
I suspended the #Eurogroup & continue tomorrow, thu.
My goal remains: A strong EU safety net against fallout of #covid19 (to shield workers, firms &countries)& commit/ to a sizeable recovery plan pic.twitter.com/kGHoURgdrv
— Mário Centeno (@mariofcenteno) April 8, 2020
Ministers have agreed in principle to a short to medium-term response that would make use of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) , created in 2012 at the height of the eurozone debt crisis.
The ESM would issue loans worth up to 240 billion euros to help stimulate the economies of countries hard hit by the Covid-19 pandemic. Member states are also favourable for guarantees for businesses and support for partial unemployment.
But Italy’s government says the ESM is not suited to the situation presented by the coronavirus epidemic and has led calls for a longer-term debt-sharing solution.
Known as eurobonds in non-epidemic times, the controversial system of debt-sharing across eurozone states have taken on the moniker “coronabonds” in the context of the coronavirus pandemic.
“Eurobonds represent a serious and adapted response,” Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte said.
Sources told AFP agency that France, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malta and Spain are in favour of establishing a coronabond fund.
But sharing of debt is a red line for northern countries, which in addition to Germany and the Netherlands also reportedly include Austria, Denmark, Sweden and the Baltic States.
Northern countries support the use of the ESM but refuse so far to agree to a debt-sharing scheme with heavily indebted countries in the south, which they consider to be undisciplined in financial management.
France sought to offer a compromise by proposing “renewal funds” of shared debt limited to essential public services or fragile sectors.
