The FTSE 100 is cruising flat, with a shifting sterling moving the currency gently in both direction Credit: Bryn Colton/Bloomberg
It was a heavily muted day overall for European stocks, with the pan-continental benchmark Stoxx 600 dipping slightly while blue-chips remained flat.
The FTSE 100 was buffeted gently by currency movements throughout the day, as the pound found itself caught in a tug-of-war between bearish speculators anticipating a Bank of England rate cut, and traders trying to buy the dip following several days of a falling dollar price for the pound.
What to look forward to tomorrow:
Economics: Inflation (UK), industrial production (eurozone), mortgages, PPI (US)
Andrea Leadsom, Secretary of State for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, has just tweeted that an agreement has been reached with Flybe’s shareholders.
She said: "This will be welcome news for Flybe’s staff, customers and creditors and we will continue the hard work to ensure a sustainable future."
Delighted that we have reached agreement with Flybe’s shareholders to keep the company operating, ensuring that U.K. regions remain connected. This will be welcome news for Flybe’s staff, customers and creditors and we will continue the hard work to ensure a sustainable future.
Production of a key Vauxhall Astra variant is being shifted to Germany from the UK, raising fresh fears for the firm's Ellesmere Port plant in Cheshire, my colleague Alan Tovey writes.
Vauxhall owner PSA Group will make the Astra estate in Russelsheim from 2022 - ratcheting up pressure on Ellesmere Port and its 1,000 staff.
The estate model represents the vast bulk of the 59,000 cars which roll off the UK site's production line each year, and losing it is a severe blow.
It comes as car industry chiefs nervously await trade talks between Brussels and the UK. Lobbyists say that if tariffs are introduced then it will wreck their supply chain and trigger mass British factory closures.
It has been a quiet on the currency markets due to no major economic announcements from Europe today.
The US dollar index initially jumped on the back of the US inflation data, but turned lower later in the day.
The pound is currently 0.20pc higher against the dollar at $1.3017 and 0.25pc up against the euro at €1.1696.
Trade Secretary Liz Truss has kicked off talks with the US ambassador as Britain scrambles to fast-track a deal with America that would pile pressure on Brussels.
Ms Truss is understood to have this week made the case against further American tariffs on UK exports including Scotch whisky to ambassador Woody Johnson, in their first meeting on the matter.
It follows six working groups between policy experts to discuss a free trade agreement, insiders said.
Both sides are hoping a deal to slash tariffs can be reached rapidly - cutting the cost of US goods for British consumers and opening new opportunities for British firms in the American market.
German prosecutors have charged six Volkswagen executives with fraud, accusing them of “deliberately misleading” authorities and customers in the lead up to the diesel emissions scandal in 2015.
The 876-page document does not name the people accused, but alleges three of them “knowingly and willingly participated in the development, refinement and improvement of manipulation software”.
Stocks in Europe pushed higher today but it was a heavily muted day overall. In London the benchmark index finished 0.06pc up to 7,622.35 while the FTSE 250 was 0.18pc higher to 21,756.05.
In the eurozone, the DAX and CAC ended just 0.08pc and 0.04pc higher respectively.
NMC Health had one of its better days as an ongoing spell of volatility continued, closing the day up 10.23pc as the biggest FTSE 100 riser.
Taylor Wimpey followed behind, up 3.91pc, after saying its financial performance would be in line with expectations despite “ongoing political and economic uncertainty”. The housebuilder said it expected a full-year operating profit margin of around 19.6pc, amid solid levels of demand for homes.
On the other end of the scale, Evraz was the largest FTSE 100 faller, tumbling 4.22pc, while education giant Pearson slipped 3.29pc ahead of a trading update on Thursday.
Larry Fink's letter said climate change risks could change the way markets function, with businesses losing out if they fail to adapt Credit: MOHAMMAD FAROOQ/AFP
My colleague Taha Lokhandwala says BlackRock's climate change promise might be cynical marketing, but it's still better than Vanguard's silence:
"Investors should spare BlackRock criticism for this conspicuous maneuver and instead focus their anger at the firm’s biggest rival: Vanguard.
"While BlackRock is attempting to profit from changing investor values and invoke some kind of action against climate change, Vanguard has remained silent. The firm might have publically said it is concerned about climate risks, yet it offers nothing to investors in Europe that can help mitigate them.
"Vanguard may espouse the need to teach investors and offer cheap and simple investing, but it has done nothing to educate its savers on the risks of global warming to stocks."
Thanks for following along with Louis today. We will take a look at how markets closed in Europe very shortly.
"The mood is muted as traders seem to be awaiting the signing of the interim trade deal between the US and China – it is tipped to take place tomorrow," says David Madden of CMC Markets. He adds:
"The trade saga has been going on for over 18 months, and the first phase of the deal is expected to be signed on Wednesday.
"Yesterday, the Trump administration claimed that China is no longer a currency manipulator. The move would have helped US-China relations somewhat, and it left dealers feeling more optimistic about the situation."
That’s all from me today – I’m handing over to LaToya Harding, who will take things from here. Thanks for following along!
Donald Trump is attending Davos for the first time since 2018 Credit: Mark Wilson/Getty
Here are some more of the day’s biggest business stories:
Businesses tone down Brexit deal demands as reality hits home : Business leaders are giving up their ambitious demands for the UK to maintain frictionless trade, freedom of movement or a customs union with the EU after Brexit, as Boris Johnson’s resounding election victory forces europhiles into a new political reality.
Boeing 737 Max planes have been grounded after two deadly crashes Credit: Gary He/Reuters
Just in: Boeing has posted its worst jetliner delivery loss in 45 years, shedding a net 87 orders for commercial aircraft as it battles with the aftermath of the 737 Max crisis.
The fall, driven primarily by cancelled 737 orders, means the company had more cancellations of new orders than net purchases during 2019. It delivered 380 planes last year, fewer than half  of rival Airbus’s 863 deliveries. Airbus logged a net 768 new plane orders during the year.
The situation at Flybe remain one of the day’s biggest stories, with the BBC reporting that the Government may consider a short-term loan to the group in order to comply with state aid rules.
Josh Hardie, deputy director of the CBI, says the government should examine was can be done to help the group, saying:
The news about Flybe is deeply worrying for the thousands of staff, their families and communities affected.
The CBI is clear that it’s not the role of government to bail out failing companies. But it’s right the government examines what help it can provide, given the importance of regional connectivity to so many people’s jobs and livelihoods.
More broadly, the new Government has a huge opportunity to look at the overall cost of doing business and to support growth through high quality, sustainable infrastructure. That’s what will ultimately drive shared prosperity and level up growth across all.
The Office for National Statistics has released an interesting dataset today, which shows the proportion of UK shares owned by oversees entities hit a record high of 54.9pc in 2018.
The proportions of UK shares held by UK-resident individuals rose to 13.5pc, up by 1.2pc from 2016, away from a historic low of 10.2pc in 2008.
The ONS’s geographical breakdown shows that most of those ‘rest of world’ holders are in North America. It notes:
North American investors have increasingly invested directly in the ordinary shares of UK companies listed on the London Stock Exchange.
A pretty flat-footed start for US stock markets, amid high interest in bank  earnings. Investment giant JP Morgan smashed analysts’ expectations with a 90c revenue surge, but that hasn’t prompted a wider bull run.
Meanwhile, things are still flat in Europe...
Education giant Pearson is the biggest faller on the FTSE 100 today, dropping ahead of a trading update on Thursday.
Bloomberg Intelligence analyst John Davies says the update “isn’t likely to shed much extra light on [the group’s] prospects”, adding the group’s retiring chief executive John Fallon may not want to set “significant forecasts” for his successor.
Management’s only course of action is to keep making significant cost cuts given the problems it faces are industrywide. Delaying some discretionary spending to 2020 doesn’t change the underlying trend.
Markets have just opened in the US, and Tesla is once again pushing upwards, topping off yesterday’s break through $500 with further gains. The electric car company, long a target of short sellers, is likely causing some bears to bang their heads today.
My colleague Ed Clowes has a full report on Endeavour’s decision to walk away from tie-up talks with London-listed gold miner Centamin. He writes:
Centamin knocked back an initial £1.5bn hostile takeover bid from rival Endeavour last November. The Toronto-listed company said it had repeatedly tried to engage with its target's board and would appeal directly to Centamin shareholders for their support.
The offer would have given Centamin investors stock in Endeavour. They would have received the equivalent of 126.27p for every Centamin share they held, a 13pc premium on the  company’s market value. Both companies share a number of institutional shareholders.
Consumer price index inflation in the US stood at 0.2pc in December, according to data just released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. That has missed analysts’ estimates of 0.3pc, and may add to the ongoing sentiment that a continued rise in US stock markets is increasingly out of sync with the country’s actual economic performance.
Bloomberg reports that the odd shifts we’ve been seeing in the pound today are the product of bearish investors meeting trader trying to grab a bargain from what had been a sustained fall:
On the one hand, increased speculation of an imminent interest-rate cut is putting pressure on sterling, and on the other, five straight days of declines to $1.2955 has tempted investors to buy the dip. Prime Minister Boris Johnson also gave bulls a boost when he said it’s likely his government would secure a trade deal with the European Union before the end of the year.
It looks like the bears may be winning out, however, with the pound moving downwards again:
Carlos Ghosn's arrest exposed fissures in the alliance between Renault and Nissan Credit: Regis Duvignau/REUTERS
Here’s your daily Ghosn injection: Nissan has hit back at claims it is looking to end its partnership with Renault, with the Japanese carmaker stating it is “in no way considering dissolving the alliance”.
My colleague Alan Tovey reports:
Reports had suggested Nissan was stepping up contingency planning about a split, working through scenarios including how to separate manufacturing and engineering operations.
The 20-year old tie-up between the French and Japanese car makers was created and overseen by Carlos Ghosn.
It was aimed at reducing costs through co-operation in areas such as R&D, manufacturing and purchasing, as well as through sharing basic platforms of vehicles.
However, when Mr Ghosn was arrested in Japan in 2018 over allegations of financial crimes in his role as Nissan chairman, it exposed cracks in the set-up, with worries about disproportionate influence smaller Renault had over Nissan. Last month Mr Ghosn fled Japan in a dramatic escape to Beirut.
Possible contender for the story of the day comes from the Financial Times, which reports tiny Aim-listed company Lekoil has fallen victim to an apparent scam:
Shares in Lekoil fell by more than 70 per cent on Tuesday as investors responded to news that the Nigeria-focused oil producer had fallen victim to alleged fraud over a non-existent $184m loan.
Trading in Lekoil was suspended on Monday after the Aim-listed company said it had not secured cash from the Qatar Investment Authority and might have been tricked by individuals “masquerading” as its representatives.
The company said it had paid $600,000 to Seawave Invest, a Bahamas-based consultancy, for brokering the loan, claiming it had undertaken due diligence including a third party report “based predominantly on open source information.”
As a beginner investor, getting your head around fees can be hard. But should you trust platforms promising to rid you of them entirely? Credit: RICHARD ALLEN FOR THE TELEGRAPH
Here are some of the day’s biggest stories from the Telegraph Money team:
There are still almost two hours to go until trading open in the US – and it looks like we should expect a similarly flat outcome.
There are a few factors pushing markets towards neutrality at the moment, but perhaps the biggest must be ongoing questions over trade: even as things appear to be smoothing out between Beijing and Washington, EU trade chief Phil Hogan is in the US capital holding meetings – might disagreements prompt Donald Trump to open a war on a new front?
Dominic Chappell bought BHS for £1 Credit: Gareth Fuller/PA
Former BHS owner Dominic Chappell has been ordered to pay £9.5m towards the now defunct retailer's pension scheme after he failed to convince a court he should not contribute.
My colleague Laura Onita reports:
The former racing driver and thrice bankrupt bought BHS for £1 from retail tycoon Sir Philip Green a year before it collapsed. He was running the business when it went bust in 2016, leading to 11,000 job losses. It had a £571m deficit in its pension fund at the time.
On Tuesday the pension regulator said that management decisions, the appointment of inexperienced board members, an inadequate business plan and the fact money was extracted and dished out to Mr Chappell and his entourage all contributed towards the decision to try to claw back the money.
The Pensions Regulator took Mr Chappell to court in 2016 in an attempt to force them to contribute cash to the scheme. He then launched a legal battle contesting the move.
His failure to to overturn the decision suggests that the BHS pension scandal is coming to a close.
Having spent some time moving in both directions so far today, European markets have settled out flat, with the FTSE 100 losing its edge on peers after the pound’s rise.
BlackRock’s New York headquarters Credit: Lucas Jackson/REUTERS
My colleagues Taha Lokhandwala and Michael O’Dwyer have a full report on BlackRock boss Larry Fink’s letters to investors and chief executives this morning. They write:
His 2020 letter warns businesses that ignoring climate change will affect profits. Firms that fail to adapt, manage or mitigate their carbon footprint will eventually be left behind by investors, Mr Fink said.
Climate change would fundamentally change the way financial markets work and how investors think about risk.
“What will happen to the 30-year mortgage if lenders can’t estimate the impact of climate risk over such a long timeline or if there is no viable market for flood or fire insurance in impacted areas? What happens to inflation, and interest rates, if the cost of food climbs from drought and flooding?” he said.
More and more of BlackRock’s investors were looking to shift their money into more ethical and so-called sustainable funds, according to the firm. Even if only 5pc of investors did so, shunned companies would suffer as huge amounts of shareholders depart and share prices fall significantly, Mr Fink added.
Sterling has taken a significantly shift in recent minutes, which may be down to investors pocketing some profits. Here are other potential reasons for the shift:
In Scotland, First Minister Nicola Surgeon has said she will once again ask MSPs to vote on holding a new independence referendum. The move comes after Boris Johnson said he “cannot agree” to a tranfer or powers that would allow Hollyrood to call a vote
What’s going on in Westminster?
Will the bell toll for Britain? Credit: REUTERS/POOL
In a nauseating turn of phrase, Boris Johnson has called on Britons to “bung a bob for a Big Ben bong”. In words not devised by a Number 10 communications advisor, that means the PM wants the public to fund the £500,000 cost to ring the currently-decommissioned bell on January 31, the expected ‘Brexit day’.
Yes, in what must be a slow day at the seat of UK power, our politics team reports:
To the delight of Tory MPs, Mr Johnson said that whilst the £500,000 cost of the event would be “expensive,” he hoped that crowdfunding would allow it to go ahead.
In a wide-ranging interview, he also dismissed scepticism in Brussels over the narrow time frame available to strike an EU trade deal, adding that UK would become a champion of “global free trade”.
UK Finance estimated that 800,000 consumers used credit cards to gamble in 2018 Credit: PAUL ELLIS/AFP
Gambling companies will be banned from allowing customers in the UK to use credit cards to bet in a bid to protect consumers and improve the sector's image.
My colleague Simon Foy reports:
The ban, which starts on April 14, comes after reviews of the industry by the Gambling Commission - the sector's watchdog - and the Government.
Major betting companies such as Bet365, Betfair and 888 all allow customers to place deposits online using credit cards, which has led to warnings from campaigners that gamblers risk racking up big debts and falling into addiction.
Neil McArthur, chief executive of the Gambling Commission, said: ​"Credit card gambling can lead to significant financial harm. The ban that we have announced today should minimise the risks of harm to consumers from gambling with money they do not have.”
Just in: Canadian gold miner Endeavour says its takeover talks with London-listed peer Centamin have been terminated, confirming it will not seek an extension to negotiations.
We remain convinced about the strategic rationale of combining Endeavour and Centamin to create a diversified gold producer with a high-quality portfolio of assets. The quality of information received during the accelerated due diligence process has been insufficient to allow us to be confident that proceeding with a firm offer would have been in the best interests of Endeavour shareholders.
Centamin shares have dropped sharply:
As mentioned earlier, the FTSE 100 is being lent some support by a fall in the pound. That’s chiefly because traders are bracing for a potential interest rate cut by the Bank of England went its Monetary Policy Committee meets at the end of this month.
As my colleague Tim Wallace reported yesterday:
Figures released since the general election suggest the Conservatives' decisive victory triggered a sharp increase in business confidence.
But Bank rate-setters will be paying particularly close attention to the IHS Markit Purchasing Managers' Index which comes out on January 24 and will give a snapshot of economic performance. If this does not suggest a pick-up, the clamour to slash rates in Mark Carney’s last Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting as Governor will grow even louder.
A handout photo of Jeff Fairburn from 2013 Credit: Persimmon/Press Association Images
Jeff Fairburn, the former Persimmon boss ousted following a furore over his £75m bonus, has found a new job as chief executive of a Yorkshire housebuilding company.
My colleague Seb McCarthy reports:
The under-fire executive has bought a 50 pc stake in Berkeley Deveer, a privately-owned developer in the north of England which he is now set to run.
The move, first reported by The Times, comes against a backdrop of criticism levelled at Fairburn, who was asked to leave Persimmon in 2018 after the company said that his huge payout was having a "negative impact" on the firm's reputation.
“It seems like the proverbial round of football managers.  You get a team relegated one week and go join another one the next week,” said Clive Betts, the most recent chair of Parliament’s Communities and Local Government Committee. He added: “I think I would be worried about buying a house from this group given Fairburn’s track record.”
The ex-Persimmon chief executive’s pay packet was tied up with the housebuilder's share price performance, which has been boosted in recent years as a result of the taxpayer-funded Help to Buy scheme. Last month Persimmon faced fresh scrutiny after a devastating report found fire safety issues and poor workmanship at the FTSE 100 firm.
In a statement about his new role, Fairburn said: “Berkeley Deveer is a fantastic housebuilder and I’m honored to join the company as CEO, and to have become a significant investor.”
Optimism has returned to European stocks somewhat – though they still look pretty mixed, the FTSE 100 is outperforming its amid relief from a weaker pound.
— Neil Wilson (@marketsneil) January 14, 2020
Here’s how sterling has shifted:
Based in Exeter, Flybe connects smaller cities such as Southampton to Newcastle and carries eight million passengers a year Credit: Andrew McCaren/LNP
Britain could cut air passenger taxes on all domestic flights to help rescue struggling regional airline Flybe, the BBC said on Tuesday.
Finance minister Sajid Javid will meet later with representatives from the Department for Transport (DfT) and Business to discuss the tax and a possible deferring of Flybe's bill, the corporation said.
A possible deal could allow Flybe to defer a payment of more than 100 million pounds ($130 million) for three years, according to Sky News. Under the plan, Flybe's owners would be required to invest tens of millions of pounds in fresh equity into the company as a condition of any deal.
Flybe’s flights appeared to be operating as normal on Tuesday, a day after news reports emerged suggesting it needed to quickly raise new funds to help it survive through the winter when demand for travel is lower.
Shares in Elementis have fallen sharply this morning, after it warned profit for 2019 would be lower than the year before.
The FTSE 250 chemicals group said it anticipated an adjusted operating profit of between $122m and $124m, down from $133m in 2018.
It said fourth-quarter trading had been “subdued”, with a “mixed end to the year” for its personal care, chromium and energy wings.
Paul Waterman, its chief executive, said “our priorities going forward are clear”, adding that Elementis was focused on raising its profit margin and cash conversion.
Shares in Irish building materials supplier Grafton have risen this morning, after the group said its trading during November and December was better than expected.
The group said it expected to report and operating profit of around £202m for 2019, up from £194.5m in 2018 despite “subdued” end-market activity.
In the UK, households continued to be very cautious about discretionary spending as uncertainty persisted during the fourth quarter and sentiment continued to weigh on demand in the merchanting market.  The weak markets of September and October continued into November and December but did not deteriorate further.  The group’s focus in the UK remains on tight control of costs, driving efficiency and delivering productivity gains.
Chief executive Gavin Slark said the year – in which Grafton sold its specialist UK plumbing business Plumbase and its merchanting unit in Belgium – had been one of “significant strategic progress”. He added:
While we remain cautious about the timing of any recovery in the UK merchanting market at this very early stage in the New Year, our expectations for 2020 are positive for the overall group and we are optimistic about growth opportunities.  We are well placed to continue to successfully implement our development strategy supported by very cash generative businesses and a strong balance sheet.
BlackRock’s announcement today is the product of sustained pressure upon the group to take a more active role in the fight again climate change.
Although BlackRock is perhaps best known for its broad strategy – which combines tracking, passive and active management and algorithmic trading – activists have long said the company cannot absolve itself of responsibility for pushing companies to be more sustainable.
Fink’s letter builds on previous missives advising corporate leaders on how to orient their businesses for the long term. In previous years he’s underscored the theme that profit and social purpose are inextricably linked. People are looking to corporate executives to step in and offer fixes to social problems that governments are failing to solve, Fink wrote in last year’s letter.
Activists have been calling on BlackRock to do more around the climate crisis. Groups including Amazon Watch, the Sunrise Project, and coalitions of youth activists and parents have all targeted the firm, asking for more action around the global crisis of climate change. Former US Vice President Al Gore attacked big index fund firms recently too.
BlackRock’s size puts it in a delicate position: operating in more than 30 countries, and as one of the biggest holders of most US publicly traded companies, its clients include large sovereign wealth funds, state pension plans and financial advisers with viewpoints that don’t necessarily align on what to do about climate change and social justice issues.
Non-profit Majority Action analyzed the 2019 proxy voting records of BlackRock and its peer Vanguard Group, and found the two firms voted against at least 16 climate-related shareholder proposals where their support could have given the measures majority support. In contrast, BNP Paribas SA and Pacific Investment Management Co. voted in favor of almost all of the 41 climate-change resolutions that Majority Action analyzed in its study.
BlackRock chief executive Larry Fink Credit: Lucas Jackson/Reuters
Larry Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, the world’s biggest asset manager, has announced the group will ditch its investments in firms with high levels of sustainablity risk, as part of sweeping changes in reaction to the threat of climate change.
The group, which has $7 trillion under management, will make a series of changes to the way it operates in response to what Mr Fink called a “fundamental reshaping of finance”.
In a letter to chief executives , he said:
Climate change has become a defining factor in companies’ long-term prospects. Last September, when millions of people took to the streets to demand action on climate change, many of them emphasized the significant and lasting impact that it will have on economic growth and prosperity – a risk that markets to date have been slower to reflect. But awareness is rapidly changing, and I believe we are on the edge of a fundamental reshaping of finance.
These questions are driving a profound reassessment of risk and asset values. And because capital markets pull future risk forward, we will see changes in capital allocation more quickly than we see changes to the climate itself. In the near future – and sooner than most anticipate – there will be a significant reallocation of capital.
In a separate letter to investors , Mr Fink outlined some of the changes BlackRock plans:
[M]aking sustainability integral to portfolio construction and risk management; exiting investments that present a high sustainability-related risk, such as thermal coal producers; launching new investment products that screen fossil fuels; and strengthening our commitment to sustainability and transparency in our investment stewardship activities.
He told the group’s clients:
We invest on your behalf, not our own, and the investments we make will always represent your preferences, timelines, and objectives. We recognize that many clients will continue to prefer traditional strategies, particularly in market-cap weighted indexes. We will manage this money consistent with your preferences, as we always have. The choice remains with you.
As we move to a low-carbon world, investment exposure to the global economy will mean exposure to hydrocarbons for some time. While the low-carbon transition is well underway, the technological and economic realities mean that the transition will take decades. Global economic development, particularly in emerging markets, will continue to rely on hydrocarbons for a number of years. As a result, the portfolios we manage will continue to hold exposures to the hydrocarbon economy as the transition advances.
A successful low-carbon transition will require a coordinated, international response from governments aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement, including the adoption of carbon pricing globally, which we continue to endorse. Companies and investors have a meaningful role to play in accelerating the low-carbon transition. BlackRock does not see itself as a passive observer in the low-carbon transition. We believe we have a significant responsibility – as a provider of index funds, as a fiduciary, and as a member of society – to play a constructive role in the transition.
China’s offshore yuan, also known as the renminbi, has reached its strongest level since July after the US said its would stop labelling Beijing as a currency manipulator.
Taylor WImpey said its results would be in-line with its expectations Credit: Paul Thomas/Bloomberg
The FTSE 100 group said it expected a full-year operating profit margin of around 19.6pc, amid solid demand for homes and trading at anticipated levels.
Chief executive Pete Redfern said:
Our results for the year to 31 December 2019 will be in line with our expectations. Despite an uncertain political and economic backdrop in 2019, we have continued to experience a good level of demand for our homes and trading in the second half of the year was as anticipated. The Group has again delivered a record sales rate and we increased home completions by c.5pc in the year.
At the end of 2019, Taylor Wimpey’s order book stood at £2.2bn, the company said, up from £1.8bn at the end of 2018.
Cost pressured softened during the period, the group said. It added:
While 2020 will continue to be a year of change for the UK, we welcome the increased political stability following the general election. We start the year with a strong order book and continue to target a smoother profile of completions throughout the year but expect 2020 to continue to be second half weighted.
