It also extended the scheme's duration until June 2021, or until the bank believes the crisis is over.
Interest rates were maintained at their current levels, as expected.
However, the ECB updated its economic projections which came in significantly worse than in March.
The European Central Bank announced Thursday it will increase its Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme by 600 billion euros ($672 billion) as it attempts to bolster the economy following the coronavirus crisis.
The amount comes on top of 750 billion euros of government bond purchases the ECB announced in March , taking the total to 1.35 trillion euros. The central bank also said Thursday that the duration of the program will be extended from the end of 2020 until June 2021, or until the bank believes the crisis is over.
However, some analysts have raised doubts that the 600 billion euro increase will be enough to cover purchases until June of 2021. In a press conference following the move, ECB President Christine Lagarde said this was deemed to be "the appropriate size" to bring inflation "significantly closer" to its pre-coronavirus path.
The emergency program, announced in March, has helped keep borrowing costs lower for countries in the euro zone — the 19-member region that uses the euro as its common currency.
Thursday's announcement contributed to a further reduction in borrowing costs, with the yield on Italy's 10-year government paper dropping from session highs above 1.56% to 1.40% shortly after the decision. There have been similar moves on Greek, Portuguese and Spanish debt.
The euro see-sawed, initially turning positive on the news to trade about 0.25% higher against the U.S. dollar. It then dropped after disappointing macroeconomic projections, to rebound again moments later.
"The even more aggressive monetary policy stance helps to contain the downside risks," Holger Schmieding, chief economist at Berenberg bank, said in an email. "In addition, the strong signal can bolster the nascent rebound in the confidence of households and companies that the worst will soon be over."
