Euro to Dollar exchange rate slumped at the start of the week despite German manufacturing jumping to an 11-month high in January.
However, PMI data also showed that the pace of staff cuts in the manufacturing sector remained around the fastest since early 2010.
Meanwhile, the US Dollar benefitted from January’s manufacturing rebound after five months of contraction. Both the Markit PMI and Federal Reserve’s preferred measure, the ISM PMI showed the manufacturing sector expanded.
Tuesday saw the pairing extend losses as data revealed new orders for US goods jumped to a one-and-a-half year high at the end of 2019. However, the data did show that persistently weak business spending on equipment could mean there is limited scope for a manufacturing rebound.
Wednesday saw the pairing slump further despite the Eurozone’s PMI composite showing stronger growth at the start of 2020. However, weak retail sales in the bloc weighed on the currency as sales plummeted to -1.6%, the lowest reading since February.
US data buoyed the ‘Greenback’ as the service sector appeared to pick up at the start of the new year, suggesting the economy will continue to grow despite the slowdown in consumer spending.
Added to this, a strong US private sector payrolls report suggested the country’s economy was on track for stable growth over the course of the year.
Thursday saw EUR/USD continue to slide as data showed that the recession in the bloc’s largest economy may be far from over. German factory orders plummeted at the fastest pace in more than a decade despite earlier signs suggesting the economy was working its way out of a slump.
At the end of the week, the US Dollar continued to make gains after further data revealed US jobs growth accelerated in the first month of 2020. Thanks to unseasonably mild weather, weather-sensitive sectors received a hiring boost, suggesting the US economy will grow moderately despite a worsening decline in business investment.
Will the Euro Continue its Slump?
Looking ahead to Monday, the US Dollar (USD) could edge up against the Euro (EUR) following several speeches from Federal Reserve policymakers.
If the Fed indicates it is upbeat about the country’s economy, the Dollar will rise.
Meanwhile, Tuesday could see the pairing slump further following the European Commission’s economic growth forecasts.
If the EC predicts Eurozone growth in 2020 is going to worse than previous estimations, single currency sentiment will slide.
If inflation disappoints, remaining far below the European Central Bank’s (ECB) target, the Euro will fall.
Meanwhile, the Dollar could suffer some losses in the afternoon after the release of CPI data. If US inflation disappoints in January, the pairing will be left flat.
At the end of the week, the single currency could slump further if German data follows last week’s disappointing pattern.
If flash German GDP does not rise as high as expected, the Euro will slide.
The Euro could suffer further losses if data also reveals the Eurozone as a whole saw an underwhelming level of growth in the final quarter of 2019.
The US Dollar could make further gains following the release of US retail sales data.
If sales jump in January, indicating the US consumer remains optimistic, the Euro-to-Dollar exchange rate will slide.
"EURUSD short-term technicals are neutral/bearish" says Shaun Osborne, Chief FX Strategist at Scotiabank. "EURUSD is heading for a weak close on the week overall and the loss of support at 1.0975/85 (now resistance) rather points to the broader risk of a retest of the late 2019 low around 1.0880. Short-term trend suggest the EUR could find support at 1.0945, the base of this week’s bear channel, however, which may be the springboard for a modest rebound to 1.0965/75."
"EURUSD has finally blasted below 1.1000 and looks ready to test the sub-1.09 close in the sessions ahead" says John Hardy, Head of FX Strategy, Saxo Bank Group. "Traders should be wary of negative attention on the situation from US President Trump at any time, and we have been well trained to believe that any new lows won’t last for long from the last 18 months and more of market action, as each new low has quickly back-filled, but let’s see how this develops as the options market shows record complacency (1-month implied volatility is sub-4.0% even this morning after the break!)"
"In FX space we still hold the view that it is too early to bet against the USD" says Mikael Sarwe, FX analyst at Nordea Markets. "Short-term it is plausible that the Euro area, with its larger dependence on exports to China, will be affected more by the coronavirus than the US. Thus, there is currently no reason to believe that investors will change their view on the growth advantage of the US and thereby the inclination to hold USD."
"Long term, we view the pullback from 1.2600 as corrective and look for a higher low over the 2017 1.0340 lows, ideally in the 1.09 to 1.08 region" say analysts at Lloyds in a brief to clients on Friday, February 7. "The break of 1.0980 increases the risks that we re-test support in the 1.09-1.08 region, but we still view that as medium-term support."
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
