EUR/USD, GBP/USD and AUD/USD continue their surge, yet key resistance levels lie ahead.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-05T09:02:04+0100
EUR/USD has continued its recent uptrend, with yesterday's post- European Central Bank (ECB) surge being followed up by another smaller rally this morning. This continues the clear uptrend evident on the hourly chart.
The next resistance level of note comes all the way up at the crisis peak of $1.1496. As long as we remain within this hourly uptrend, it makes sense to keep expecting further upside for this pair. As such, a drop below $1.1326 would be required to start asking questions over this current rally.
GBP/USD has also seen sharp gains over the course of the past fortnight, with the pair moving back into the 200-day simple moving average (SMA), currently at $1.2669. With the two previous April peaks having come around the $1.2648 level, this region of resistance provides a major hurdle to overcome if this trend is to continue.
With that in mind, the ability or inability to break through this resistance zone will be key to forthcoming price action, with a break below the $1.2583 level required to negate this current uptrend.
AUD/USD has seen sharp gains over the course of the week, in a continuation of the upside seen since the March lows. This has taken us back towards the key $0.7032 resistance level (December peak), which provides the next upside level of note.
However, the key here is to simply follow the short-term uptrend, which has continued after respecting trendline support overnight. With that in mind, a bullish outlook remains in play unless we see a break back below the $0.693 support level. ​
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Trade the largest and most volatile financial market in the world.
Speculate from a range of platforms, including on mobile
Don’t miss your chance. Try a risk-free trade in your demo account, and find out whether your hunch could have paid off.
