EUR/USD Mid-Session Technical Analysis for June 22, 2020
The current inside move suggests investor indecision and impending volatility.
The Euro is edging higher against the U.S. Dollar on Monday as investors continued to battle over whether to respond to recovering economic indicators or concerns about a second-wave of COVID-19 infections in the week ahead.
Analysts at Barclays said in a note that gains in the Euro are possible if the Purchasing Managers index due on Tuesday beats expectations.
Traders also said the trade was shaky as divisions among European Union leaders over how to structure a planned COVID-19 recovery fund kept investors wary.
At 13:07 GMT, the EUR/USD is trading 1.1226, up 0.0048 or +0.43%.
The main trend is down according to the daily swing chart. A trade through 1.1168 will signal a resumption of the downtrend, while a move through 1.1422 will change the main trend to up.
The minor trend is also down. A trade through 1.1353 will change the minor trend to up. This will also shift momentum to the upside.
On the downside, the first support is the 50% level at 1.1146, followed by the Fibonacci level at 1.1082.
The minor range is 1.1422 to 1.1168. It retracement zone at 1.1295 is the primary upside target.
The current inside move suggests investor indecision and impending volatility.
Taking out Friday’s high at 1.1254 could create the upside momentum needed to challenge 1.1295.
A break through 1.1168 will indicate the selling is getting stronger. This is followed by 1.1146. If this level fails then look for a possible acceleration into 1.1082.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
