EUR/USD has been on the back foot amid an increase in US coronavirus cases . Yohay Elam, an analyst at FXStreet , continues looking at coronavirus statistics besides a big bulk of American economic figures.
“Houston, we have a problem – Intensive Care Units (ICUs) may run out of capacity in America's fourth-largest city on Thursday as COVID-19 rages through Texas. The lone-star state is not alone, as the disease is rising in some 26 states, with the worst-hit ones being in the south. President Trump and his administration say that a higher testing capacity is behind the surge in cases but the worrying reports are weighing on the market mood and pushing the safe-haven dollar higher.”
“Further gloom comes from the IMF, which downgraded its forecasts – and now sees a decline of 4.9% in global growth this year. Moreover, it also laid out a scenario in which there is 0% growth in 2021 – an L-shaped non-recovery.”
“Apart from US data and coronavirus statistics from southern states, markets may pay more heed to the presidential elections. Democrat Joe Biden is ahead against President Donald Trump by some 9-10%. A clean sweep by the opposition party would weigh on stocks amid regulation fears.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
