A combination of factors such as plans to joint debt issuance, German fiscal expansion, and the extension of the ECB PEPP programmes call for medium Run EUR bullishness, according to Jeremy Stretch from CIBC Capital Markets.
“Although we are not yet considering debt mutualisation, there has been progress on that end. For instance, Germany has come around to the concept of rescue funds largely made up of grants (and not loans only).Furthermore, the German government has left the ‘black zero’ budget policy behind via two significant fiscal expansions, the latter equating to a larger than expected €130bn.”
“Although there has been pushback against the EU’s proposed €750 billion rescue plan from the ‘Frugal Four’ (Austria, Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands), we expect this pushback to dissipate.”
“The combination of a plan advocating joint debt issuance, German fiscal expansion, and the extension of the ECB PEPP programmes underlines our bias towards medium run EUR impetus. The risk to our EUR bullish view is if talks on the EU rescue fund breaks down.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
