Risk-off rules amid rising coronavirus cases in the US boost the greenback.
US Durable Goods Orders jumped by 15.8% in May, weekly unemployment claims printed 1.48M.
EUR/USD nears its recent lows and a critical Fibonacci support level.
The EUR/USD pair remained under selling pressure throughout the first half of the day, piercing the 1.1200 figure on the back of risk-aversion and ahead of US data releases. Stocks came under selling pressure on Wednesday, with fears mounting after the US reported the largest one-day number of new coronavirus cases, spurring concerns about the economic health of the country. The longer the pandemic remains out of control, the longer will be the economic comeback.
European indexes pared their slumps and bounced a bit on headlines reporting that the ECB has introduced a new repo facility for central banks outside the Union, mean to address liquidity needs within the ongoing crisis.
US macroeconomic figures were pretty encouraging, as Durable Goods Orders came in at 15.8% in May, much better than anticipated, while Q1 GDP was confirmed at -5.0%. Initial Jobless Claims for the week ended June 19 were above expected, at 1.48M,  while the Continuing Jobless Claims for the week ended June 12 improved to 19.552 M.  The news had a limited impact on the dollar, which retains its strength against most of its major rivals.
The EUR/USD pair is trading at around 1.1200 ahead of the US opening, approaching a critical Fibonacci support at 1.1170, the 38.2% retracement of its latest daily advance. In the 4-hour chart, the pair is below its 20 and 100 SMA, which hover around the immediate Fibonacci resistance at 1.1270. Technical indicators head firmly lower within negative levels, supporting a bearish extension, particularly if the pair breaks below the mentioned support.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
