EUR/USD trades on a strong note just below 1.1300 on Monday.
German flash CPI surprised to the upside at 0.6% MoM in June.
EUR/USD keeps navigating the area of 3-day highs just below the 1.1300 area at the beginning of the week.
The buying interest remains well and sound around EUR/USD on Monday, always against the backdrop of the increasing selling bias surrounding the greenback.
Looking at the broader scenario, market participants keep tracking the progress of the return to some sort of ‘normal life’ in Euroland despite the coronavirus pandemic looks everything but abated.
In the docket, German advanced inflation figures showed consumer prices are expected to rise at a monthly 0.6% during the current month, surpassing initial forecasts. Earlier in the session, the Consumer Confidence gauge tracked by the European Commission came in at -14.7 for the month of June, matching the preliminary reading.\
Across the pond, Pending Home Sales are due along with the Dallas Fed manufacturing index and speeches by FOMC’s Daly and Williams.
EUR/USD appears to have met some important resistance in the 1.1350 region in recent days. Investors continue to look to the gradual return to some sort of economic normality in Europe while closely following new COVID-19 cases around the world. The constructive view in the euro, however, remains well sustained by the gradual and relentless re-opening of economies in Europe and by the ongoing monetary stimulus (announced by the ECB, Germany and the European Commission). On top, the solid performance of the region’s current account is also adding to the attractiveness of the shared currency.
At the moment, the pair is gaining 0.63% 1.1286 and a breakout of 1.1348 (weekly high Jun.23) would target 1.1422 (monthly high Jun.10) en route to 1.1495 (2020 high Mar.9). On the downside, the next support lines up at 1.1168 (monthly low Jun.19) seconded by 1.1147 (high Mar.27) and finally 1.1032 (200-day SMA).
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
