EUR/USD, GBP/USD and AUD/USD rebound, but will this mark the beginning of a bullish phase or simply a precursor to another leg lower?
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-29T09:14:40+0100
​ EUR/USD is on the rise this morning, with a rally through $1.1239 providing a bullish signal for the pair. Coming off the back of a rally back into the $1.1353 level, there is a possibility that we are seeing the pair prepare for a bullish breakout through that key threshold.
For now, there is a strong chance we will see further upside as we build upon this bullish breakout. However, we will ultimately need to break that $1.1353 level to negate the notion that we are simply consolidating within a topping pattern over recent weeks.
GBP/USD has been on the rise since Fridays low of $1.2314, with price rising back into the 61.8% Fibonacci resistance zone. However, the short-term trend remains bearish unless we see a break through the $1.2437 swing high.
With that in mind, it makes sense to expect a bearish turn from either the 61.8% or 76.4% Fibonacci levels as the trend comes back into play.
AUD/USD has also been on the rise, following on from a decline into the 76.4% Fibonacci level on Friday night. The wider creation of higher lows points towards a potential rally back towards the $0.6974 region, with a rally through the $0.6895 required to signal that impending rally.
As such, watch out for whether we see that $0.6895 level broken as a precursor to further upside. The ability to break that level will tell us plenty about where we go from here. ​
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Trade the largest and most volatile financial market in the world.
Speculate from a range of platforms, including on mobile
