- US Dollar: unwinds month-end decline ahead of ISM manufacturing , EUR: dragged down by sterling weakness on trade woes. Scotiabank
- "Pound Sterling tumbles near 1% on reports that UK PM Boris Johnson threatened to walk away from trade negotiations with the EU without a formal deal, a so-called Australian style trade deal.
- Michel Barnier, the EU's chief negotiator, sets out a 'highly ambitious trade deal' for the UK. "Must include an agreement on fisheries, this agreement should provide for continued access to markets and to waters."
The British Pound exchange rates got off to a rough start on Sunday as risk appetite took a hit with Asian indexes plummeting.
A 0.3% loss in the Pound to Dollar exchange rate (GBP/USD) saw Sterling as a major under-performer in G10 FX down to $1.3161. Sterling was the best performer overall last week and into January's month end trade. See British Pound: Sterling was Best Performing G7 Currency Last Week - Looking Ahead, More to Come?
Brexit has been on the backburner of global news headlines lately, but it should be front and center for the GBP this week, as the departure is so far quite symbolic until some actual nuts and bolts are put into place.
With trade, proximity is king (unless you are China and you make literally everything), so investors in the U.K. will want to see evidence that a healthy, open relationship with its most vital partners on the continent is still on the cards. Newswires are placing a lot of emphasis on the potential for a U.S. trade deal with the U.K. but Trump’s wild unpopularity in the U.K. among both Labour and Conservative voters, make this a difficult process for Boris Johnson.
A rally in the U.S. dollar saw the Euro falling slightly, with EUR to USD exchange rate down 0.1%.
The Euro-Dollar has seen the $1.10 handle defended well, bolstering the technical picture for bulls hoping that the floor is in for the common currency.
Interest rate expectations in the Eurozone are steady, meaning the EUR was surprisingly firm as China coronavirus worries rocked the market last week.
A 600 point drop in the Dow Jones on Friday coupled with fears about a stark economic slowdown in China have slightly increased Fed rate cut expectations. While this is a bearish fundamental for the USD, it’s safe haven quality means its a slightly confused outlook for the Dollar. Its considerable yield advantage over the Euro is still a heavy burden for bears to overcome, however.
With China’s stock market off 9% at the open and the Nikkei 225 down 1%, it was interesting to see the Japanese Yen slightly weaker in the session as U.S. stock futures gained. The only other currency making moves was the Chinese Yuan, with USD/CNH spiking over the politically sensitive 7.000 level as coronavirus cases rallied over 15,000. Chinese Caixin Manufacturing missed expectations, but this was obviously not the principal cause of Yuan weakness.
One currency that has been absolutely battered recently is the Norwegian Krone , and Nordea Research thinks the weakness looks overdone in the NOK,
“We fully understand if investors wish to stay away from more “virus-sensitive” currencies for now. This would include Asian currencies as travel bans and the like will weigh on activity in the region, and commodity currencies given how important China is for global demand. That said, one has to be impressed by the EM-like nature of the NOK as a result of recent FX trading. Sure, oil prices have plunged, but we don’t think it makes sense for the NOK to weaken this much.”
There have been over 17,000 confirmed cases of the "killer" virus and 361 deaths in mainland China. Outside China cases have reached 150 along with the first death outside China, in the Philippines.
Foreign secretary has confirmed that seven British citizens and their four relatives have been brought back in a second rescue mission from Wuhan. They are currently being quarantined in a facility on the Wirral.
Meanwhile, hospital workers in Hong Kong have gone on strike, demanding their Chinese border be completely closed to reduce the risk of the coronavirus spreading. There have been fifteen confimed cases of the coronavirus in HK.
Asymptomatic #2019nCoV infection may be rare, and transmission from an asymptomatic person is very rare with other coronaviruses, as we have seen with MERS. Thus, transmission from asymptomatic cases is likely not a major driver of transmission https://t.co/5gEHSOGO7H pic.twitter.com/Zh8ifwP4XA
— World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) February 1, 2020
"It’s no surprise then that the dominant theme in the market is a general “risk off” move" says Marshall Gittler, FX analysts for BDSwiss. "We’ll probably see this continue for some time, in my view, as the virus spreads to other countries that perhaps report the infection and death toll more accurately than China does. US stocks have now lost all their gains for the year so far.
"What surprised me about the market this morning is that it’s not following the usual path that the “dollar smile” thesis would indicate. That’s the idea that when things are good, people buy USD because the US economy is the strongest and interest rates are (currently) the highest in the developed world. When things are bad, -- like in 2008, or now with the coronavirus – people buy USD because it’s the ultimate “safe haven” currency. It’s when we’re in a “Goldilocks” scenario, neither too hot nor too cold, that people sell USD and buy EUR. But this didn’t happen, at least not on Friday. I’m not sure why this was, unfortunately.
"Chinese markets reopened sharply lower after the Lunar New Year festival and were down sharply, with stocks off around 8% and the onshore CNY off by over 1% vs USD. Several futures contracts went limit down, such as iron ore, copper, crude oil and palm oil.
"The Chinese government acted quickly to calm the financial markets by injecting CNY 1.2tn through 7- and 14-day repos. This is a huge gross amount, but actually there’s more than CNY 1tn maturing today, so the net injetion is more like CNY 150bn, not so enormous. However it cut the cost of the funds by 10 bps. The move was successful in stopping the momentum and turning sentiment around. The “risk off” mood was passing as I write – USD/JPY and AUD/JPY were headed back up, while EUR/USD was headed down. I’m not sure how long this stability will last, however."
"The CoT report showed some big moves last week" says Gittler in a brief on Monday, February 3. "Specs added to short EUR and long DXY positions, which is what I would’ve expected during this crisis, thanks to the above “dollar smile” thesis.
Specs cut long CAD and GBP positions. With CAD, I think the combination of the Bank of Canada’s recent change of view plus the plunge in oil prices makes it likely that specs will gradually switch to net short, pushing the currency down further."
"I think there’s still more to go with GBP too. Frankly I can’t believe anyone’s long GBP, although I have to admit it’s been a winning trade since last August. Which just proves a statement attributed to Keyenes:  the market can remain irrational longer than you can remain solvent. Although in this case, I suppose the bottom for GBP/USD was discounting a “worst case scenario” of crashing out of the EU with no agreement and maybe J. Corbyn as Prime Minister, which ultimately did not happen."
Today is manufacturing day for exchange rates, as Germany, the UK, Eurozone, and the US release manufacturing PMIs.
Later in the evening, the RBA meets to make a decision on interest rates with a hold expected by economists.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Traded Forex for 6 years. Trading consultant for Private Sports Betting Fund out of Edinburgh. Background in...
