Adam Bogdan has completed a move to Hungarian champions Ferencváros following his Hibs exit.
The goalkeeper’s contract expired at the end of the season which has allowed him to return to his homeland, joining the country’s most successful team.
Ferencváros won their 31st title following the completion of the season in Hungary and will enter the Champions League first qualifying round.
Adam Bogdan has returned to Hungary to play in the top-flight. Picture: SNS
Sorry, there seem to be some issues. Please try again later.
Bogdan returns to play football in his country of birth for the first time since 2007, when he left Vasas for Bolton Wanderers.
After more than 140 games in England, the 32-year-old joined Hibs last season on loan and featured 25 times.
He was brought back to the club this past season, acting as back-up to Ofir Marciano but he didn’t feature under Jack Ross.
“I was sad to leave last summer and I’m sad to be leaving now,” Bogdan told the Evening News . “The circumstances are that they are not in a position to offer anything to the players who are out of contract, and I have to understand that, and move on.
“Because of the furlough and wage deferrals they don’t think it would be fair to offer contracts to players, so I think it’s a noble reason
“Of course, I’m going to miss the team, my team-mates and the city as well. I kind of knew with the talks we were having, I had the feeling that they were not going to be in a position to offer me a contract.
“As much as it’s sad, it’s understandable. If you don’t have any income then you’re not really able to invest in the next two or three years with the contract length. If you understand the club’s philosophy on budget, you could see it coming.”
Bogdan has been back in Hungary since May and was training with a local side in the capital in Budapest, prior to signing for Ferencváros, who are managed by Ukrainian football legend Sergey Rebrov.
He faces a battle to win the No.1 spot at the club with the country's second choice Dénes Dibusz currently occupying the starting spot, while former Hibs goalkeeper David Grof is also at the club.
