Keynote Address by Vitor Gaspar, Director, Fiscal Affairs Department
Workshop on “Fiscal Rules in Europe: Design and Enforcement”
the Future of Fiscal Rules in the euro area. I want to thank the organizers
and, in particular, Lucio Pench for the opportunity.
Our views are public. For example, in his September 2018 speech , Poul Thomsen, the director of the European Department, has used a
in the absence of risk reduction.
Completion of the banking union. Some important progress has been made, including the creation of a single
supervisor and a single resolution mechanism. But the banking union also
requires a European Deposit Insurance Scheme.
Integrated single European capital market. This is crucial for making the financial system in Europe more resilient.
simplified and harmonized withholding tax rules.
ability to deploy fiscal policy, complementing monetary policy, in case of
significant euro area-wide downside dynamics. It would also help countries
stabilize their economies in downturns.
Progress on these reforms is essential but has been too slow. And there is
no political agreement on the way forward.
European integration and the euro reflect political priorities. The
completion of the euro area reform agenda depends on the European politics.
The solution will likely go well beyond economics and finance.
My talk is organized as follows:
First, I will focus on the original rationale for having fiscal rules.
thirty years and identify some open issues.
Third, I will present some policy options.
I may slip and occasionally use Europe or European Union in a loose way. [i]
Why Fiscal Rules in the Euro Area?
conducted according to day-to-day politics. The most relevant are deficit
on an increasing path one business cycle to the next. Such half-century
increases in public debt are unprecedent in peace time.
policy frameworks in fundamental ways. New Zealand provides an early and
Act in 1989. That was the year when the Delors Report was adopted.
responsible for delivering price stability. Sometimes employment or
economic activity were on par with price stability. But, in any case, by
keep output close to potential. Monetary policy would achieve such goals by
systematically deciding on policy interest rates. In this it followed an
did expansionary discretionary fiscal policy offer any promise.
What about the euro area? In my view, at the time, the case for fiscal
fiscal profligacy would be muted in the large European market. At the same
market turbulence and financial instability. Lamfalussy (in the Delors
Report) argued that market discipline alone would not suffice. Rules were
rules would have the form of upper limits. That was the vision that shaped
“no bail-out” of sovereigns and the prohibition of monetary financing.
and monetary issues when the Delors Report had just come out in 1989. I
basis for the forthcoming negotiations or “the” basis. “A” won. I was then
involved in the Maastricht negotiations representing my country, Portugal.
Later, I became chairman of the alternates of the Monetary Committee. In
that context, we helped prepare many important pieces of legislation,
including the first version of the Stability and Growth Pact. In 1989, I
joined the European Central Bank (ECB) SDG research. I was involved in the
setting up of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy (see, Issing and others,
2001) and in the first review of the strategy, in 2003. In 2009, at the
leading its Bureau of European Policy Advisers. I edited the book, the Euro
the first decade in collaboration with Servaas de Roose, Marco Buti and
doubt that I am old let me move on.
Over time, the fiscal rules in Europe have become more complex and opaque.
The evolution process followed a long and winding road. Changes to the
original setup of the fiscal framework were frequent and substantial.
rules with the Cathedral of Seville. But I believe the complexity of the
another building also in Andaluzia, Spain: Mosque-Cathedral of Cordoba. It
follow I benefited from careful reading of the contribution by Blanchard,
included in the Delors Report. The main contribution was a paper, submitted
Bank for International Settlements (BIS)). The title: Macro-coordination of
It made two fundamental points: first, given the insignificant size of the
rely on the coordination of national budgetary policies. Second,
disciplinary influence. But they are not sufficient: “The constraints
Lamfalussy’s analysis proved problematic in actual practice. In the slide
in the period from 1999 to 2007. And quite sudden and disruptive in the
period of the sovereign debt crises in the euro area. The rules did not
prevent the market turmoil that they were designed to avoid.
Despite the governance reforms implemented over 2005–13, such as increased
supported by revisions in national legislation, compliance track record
with fiscal rules has been very poor.
Here we follow Eyraud et al, 2017. The idea is simply to compare fiscal
exceeding the MTOs in every single year. Compliance worsened during the
crisis: in 2009, the MTO rule was violated by 90 percent of countries, the
debt ceiling by 50 percent of countries, the deficit ceiling by 85 percent
of countries, and the required fiscal effort by 75 percent of countries. In
compliance was weak execution of plans. Given that the EC has not applied
any fines or sanctions, this is also a sign of weak enforcement. Although
percent threshold set out by the rules in each of the projected years,
execution slippages more than offset these plans, leading to a median
I summarize Edward Prescott’s intuition about commitment through rules as:
rules; second, societies have to find a way to stick to these rules. The
compliance suggests that we are far off Prescott’s standard.
European fiscal rules did have effects. They may not have worked as
intended but – still – they did affect policy-making. That is clear in the
process leading to the start of the euro area. But here I want to quote an
stabilizers or even discretionary expansionary policy. In other words,
fiscal rules should be designed to favor counter-cyclical fiscal policies.
features of the rules, the outcomes have been mainly pro-cyclical.
countries most of the time. The right-hand-side chart (slide 10) shows most
contribution from Barry Eichengreen and Kevin O’Rourke to VoxEU. The
Depression in 1929 and the start of the Global Financial crisis in 2008. It
That remind us of the words of Alvin Hansen, in his Presidential Address,
delivered to the American Economic Association, in December 1938: “This is
there is excess of savings over investment.
In addition, economic performance within the Euro area was very uneven.
contrasting real per capita GDP growth in Germany and Italy. Over the last
twenty years Germany experienced a very strong real per capita GDP growth,
level as twenty years ago.
onset of the global financial crisis.
Germany is the issuer of the reference safe assets in the euro area.
Surprisingly, over the last twenty years, the average structural primary
surplus in Italy was 1½ percent of potential GDP, against 0.9 percent for
debt. In contrast, in Germany debt is quickly declining.
24 percentage points of GDP. Low growth and high cost of debt are primary
as evidenced by significant swings in sovereign bond yields. Interest
thanks to record-low and negative interest rates.
requires deep transformation towards green and digital economy and society.
This requires higher public investment, more extensive synergies with
that facilitate change and transformation.
For example, the outline of a EU’s Green Deal, presented by the Commission
carbon neutrality by 2050 in a sustainable growth framework. It is clear
The IMF database on public sector balance sheets shows that the general government net worth has, on average, worsened in
moved – roughly - from positive 20 percent of GDP, in 2000, to negative 20
percent of GDP, in 2016. As the right-hand-side chart (slide 15) shows,
European countries have relatively low level of public sector net worth.
Targeting public sector net worth is used in New Zealand. The similar
beyond the traditional debt and deficits. Policymakers need to understand
preferences in favor of the elderly. This makes reforming programs such as
stemming from age-related spending will increase in the decades to come.
discuss the implications from macroeconomic changes. For example, low
interest rates make the situation even more challenging. The present value
of future cash-flow commitments increases. Pre-funding pension obligations
fourth ECB biennial conference on fiscal policy and EMU governance. His
presentation was on the future of fiscal policy. Any prudent fiscal
negative interest rates on bonds would be common in thirty years’ time.
onset of the fiat money regime, inflation increased in most countries. The
period became known as the Great Inflation. That was followed by an active,
successful disinflation – with Paul Volcker as Fed Chairman - from 1979.
Eventually, inflation entered an enduring declining path globally. As a
result, nominal interest rates have fallen significantly. Even if we take a
been this negative before. This is true for all major advanced economies,
including the euro area countries.
interest rates so low including relative to growth rates, “the issuance of
debt without a later increase in taxes, may well be feasible.” The purpose
discussion of debt policy and appropriate debt rules.
In doing so we are following John Hicks. In a little known paper, The Classics Again, he explains that under Wicksell’s policy
interest rule approach the LM curve is horizontal in the (Y,i) space. He,
the LM curve is horizontal, not by policy choice, but because circumstances
are so that policy is constrained. As this happens, we move from Wicksell
associated with the prospect of low interest rates for long has been, in
recent months, explored by Olivier Blanchard (Blanchard, 2019a and 2019b;
unusual regarding the interest rate-growth differential. If we take a
negative for most advanced economies, for most time. The current period
on monetary policy rather than on interest rate-growth differential.
policy? The conventional view originates with Knut Wicksell. He showed
stability is limited. The role of fiscal policy is, therefore, reinforced.
jobs to complete the euro area architecture, along with completing the
banking union and capital markets union.
I may just repeat what I said at the beginning. There are three fundamental
priorities to consider in the architecture of the euro area:
Completion of the banking union . Some important progress has been made, including the creation of a single
supervisor and a single resolution mechanism. But the banking union also
requires a European Deposit Insurance Scheme.
Integrated single European capital market . This is crucial for making the financial system in Europe more resilient.
simplified and harmonized withholding tax rules.
ability to deploy fiscal policy, complementing monetary policy, in case of
significant euro area-wide downside dynamics. It would also help countries
stabilize their economies in downturns.
serve the dual objective of fiscal sustainability and simplicity. An option
growth rule as the operational target, with a debt correction mechanism to
better link the rule to the anchor. Tying real expenditure growth to the
important predictor of crises, showing strong nonlinearities (Moreno Badia,
prior to sovereign defaults than in normal times (Mauro and Zhou, 2019).
necessarily imply more fiscal policy space. This is clear from debt’s
related. If both growth and interest rates decline by the same magnitude,
the effect on public debt is zero. The headline deficit should fall in line
simplicity, although they can be sensitive to initial conditions. An
mechanisms to deliver the debt anchor.
There is room for progress. The first comprehensive estimate of public
assets in the European Union was only released in November 2018, by the
shortcomings in many countries (Gaspar, Gonguet and Stone, forthcoming).
dynamics suggests the reinforced public expertise in public finances. The
role of fiscal councils could be made commensurate to these challenges. In
responsibility to produce the macroeconomic forecasts grounding the budget,
and also the costing of fiscal policy measures.
According to this logic, fiscal councils could be made fully independent.
placed at the center of a system of independent national fiscal councils.
transformation associated with the green and digital transitions.
Based on the survey that the IMF conducted in 2016, fiscal councils in the
euro area differ in terms of the extent of their independence. Also, most
The slide (24) is not fully up-to-date, there have been changes in the most
does deal with the long-term sustainability issues. Similar, the remit of
The euro area architecture requires the completion of banking union,
capital markets union and a central fiscal capacity.
The review of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy is timely.
single debt anchor and a single operational (nominal) spending target.
- better information based on accrual accounting and the PSBS approach;
an independent European Fiscal Council, at its center.
Auerbach, A., 2019, “The future of fiscal policy”, Keynote Address, Fourth
for a Fiscal Union in the Euro Area.” Departmental Paper, IMF Research
Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy after the Great Recession”, MIT Press,
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 19-27
Buti, M., 2020, “Economic Policy in the Rough: A European Journey”, Center
for Economic Policy Research Policy Insight #98.
cyclical fiscal policy in EMU.
Euro Area: A Simulation Exercise”, CEB Working Paper 17/025, Centre Emile
Bernheim, Solvay Brussels School of Economics and Management, Brussels
Fiscal Criterion and Government Deficits”, IMF Working Paper No. 18/182
CEPR, 2018, “Reconciling risk sharing with market discipline: A
constructive approach to euro area reform”, Policy Insight no 91.
Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
Root causes of its complexity”, Vox EU, CEPR Policy Portal, 14 September.
the Need for Fiscal Discipline in a Monetary Union”, ECB Working Paper No.
Enforceability,” IMF Staff Discussion Note 18/04.
Governance in Europe,” IMF Working Paper 15/67.
Gaspar, V., and D. Amaglobeli, 2019, “Fiscal Rules”, SUERF Policy Note,
IMF, 2014, “Fiscal Governance in the Euro Area: Progress and Challenges,”
IMF, 2018, “Managing Public Wealth”, Fiscal Monitor, October 2018.
Mauro, P. and J. Zhou, 2019, “r − g < 0: Can We Sleep More Soundly?”,
draft paper presented at the 20th Annual Research Conference, November 7-8,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 11898.
assistance support. We are grateful to Nathaniel Arnold, Bergljot
bank governors and other members. The Delor’s report suggested the
the monetary and economic unification process to develop. The three
currencies, the establishment of the free movement of capital,
irrevocably fixed exchange rates between European currencies and,
finally, the adoption of a single currency.
Treaty on 7 February 1992 – Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany,
and the United Kingdom. The treaty established the European Union;
laid the foundations for the Euro; introduced the criteria that
deficit figure of 3% of GDP.
assess the underlying fiscal policy effort. Estimates of the
of the Stability and Growth Pact.
architecture was approved by the Member States on 7 September 2010.
their budgetary and economic policies, in line with both the
Stability and Growth Pact and the Europe 2020 strategy.
into force on the 13th December 2011, with a new set of rules for
have a balanced budget rule in domestic legal orders.
strengthening of the link between structural reforms, investment
and fiscal responsibility in support of jobs and growth.
transition from the ESA95 to the ESA2010 fiscal reporting formats;
second, targets are assumed to be similar across countries, cover
the whole period, and be constant over time; third, the assessment
clauses or other provisions granting some flexibility; fourth, the
comparison is carried out for all 19 EA countries, comprising those
that introduced the euro after 1999; and fifth, numerical
given that the EC also exerts economic judgment, on top of its
quantitative assessment, in both preventive and corrective arms.
[iv] In the United Kingdom, Richard Hughes and others recently proposed
