The British pound (GBP) is higher against the euro (EUR) on Monday.
GBP/EUR was lower by 12 pips (+0.10%) to 1.1106 as of 3pm GMT.
A dip below 1.11 in early trading stalled out and the currency pair rallied over 100 pips to retake the 1.12 barrier. Last week GBP/EUR exchange rate dropped -0.39%.
The British pound managed to squeeze out some solid gains on Monday after the UK got the better of Germany in May manufacturing performance relative to estimates. The UK Final May manufacturing PMI came in a 40.7, up slightly from the initial estimate of 40.6.
Actually the story is similar in the UK and Europe with May marking a significant improvement in manufacturing activity from April’s record decline. However, the improvement is largely ‘base effects’ because April was so bad. Some of the most important data will arrive in June when lockdown restrictions are eased more significantly.
The easing of many UK restrictions saw some English schools reopen on Monday and traders were optimistic despite concern from some health officials that the rate of transmission (the R-rate) remains dangerously close to 1.
The disappointing data out of Germany held back a multi-day rally in the euro that has carried it to two-month highs over the pound. While data from France, Spain and Italy came ahead of expectations, it was Europe’s manufacturing powerhouse Germany that missed estimates. German May manufacturing PMI slipped to 36.6 from 36.8 initially estimated. Given the weight of Germany’s economy in Europe, the miss dragged down the figure for the entire Eurozone, which fell to 39.4 from 39.5.
Commenting on the possible economic implications of its own data, Markit noted: “While we are still set to see unprecedented falls in industrial production and GDP in the second quarter, the survey brings hope that the goods-producing sector may at least see some stabilisation – and even potentially a return to growth – in the third quarter.
Currencylive.com is a news site only and not a currency trading platform.
Currencylive.com is a site operated by TransferWise Inc. ("We", "Us"), a Delaware Corporation. We do not guarantee that the website will operate in an uninterrupted or error-free manner or is free of viruses or other harmful components. The content on our site is provided for general information only and is not intended as an exhaustive treatment of its subject. We expressly disclaim any contractual or fiduciary relationship with you on the basis of the content of our site, any you may not rely thereon for any purpose. You should consult with qualified professionals or specialists before taking, or refraining from, any action on the basis of the content on our site. Although we make reasonable efforts to update the information on our site, we make no representations, warranties or guarantees, whether express or implied, that the content on our site is accurate, complete or up to date, and DISCLAIM ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. Some of the content posted on this site has been commissioned by Us, but is the work of independent contractors. These contractors are not employees, workers, agents or partners of TransferWise and they do not hold themselves out as one. The information and content posted by these independent contractors have not been verified or approved by Us. The views expressed by these independent contractors on currencylive.com do not represent our views.
