Saxo Bank, a Danish investment bank, published its 10    "outrageous" predictions for 2020 on Tuesday.
The report doesn't reflect the firm's official market    forecasts for next year, but rather focuses on  "unlikely but    underappreciated events" driven by disruption.
The predictions range from macroeconomic forecasts to    major shifts in specific industries.
Here are Saxo Bank's 1o "outrageous" predictions for    2020.
Denmark-based Saxo Bank released its 10 "outrageous" predictions  for 2020 on Tuesday.
In the report, the firm bank breaks down "unlikely but  underappreciated events" that could shake the financial markets  next year.
"We see 2020 as a year where at nearly every turn, disruption of  the status quo is an overriding theme," Saxo Bank chief economist  Steen Jakobsen said in a statement. "The year could represent one  big pendulum swing to opposites in politics, monetary and fiscal  policy and, not least, the environment."
The events range from macroeconomic and country-specific  forecasts to major shifts in specific industries.
While the predictions don't reflect Saxo Bank's official market  forecasts for 2020, they represent a "warning of a potential  misallocation of risk," for investors that see a small chance of  the events materializing.
Here are Saxo Bank's 10 "outrageous" predictions for 2020:
According to Saxo Bank, the microchips powering the artificial  intelligence revolution could start to yield diminishing returns  in 2020.
"As reality sets in on the limitations of AI the SOX Index  collapses 50% with deteriorating earnings growth as investments  freeze in a new AI winter," the firm wrote.
Chipmakers' growth in recent years has come from investments in  everything from AI to cryptocurrency. But those gains could  sputter in 2020 as actual results fail to meet investor's  expectations, the bank added.
"The iShares MSCCI World Value Factor ETF leaves the FANGS in the  dust, outperforming them by 25%," Saxo Bank predicts.
With a growing deficit and low interest rates in the US, the  Federal Reserve could be forced to "super-size" its balance in  the next recession, the firm said.
Saxo Bank predicts that Christine Lagarde, the new European  Central Bank president, could decide to reverse the direction of  monetary policy in Europe.
"She points out that maintaining negative deposit interest rates  for a longer period could seriously harm the soundness of the  European banking sector," Saxo Bank wrote, referring to a  hypothetical scenario.
The firm added: "In order to force euro area governments, and  notably Germany, to step in and to use fiscal policy to stimulate  the economy, the ECB reverses its monetary policy and hikes rates  on January 23, 2020."
"The combined forces of lower prices and investors avoiding the  black energy sector have pushed the equity valuation on  traditional energy companies to a 23% discount to clean energy  companies," the firm said.
Saxo Bank added: "In 2020, we see the tables turning for the  investment outlook as OPEC extends production cuts, unprofitable  US shale outfits slow output growth and demand rises from Asia  once again. And not only will the oil and gas industry be a  surprising winner in 2020 - the clean energy industry will  simultaneously suffer a wake-up call."
Saxo Bank predicts the exchange rate between the South African  rand and the US dollar could rise from 15 rands per dollar to 20.
The South African government warned last year that the country's  financial position could worsen as it continues to bail out the  ESKOM, a struggling utility.
"The ESKOM fiasco may be the straw that will break the back of  creditors' willingness to continue funding a country that hasn't  had its financial or governance house in order for decades," the  bank said.
The fallout from the US-China trade war could push President  Trump to implement an "America First Tax" to balance the growing  trade deficit, Saxo Bank predicts.
"Under the terms of this tax, the US corporate tax schedule is  completely reconstructed to favour US-based production under the  claimed principles of "fair and free trade," the firm wrote.
Sweden is currently grappling with a growing group of Swedes that  are unhappy with the country's approach to immigration.
"A massive and pragmatic attitude shift washes over Sweden as it  gets to work to better integrate its immigrants and overstretched  social services, driving a huge fiscal stimulus and steep rally  in SEK," Saxo Bank predicts.
Democrats could win the presidency, while assuming control of  both houses of congress in 2020 thanks to high turnout from women  and millennials, Saxo Bank said.
"Millennials and even the oldest of "generation Z" in the US have  become intensely motivated by the injustices and inequality  driven by central bank asset market pumping and fears of climate  change, where President Trump is the ultimate lightning rod for  rebellion as a climate change denier," Saxo Bank wrote.
The swift victory could send big healthcare and pharma stocks  tanking as much as 50% on regulatory concerns, the firm added.
Hungary joined the European Union in 2004, but the country's  relationship with the bloc has splintered in recent years.
"The 15-year marriage now seems in trouble after the EU initiated  an Article 7 procedure against the country, citing Hungary's - or  really PM Orbán's - ever-tighter restrictions on free media,  judges, academics, minorities and rights groups," Saxo Bank said.
The two sides could find it challenging to reconcile their  differences next year, leading to Hungary exiting the bloc, the  firm added.
Saxo predicts Asia could launch a digital reserve currency in an  effort to alleviate its dependency on the US dollar.
"To confront a deepening trade rivalry and vulnerabilities from  rising US threats to weaponise the US dollar and its control of  global finances, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank creates  a new reserve asset called the Asian Drawing Right, or ADR, with  1 ADR equivalent to 2 US dollars, making the ADR the world's  largest currency unit," the firm wrote.
