Editorial & Advertiser Disclosure Global Banking And Finance Review is an independent publisher which offers News, information, Analysis, Opinion, Press Releases, Reviews, Research reports covering various economies, industries, products, services and companies. The content available on globalbankingandfinance.com is sourced by a mixture of different methods which is not limited to content produced and supplied by various staff writers, journalists, freelancers, individuals, organizations, companies, PR agencies Sponsored Posts etc. The information available on this website is purely for educational and informational purposes only. We cannot guarantee the accuracy or applicability of any of the information provided at globalbankingandfinance.com with respect to your individual or personal circumstances. Please seek professional advice from a qualified professional before making any financial decisions. Globalbankingandfinance.com also links to various third party websites and we cannot guarantee the accuracy or applicability of the information provided by third party websites. Links from various articles on our site to third party websites are a mixture of non-sponsored links and sponsored links. Only a very small fraction of the links which point to external websites are affiliate links. Some of the links which you may click on our website may link to various products and services from our partners who may compensate us if you buy a service or product or fill a form or install an app. This will not incur additional cost to you. A very few articles on our website are sponsored posts or paid advertorials. These are marked as sponsored posts at the bottom of each post. For avoidance of any doubts and to make it easier for you to differentiate sponsored or non-sponsored articles or links, you may consider all articles on our site or all links to external websites as sponsored . Please note that some of the services or products which we talk about carry a high level of risk and may not be suitable for everyone. These may be complex services or products and we request the readers to consider this purely from an educational standpoint. The information provided on this website is general in nature. Global Banking & Finance Review expressly disclaims any liability without any limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of such information.
How to make more money in less time.
Money is so important in not just the day-to-day, but grand scheme of our lives. It is then no wonder that so many young professionals and budding entrepreneurs burn the candle at both ends to the point of exhaustion. However, something realised too late by many in life is that time is really the most valuable commodity, more so than money. The passing of your time, whether measured in youth or interest rates, is a once only deal you cannot renegotiate. However, it is unshakeable that money is still a vital asset when building a life – so the trick is to make the most of your time, leveraging it, so you can earn more money in less time.
When offering a service or product, from online courses to organic pet food and everything in between, it can cause trepidation to charge a premium. It is a similar situation to asking for a raise at work; how easy it is to fall into a mindset of thinking we will be rejected, left broke, with people judging our audacity. However, since we have figured out that time is more valuable than money, it is not just appropriate, but essential to charge accordingly. Since humans have a tendency to undervalue themselves, it is very easy for them to start undercharging for their services. This is offset by asking a healthy premium for your valuable time and efforts. Imagine the alternative – too good of a deal and undercharging yourself makes you an active match for price shoppers who wring you dry and the sort of clients who will make your life hell. Working yourself to the bone for clients who do not appreciate your real value will begin a cycle of resentment with your inner voice consistently telling you ‘I should be getting paid more this!’ Resenting clients or customers for not paying enough when really it was you set the prices is a recipe for disaster isn’t it? Value yourself above that first figure that pops up and the rest, provided you are practiced and confident, will fall into place.
You have probably heard this phrase before and with good reason – there is always a sliver of truth to old adages and clichés. Creating content-based lead magnets to attract attention to your products sounds simple enough – give the people what they want right? However, refining this process will ensure you are not wasting your time on content that will fail to attract anyone or nurture your potential clients who do stop for it. The essential starting tip with this is to think about what platform your content is published on. A consumer who sees your product on Pinterest might be more interested in performing an action such as checking out your website or moving straight to buying, because Pinteresters have more intent to shop than say, Facebook users who are looking to catch up with the world around them. It’s the psychology, frame of mind and overall context surrounding people when they interact with these platforms. Respecting this phenomenon will diversify your content – (making it suitable for each platform!) and offer a little something extra to those who subscribe to you across the board – (your crucial diehard fans!)
Even established professionals take on projects and clients they shouldn’t sometimes. Similar to working with underpaying clients, excruciating deadlines and projects you just have zero passion for are not in the best interests of your business. Being overbooked, overworked and overstressed is the opposite of using your time effectively; so, give yourself a break by choosing the right clients to work with. It is crucial to remember when you are a business owner or freelancer ultimately you call the shots.
Things get tough when falling into a pattern or routine as a result of working with less than ideal clientele. Perhaps they ask for extra revisions here and there that you didn’t agree in the contract – and you comply a few times to be nice or for the sake of steady work or income. What was first a favour has now turned into an expectation and the cycle becomes difficult to break out of. As it is highly unlikely you will have the time and energy to spend on both your low paying, tedious to work with clients and your great ones who make workdays a joy – it is time to make a decision. Making sure to consistently reevaluate client lists ensures you will not only be correctly aligned financially but also this will keep your work-life balance in order, not to mention the wonders it will do for your stress levels.
This baseline strategy will help you streamline the relationship you have with your time and money, but it will also sharpen your self-awareness, another vital commodity for good business acumen. Do not feel guilty about dropping clients to achieve the healthy balance you need – you are running a business so aim for the lucrative clientele, the ideal clientele, the projects you feel passionately about. You will work less, earn more and overall be happier with the outcome.
