International Internet Magazine. Baltic States news & analytics Friday, 03.07.2020, 14:31
The European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) has mobilized 514 bn  euros in additional investment across the EU since July 2015 -- reaching its target half a year before the end of the initiative, the European Comission said.
European Union and own resources from the EIB Group. They are expected to
broaden the EFSI's scope and size, the goal was to mobilize 500 bn  euros by the end of 2020. The money was
outbreak, the focus of the EFSI shifted: it has inspired InvestEU, the
Commission's new investment program for the years 2021-2027, and already now it
contributes to the Corona Response Investment Initiative.
shock. It will do this via a top-up for a Solvency Support Instrument, which
aims to prevent insolvencies in European businesses.
"The Investment Plan for Europe is a success. Over the
riskier than its average investments.
Often, EFSI-backed projects are highly innovative,
undertaken by small companies without a credit history, or they pool smaller
infrastructure needs by sector and geography.
way Europe finances its priorities.
guarantee's backing, as well as to reach out to new clients: three out of four
receiving EFSI backing are new to the bank. This proves the added value of EFSI
in all EU countries. Examples range from sustainable agriculture in Belgium, to
innovative medical technology in Spain, to an energy efficiency company in
The impact of the initiative is sizable. Based on results
has increased EU GDP by 1.3% and it is set to increase EU GDP by 1.9% by 2022. As of the beginning of this year, 60 percent of the capital
raised came from private resources, meaning that EFSI has also met its
objective of mobilizing private investment.
is in countries that were hard hit by the 2007/8 crisis, that is Cyprus,
those countries, the calculations found that cohesion regions, mostly Eastern
European countries, are likely to benefit more from a long-term effect. These
calculations correspond with the actual financing activities under EFSI: top
countries ranked by EFSI-triggered investment relative to GDP are Bulgaria,
households can access high-speed broadband, around 540,000 social and
affordable housing units have been built or renovated, 22 mln Europeans
benefit from improved health care services, some 400 mln passenger trips
per year will benefit from new or improved transport infrastructure, 13.4
mln households were supplied with renewable energy.
