2020 Pound to Dollar Forecast: "The Scope for GBP/USD Downside is in Place" say Analysts
According to Commerzbank Antje Praefck; “The pound may still be in for a rocky ride as the UK embarks on lengthy and complex negotiations with the remaining 27 members states of the European Union following its departure from the bloc at the end of last month.
“The subjects are diverse, the positions far opposed and time in short supply. So anyone hoping that sterling could be out of the woods might be bitterly disappointed,”
According to Danske Bank; “We remain sceptical about any large-scale fiscal easing in the UK and still see scope for renewed Sterling weakness ahead, once “No-Deal Brexit” headlines come back into focus amid sluggish progress in EU-UK trade negotiations”.
In its latest commentary, Rabobank stated that; “The pound has held on to most of the gains that it made yesterday on the news that Chancellor Javid had resigned. The market’s collective conclusion is that will likely result in a greater amount of government spending.”
They added, however, that; “GBP will remain vulnerable to any signs of friction stemming from the talks between the EU and the UK on their future post Brexit arrangement. Consequently we continue to see GBP/USD as likely trading below the 1.30 level on a 1 and 3-month view.”
Other experts expressed doubts whether expectations of Sterling gains on the prospect of fiscal easing were justified.
Prof Costas Milas of the University of Liverpool's Management School commented that “it's an "extremely premature" rise that finds the currency "wrong-footed" by news of Sajid Javid’s resignation.
"Markets are rushing to value positively the prospect of looser fiscal policy which will, presumably, stimulate the economy. Unfortunately, currency celebrations are really premature," he says.
"What financial markets are missing is that Javid’s departure has to do with his refusal to allow sound economic policy to be dictated by non-economic experts and the political cycle.
Some technical analysts were more positive on the Sterling outlook. According to Richard Perry at Hantec Markets;
“The market has been in a multi-month downtrend for several months now. Having broken decisively below £0.8390 support yesterday, this now becomes overhead supply for a technical rally. Bearish configuration is confirmed across the hourly chart indicators and any intraday rebound that pulls the hourly RSI towards 50 looks like an opportunity to sell. Below £0.8275 is pretty open towards £0.8100/£0.8115.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Tim is an economist and has been involved in financial markets for over 20 years as an analyst. He...
