the Lebanese side on a common approach for calculating losses,
Finance Minister Ghazi Wazni said.
the Lebanese side on a common approach for calculating losses,
investors from taking on excessive risk.
Morning News Call - India, July 3
To access a PDF version of this newsletter, please click here http://share.thomsonreuters.com/assets/newsletters/Indiamorning/MNC_IN_07032020.pdf
    If you would like to receive this newsletter via email, please register at:
CEO C.H.S.S. Mallikarjuna Rao at FICCI’s webinar.
of Bharat Bond Series II.
    • Apple supplier Foxconn, others hit as India holds up imports from
at plants owned by Apple supplier Foxconn in southern India, three sources told
its discriminatory actions against Chinese companies immediately, after India
banned Chinese mobile apps amid a border crisis between the two countries.
    Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has deleted his account on Sina Weibo,
China's answer to Twitter, an Indian government source and the company said, as
tensions between the two countries continue to simmer over a border skirmish.
    • World's e-waste "unsustainable", says UN report citing China, India and
    Across the river from Delhi's Red Fort, the grim neighbourhood of Seelampur
obsolete electronic and electrical goods. Home to one of the world's largest
U.N.-led report released on Thursday.
    • Indian police allege fraud by GVK chairman, others at Mumbai airport
    • India's June gold imports plunge on record price, lockdown
a nationwide lockdown to curb the spread of coronavirus, a government source
in deaths not attributed to the outbreak, according to official data and burial
records, highlighting how the pandemic has affected general healthcare.
checks in the middle of the month, and a resurgence in COVID-19 cases suggested
the labor market could suffer a setback in July.
demand, a private survey showed on Friday, though companies continued to shed
    • U.S. coronavirus cases hit new global record, rising over 55,000 in single
    The United States reported more than 55,000 new COVID-19 cases on Thursday,
the largest daily increase any country has ever reported, according to a Reuters
    • SGX Nifty nearest-month futures were 0.4% higher at 10,596.00.
    • The Indian rupee is expected to strengthen further against the U.S.
    • Indian government bond yields are likely to edge higher in early trade,
ahead of a fresh supply of notes at a weekly debt auction today. The yield on
5.82%-5.88% until the auction today.
record surge in payrolls, which provided assurance that the U.S. economic
recovery was well under way.
    • Asian shares rallied to a four-month high on robust U.S. payrolls data and
cases in the United States kept a lid on further risk-taking.
    • The dollar was hemmed into a narrow range, supported by safe-haven flows
investors from taking on excessive risk.
June jobs data, slipped later in the session ahead of a long holiday weekend,
United States, the world's largest oil consumer, dimmed the prospects of fuel
    • Gold was flat, trading in a narrow $4 range, as worries over surging
States and China overshadowed strong U.S. jobs data.
    (FII investment numbers are in Indian rupees. Source: National Securities
