Royal travel: Will British taxpayers still pay for Harry & Meghan?
For those looking to save money, making sure you jet off on the right day can make all the difference to holiday costs.
Data from Skyscanner has revealed that while Sunday used to be the most expensive day to travel, Tuesday now takes the crown for the day of the week boasting the priciest tickets.
Meanwhile, it seems Friday is the departure date to go for if holidaymakers want to cut costs.
Skyscanner found that travellers who switched their travel date from a Tuesday to a Friday could save as much as 11 percent.
Pound euro exchange rate: Britons should use a travel card that doesn’t come with hidden charges (Image: Getty Images)
Holidays 2020: Where is best to go in January? Top holiday destination
Another way to keep on top of the pounds and pennies to make sure you’re spending in the right way when abroad.
Travel money provider WeSwap has urged Britons to ensure they are getting the best rates for their money as well as using a travel card that doesn’t come with hidden charges such as ATM fees and transaction fees.
With UK debit cards deducting up to around 3 percent in non-sterling transaction fees, in addition to 2 percent overseas ATM fee based on the amount you take out, once totalled up, we’re charged at a conservative estimate a colossal £125,000,000 in ATM fees abroad.
By researching travel cards, holidaymakers can travel safe in the knowledge that purchasing travel insurance will not take them over their budgets.
Pound euro exchange rate: January will be the most popular month for people to book holidays (Image: Getty Images)
As for how the euro is faring in the current political climate, George Vessey - Currency Strategist at Western Union said: "As geopolitical tensions ease, attention shifts back to fundamentals.
"A slew of German data has been released this morning, namely industrial production, which posted its largest increase in 1-½ years in November."
Vessey added: "Overall sentiment on the Euro is still weak though given the economic downturn in the Eurozone over the past year or so. Monetary policy will be a key focus this year given the dovish shift witnessed last year.
