Brexit passport rules: What happens to my passport after Brexit?
“Today, the UK calendar sees no major data releases, hence sterling will likely tread water ahead of tomorrow’s all-important, knife-edge policy decision.”
Brexit, too, remains a source of uncertainty and has jumped back to the forefront of investors’ minds with Friday’s due date nearing.
Jeremy Stretch, CIBC Capital Markets’ head of G10 currency strategy said: “It’s been a case that Brexit issues have been off the agenda for a while, but there are now some signs of friction between the two sides as negotiations are gearing up, and that might be a source of consternation.”
So what does this mean for your holidays and travel money?
Pound euro exchange rate: "Nearly half of Brits buy all their travel money in one sitting” (Image: Getty Images)
The Post Office is currently offering an exchange rate of €1.1397 for over £400 and €1.1622 for over £1,000?
With Brexit looming, is it best to buy your holiday money as soon as possible?
Rob Stross, CMO of WeSwap, commented: "There are lots of factors at play at the moment and it is near impossible to predict exactly how Brexit and upcoming political events will impact our everyday lives and our freedom to travel to all corners of the globe.
"For those who are still planning on booking last minute winter breaks, it is best to prepare as early as possible for any possible outcome. From travel insurance, checking passports to buying foreign currency, preparing these as early as possible is more likely to mitigate risk.
"As for holidaymakers looking to get travel money, it may be more difficult to plan when to buy currency, and also more challenging to predict the value of the pound in the upcoming months. In light of this uncertainty, it is always best to exchange money as early as possible.
Pound euro exchange rate: "Exchange half your holiday money now and half closer to when you go" (Image: Getty Images)
"Last minute travel money purchases, in locations such as at airport bureaux, are always likely to lead to less bang for your buck as merchants are able to offer whatever exchange rate they like, knowing holidaymakers have no choice but to accept.
"As for those who are concerned about the possibility of the pound’s value falling further due to current political events, it may be best to buy half of your holiday money today and a half later. That way, you can assure that you avoid paying higher rates on all of your cash.”
As for Brexit and travel in general, travel association ABTA has revealed that Brexit will not affect trips to the continent.
The UK is now on track to enter a transition period at the end of the month.
Consequently, post-Brexit valid passports can still be used as normal, cost of making calls, using the internet and sending texts will remain the same, and coaches and trains from the UK to the continent will be unaffected. This means that all travel requirements and arrangements will remain the same until at least the end of December 2020.
