Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Fill out this field Email address is invalid You already have an account. Please log in .
I would like to receive lunchtime headlines Monday - Friday plus breaking news alerts, by email
The pound struggled against the Euro in Friday and over the weekend ahead of crucial post-Brexit trade talks that took place today.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson held discussions with European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen via video link on Monday afternoon amid mounting concerns negotiations over the UK and EU's future relationship are at a stalemate.
The UK officially left the EU on January 31 at 11pm and is currently in a so-called transition period, scheduled to last until the end of 2020, during which both sides negotiate the nature of their future relationship.
On Monday, Mr Johnson and Ms von der Leyen said they would "work hard" to agree on the terms of that relationship and ratify a trade deal before the end of this year after the UK ruled out extending the transition period.
The two sides have also now agreed to intensify talks in July after previously admitting that no major progress has been made towards a deal following four rounds of negotiations already this year.
Here is how the currency markets have responded to the turbulence:
What is the GBP to EUR exchange rate currently?
At the time of writing on June 15, £1 is equivalent to €1.1135, according to Bloomberg.
It is hard to predict how the exchange rate will fare in the coming months and once the transition period expires as the global markets are an ever-changing force and there is currently scant certainty over whether the EU and UK will strike a trade deal before then.
Michael Brown, currency expert at Caxton FX , suggested the market had been keenly awaiting the talks between London and Brussels.
"Sterling traded within a tight range against the euro on Friday, treading water for most of the day, as market participants awaited today’s high-level conference call between UK and EU leaders aimed at kickstarting the presently stalled post-Brexit trade talks," Mr Brown told the Daily Express.
“No-deal risk does not yet appear priced into GBP, hence indications that a deal is some way away should exert pressure on sterling.”
Global markets are already in turmoil amid the uncertainty and disruption unleashed by the ongoing coronavirus outbreak.
Forecasting website PoundSterlingLive reported on Monday that Sterling was trading under pressure against the Euro and the US Dollar, but was higher against the Australian Dollar and New Zealand Dollar.
"The Pound remains heavily influenced by the broader picture concerning stock markets and commodity prices, therefore should further anxieties over Covid-19 emerge we would expect the UK currency to experience further declines in value," the forecasting website suggested.
