Coronavirus in Turkey: Is it safe to travel to Turkey?
“I should emphasise this decision is being taken based on the domestic measures being introduced into the UK alongside the border and a range of other restrictions which are being taken by countries right around the world. "The speed and the range of these measures across other countries is unprecedented some of those decisions are being made without notice.
“In some countries or particularly cases where there haven’t yet been any reported cases of COVID-19 local authorities are nonetheless imposing restrictions on movement, and again doing so with little or sometimes no notice whatsoever. In light of those circumstances, we want to reduce the risk of leaving vulnerable British travellers or tourists stranded overseas.”
The travel industry has taken a massive hit as a result, and many are anticipating financial struggles.
Jack Sheldon, Founder of Jack’s Flight Club, an email newsletter and mobile alert system for flight deals, shared his insight into what will happen to the future of the industry. He said: "I think many airlines, cruise companies and other cost-heavy companies will require government bailouts in order to survive.
Pound to euro exchange rate: The pound is suffering as the economy feels the effects of coronavirus panic (Image: Getty Images)
How will travel industry recover from coronavirus outbreak?
“If this lasts for more than a couple of months, we expect there will be layoffs within the industry, though we expect once this crisis is over there will be a large build-up of travellers looking to make up for lost time and those companies which survive will stand to benefit."
How will all of the turbulence affect Britons who need to switch currency back into pounds?
As you may imagine, it won't be the best time to switch money back, but with uncertainty about how long Britons must stay at home for and worries around the job market, it may be the only option.
Ian Strafford-Taylor, CEO of international travel money specialist Equals (formerly known as FairFX) explained: "The global pandemic of the coronavirus along with the government's response and the market's reaction has left the pound incredibly vulnerable."
"Combined with travel bans, country lockdowns and mass flight cancellations, holidaymakers are struggling to know which way to turn.
"People who have had to postpone their holiday or had their trip cancelled, could hold onto their travel money until they are able to rebook, or if it’s loaded onto a prepaid card, they could use it while on home soil.
Pound to euro exchange rate: A map of currencies in Europe (Image: DX)
"It’s a very uncertain time for the pound, so if you do need to change your travel money back into pounds, you should shop around to find the best buy-back rate.”
The Post Office is still offering currency exchanges.
It is offering €1.0446 for amounts of £400 or more, or €1.0654 for amounts of £1,000 or more.
A Post Office Travel Money spokesperson said: “January and February had been strong trading months for our Travel Money services.
"However, since then customers have understandably put their travel plans on hold for the foreseeable future. We are maintaining our stock of Travel Money across our branch network to ensure that our customers can continue to rely on us for their travel needs in readiness for an uplift as things improve.
“Any holidaymakers who are booked to travel can claim a full refund on foreign currency purchased with the Post Office if their holiday is cancelled. Customers need to submit both their currency purchase and sell receipts and evidence their holiday was cancelled to qualify. Loading currency onto our Travel Money Card is another way to safeguard cash as this can be held over for future travel.”
