Tata Steel has plunged deeper into the red as coronavirus cuts demand for its products, with tough lockdown conditions in India further threatening production in the company’s home nation, my colleague Alan Tovey writes.
In the quarter to the end of March, the business reported revenues down by a fifth to 337.7bn rupees (£3.6bn), taking it to a 15bn rupee pre-tax loss – three times the size of the loss for the previous quarter.
Over the full year, sales fell 11pc to 1.4 trillion rupees, resulting in a 2.3bn rupee loss, compared with a 159bn rupee profit the year before.
The company’s dive into the red was bigger than analysts had been expecting and came as Tata Steel reeled from the harsh lockdown in its home nation, which limited travel conditions on the country’s 1.3bn population and which is only slowly being eased.
It’s time for me to hand over to my colleague LaToya Harding, who will steer the blog into the evening. Thanks for following along today!
As we head towards the close, European equities have gained some momentum, with the continent’s top indices all solidly in the green – and performing in line with Wall Street.
Most of the sites set to close will be Frankie and Benny’s Credit: Handout
Frankie & Benny’s owner The Restaurant Group has been given the green light to push ahead with plans to close 125 sites within its struggling leisure arm.
My colleague Hannah Uttley reports:
At a meeting today 82pc of landlords voted in favour of the company’s plans to carry out a company voluntary arrangement, while 65pc of other creditors backed the proposals.
It will pave the way for TRG to implement a major overhaul of its operations and shut 125 restaurants, while obtaining rental reductions and revised lease terms on 85 others. The restructuring deal is expected to leave the group's leisure business with around 160 sites, most of which will be Frankie & Benny’s.
Creditors have 28 days to file a challenge to the CVA in court.
My colleagues Ed Clowes and Simon Foy have a full report on BP’s $5bn sale of its petrochemical division to Ineos. They write:
Chief executive Bernard Looney said the disposal was a significant step in the company's reinvention and meant it would meet its divestment targets a year ahead of schedule while strengthening its balance sheet.
The division includes two main businesses, aromatics and acetyls, across 14 plants in Asia, Europe and the US that produced almost 10m tonnes of petrochemicals last year.
The deal is expected to be completed by the end of the year, subject to regulatory and other approvals.
Pending home sales in the US jumped last month, returning almost to their pre-pandemic levels. Sales jumped 44.2pc month-on-month, leaving them still down 10.4pc on the year, according figures from national Association of Realtors.
This has been a spectacular recovery for contract signings, and goes to show the resiliency of American consumers and their evergreen desire for homeownership. This bounce back also speaks to how the housing sector could lead the way for a broader economic recovery.
The Dow Jones and S&P 500 have opened in positive territory after last week’s rout.
Synthesizer makers Roland and Korg have been fined £5.5m by the competition watchdog for price fixing.
My colleague Laura Onita reports:
The penalty follows an earlier Competition and Markets Authority fine for two other instrument makes, Casio and Fender, for rigging the market to make it more difficult for shoppers to find deals online.
All four companies have been accused of fixing prices illegally by preventing online discounts on their products.
They demanded a minimum sales price from vendors, known as resale price maintenance, which meant customers were less able to shop around for a better deal, according to the watchdog.
The latest fine in the sector brings the total imposed by the CMA to £13.7m.
Michael Grenfell of the CMA said more shoppers had been buying a musical instrument in lockdown, with 40pc of sales made online even before the pandemic struck.
“It’s important that manufacturers and retailers do not illegally work together to keep prices high,” he said.
Sterling is also falling against the euro today, dropping below €1.10 to touch its lowest level in three months as investors prepare for Britain’s infrastructure spending plans to be unveiled.
Rabobank’s Jane Foley told Reuters:
The pound earlier today, certainly in Asian hours, looked as it had a little bit of a boost on the back of the perception that we will have potentially strong growth on the back of that (infrastructure spending), but I think that back in European hours, the market is now a little bit more concerned about funding.
Barratt Developments, one of the UK’s biggest housebuilders, has announced a string of new enviromental targets, including an ambition to hit net zero emissions by 2040.
In a statement , the group said:
By 2040 Barratt will become a net zero emissions business covering all of its direct operations. Earlier this year it became the first national housebuilder to publish science-based targets for reducing carbon emissions, and the new net zero goal extends this sustainability roadmap further as it works across the industry to combat climate change.
Identifying and implementing what is needed to achieve these reductions will be an ongoing process across the entire Barratt business. For instance, reducing diesel use will involve new technology such as solar assisted generators, whilst driving down plant emissions on site and improving the energy credentials of its buildings will all help Barratt to achieve the 2040 net zero target.
Byron employs 1,200 staff Credit: Carl Court/Getty Images
Burger chain Byron is set to fall into administration as it seeks a buyer to stave off a collapse.
My colleague Hannah Uttley reports:
The company has filed a notice of intention to file administrators in a bid to prevent it from being pursued by creditors while it holds talks with potential buyers, Sky News reported.
Byron, which employs 1,200 staff, is the latest casual dining chain to fall on hard times during the coronavirus pandemic after struggling to obtain financial support through the Treasury’s emergency loan support.
Chains including Carluccio’s and Chiquito have already gone bust, while others such as Prezzo, Wahaca and Wasabi have hired advisers to explore ways of propping up their businesses.
Inflation in Germany jumped more than expected in June, with higher prices for services providers driving up costs for consumers.
EU-harmonised prices climbed 0.7pc month-on-month, putting them 0.8pc high month-on-month, with state-level data showing increasing costs at hairdressers and beauty salons, as well as in the restaurants and cafes.
Drinks-maker Britvic says it “will be pausing all paid and organic advertising on Facebook and Instagram for the month of July” to support the #StopHateForProfit campaign, which is calling for Facebook Inc. to take stronger actions against disinformation and harmful content.
It follows similar moves by giants such as Unilever, Starbucks and Coca-Cola.
