Pound to euro exchange rate after Brexit: how the UK leaving the EU tonight will affect the price of travel money
This is everything to know about the pound-euro exchange rate after Brexit, and when you should get your euros
If you’re heading abroad to Europe after Brexit , is it best to buy your euros now or after 31 January 2020?
Here’s everything you need to know as the Brexit deadline looms.
The pound to euro exchange rate has fluctuated over the past few days, soaring to a year-to-date high on Wednesday 22 January 2020, but then dropping back down on Thursday 23 January.
Sorry, there was a problem with your subscription.
Flash January Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) surveys released on Friday 24 January are expected to set the tone for the Bank of England’s policy decision next week.
Many people are watching and waiting to see if the exchange rate will fluctuate both after the recent election – named the ‘Boris Bounce’ – and after Brexit.
At the time of writing, 1 GBP is equal to 1.19 Euro, according to foreign exchange company Xe.com.
Will the exchange rate fall after Brexit?
It is currently unknown if the exchange rate is set to rise or fall after Brexit.
Ian Strafford-Taylor, CEO of international money specialist Equals, told the Daily Express , “Today marks the one week countdown to Brexit and although the pound has made marginal gains against the euro compared to this time last week, there’s no guarantee these improvements will continue after the 31 January.
“This time next week we will be entering uncharted territory for the pound which puts it in a vulnerable position and makes it difficult to predict exactly what will happen.
It usually takes three weeks if you need to renew your passport, but there is a premium service if you need it sooner (Photo: Shutterstock)
How else will Brexit impact travel to Europe?
Current rules state that valid passports can still be used after Brexit, but must be valid for the entire duration of your trip. You do not need to have six months left on your passport to travel to the EU.
In addition to this, UK travellers will not need a visa to travel to the EU after Brexit.
It will still be permitted to take pets abroad after 31 January 2020, with no changes yet to come into force.
When it comes to taking out travel insurance, UK travel trade association ABTA advises that the best way to protect your holiday is to book a package deal. It is then the responsibility of the travel company to make sure your holiday is provided and to offer an alternative, or a refund, if it cannot be delivered.
If you haven’t booked a package deal, it is advisable to check with your individual insurance provider about your cover ahead of your trip.
