Flybe flights: Airline goes bust - what are passenger rights?
Jeremy Thomson-Cook, Chief Economist at Equals (formerly known as FairFX), said: “International travel is already being impacted by the spread of coronavirus as flights are cancelled with bookings reportedly decreasing.
“Since the outbreak on December 31, the pound is down 3 percent against the euro and 4 percent against the US dollar, meaning both consumers with spring trips planned and businesses trading overseas will get less for their money compared to before the outbreak.
“The EU’s environment and public health committee are scheduled to meet on Thursday 5 March to discuss the global emergency of coronavirus and how member states are confronting the epidemic, and both economic and public interest in the discussions will remain high.
“In terms of currency, the euro remains the most vulnerable given its trade links with China and the sheer weight of disruption that will hit supply chains in the coming weeks and months, already evidenced in its fall of 1 percent against the US dollar since December 31 2019.
Exchange rate: "The euro remains the most vulnerable given its trade links with China" (Image: Getty Images)
Pound to euro exchange rate: GBP ‘trades flat’ after slump
“Whilst the pound is fluctuating, it looks relatively insulated for now given its reliance on the services sector as opposed to manufacturing, where production and supply are already being impacted as a result of the virus.
“The number of infections here in the UK remains low compared to other countries meaning fears and concerns over the economic impact of the virus are predominantly focused elsewhere.
“Fluctuations in the pound are likely to continue as a result not just of coronavirus but the unprecedented Brexit journey and more specifically trade negotiations as they continue over the coming weeks and months.
“Trade negotiations between the EU and UK commenced this week, and although they will continue for some time the outcome is likely to have a big impact on the strength of the pound.
Exchange rate: "Buy when you see a rate you are happy with and avoid leaving it until last minute" (Image: Express)
“There is a huge opportunity for the pound to gain strength over the course of the transition period, although much work is needed for it to return to its pre-referendum heights which it has yet to return to.
“The markets will be keeping a very close eye on the pound’s reaction to any talks and agreements.
“Anyone whose travel plans are unaffected or who has a need for currency exchange needs to keep a careful watch on foreign exchange, buy when they see a rate they are happy with and avoid leaving it until the last minute in order to get the best value for their money.”
