can access each other’s markets, the bloc has strict rules on how much help a government can give to domestic companies. When covid-19 hit, the commission loosened them, allowing governments to hand out cash to industries they feared might go under. Such aid, in the form of guarantees or wage supplements, has amounted to €1.9trn ($2trn) so far. German guarantees for German businesses account for just over half of this figure.
Once a reasonably level playing field, the single market is now lopsided. In the downturn to come, Spain and Italy will endure deeper recessions than Germany, leaving them even less financial muscle to help domestic businesses. Both the Spanish and Italian economies will contract by more than 9% this year, predicts the European Commission. By contrast, Germany’s
will fall by 6.5%. Not for the first time in the bloc’s history, the burden falls heaviest on those least able to bear it.
’s economy, an alliance of countries led by Spain suggested grants totalling €1.5trn, paid for with debt backed collectively by the
. Collapsing southern European economies would wreck the cozy economic settlement that has been so beneficial to the likes of Germany and the Netherlands. The euro has enabled Germany to run huge trade surpluses without being hindered by an appreciating currency. Fiscal transfers from north to south would be a small price to pay. Without such a comprehensive recovery fund, the single market risks entrenching inequality rather than spreading wealth.
However this plan was staunchly opposed by small, rich, mostly northern countries, several of which have also had slightly fewer covid-related deaths than others (see map). The Netherlands, Demark and Sweden all pooh-poohed the idea. The Dutch government offered a one-off grant of €1bn, about a tenth of a percent of the sum demanded by the Spanish government, as a gesture of goodwill.
The German government, meanwhile, will stretch only to modest grants, arguing that any
recovery fund should consist mainly of loans. In the middle, the European Commission is tasked with devising a scheme that keeps both sides happy. It will propose a mixture of grants and loans to indebted countries, paid for out of the
’s budget. Countries will spend much of the year haggling over it.
: a shared currency but no shared spending policy. This was originally a feature of the euro’s design, not a bug, argues Jan Techau of the German Marshall Fund, a think-tank. The euro’s creators “wanted this tension to be there”, he says. Given the obvious problems of running a currency without a unified budget or transfers between richer and poorer members, fiscal union—considered a step too far when the euro was introduced—would eventually have to follow. What the euro’s designers did not envisage was that Europe’s leaders would balk, repeatedly, at that deeper integration, thus endangering the currency’s survival.
with a compelling common purpose. Other, less tangible goals have taken on greater importance. A Europe based on shared values looms large in the imagination of Europhiles. Today Eurocrats are more likely to discuss ways of protecting and promoting the “European way of life” than the merits of close economic ties.
as a civilising force. “Spain is the problem, Europe is the solution,” declared José Ortega y Gasset, a Spanish writer, in 1910. If his phrase has become a cliché of his country’s political life it is because after the end of the long dictatorship of Francisco Franco in 1975, most Spaniards wanted their country to become a normal European democracy. It is a view shared in Germany. “German problems can only be solved under a European roof,” declared Konrad Adenauer, West Germany’s first chancellor, in 1962.
However, this view is not universal. Memories of authoritarian regimes may linger in the politics of most
states. Yet no such memory concentrates minds in, say, Sweden, meaning that supranational shackles can be seen as an affront to sovereignty rather than a necessary constraint on the state.
Shared values matter to a continent coming to terms with its past. They also matter for a continent that increasingly tries to influence the world, portraying itself as a global power. Ivan Krastev, a political scientist and the bloc’s most impish critic, sees two paths for the
. Either it becomes more of a “mission”, going forth and evangelising European values globally, or it becomes a “monastery” and preaches only to Europeans within its precincts.
The idea of a European mission has its fair share of supporters. Ursula von der Leyen, the new president of the European Commission, said it would be a more “geopolitical” body under her leadership. Enrico Letta, a former prime minister of Italy and now the head of the Jacques Delors Institute, a think-tank, argues that the
should aim to become a third superpower between America and China.
already has immense regulatory clout. It sets global standards on everything from privacy to processing chemicals to environmental rules. Rather than use different standards across the globe, businesses obey the
’s (usually more stringent) regulations to save costs, a phenomenon known as “the Brussels effect”. Translating this into more tangible forms of power is difficult. Superpowers require strategic unity, which may be hard to build in a club that has very different views on Russia, to give just one example.
rolls back its global ambitions and goes down the second route suggested by Mr Krastev—becoming a monastery—it will have to deal with a war among the monks. Any claim that the
is united in its support for liberal democratic norms is disproven by the fact that Poland and Hungary have steadily eroded the rule of law—and yet they remain members of the club. Poland’s government has tried to nobble its supreme court. Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, has subverted or sidelined most of his country’s checks and balances over the past decade, and seized on the pandemic as an excuse to rule by decree indefinitely. Meanwhile, cronies of his ruling party are gorging on aid from Brussels.
’s dogma, such as its legal order, look more shaky. In May Germany’s constitutional court ruled that the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg was acting beyond its authority in the way it ruled on the European Central Bank’s bond-buying in 2018. In effect, the German court declared that since the
is not a federal state, national courts can decide whether the
has gone beyond its remit. The
disagreed, leaving the two courts jostling for supremacy. The European Commission is examining whether to launch sanctions against Berlin for breaking the
would have the final say.) A bizarre situation looms in which the German government is criticised for the actions of its independent court.
to stem the financial effects of the covid-19 crisis. A €750bn bond-buying programme launched in March by the
saw the central bank hoover up debt from Italy and Spain, in a bid to dampen the effects of the pandemic. As a result, Italy and Spain can easily borrow on the open market. This contrasts sharply with the start of the euro crisis, when the euro zone’s future seemed to hang in the balance every time Italy held a bond auction.
’s northern states. It has thus relieved pressure on Europe’s leaders to take tricky decisions, such as whether they should provide southern Europe with enough fiscal power to get out of the crisis. Germany and the Netherlands once railed against the
’s largesse; now they are among its beneficiaries, delaying difficult choices in the knowledge that the bank will continue to keep the bloc afloat. For a project that seems to move decisively only when in peril, this is a problem.
The result is that a constitutional reckoning has never seemed more necessary, yet it has never felt less likely. Hard questions proliferate: whether or not the
will pursue deeper integration, what role the bloc will play in global politics, and so on. Even dilemmas unimaginable a decade ago, such as whether the
is only for liberal democracies, need to be cleared up.
Although Britain’s chaotic departure was not exactly a tempting advertisement for the joys of leaving the bloc, it is still likely that big changes to the
’s rules would lead to a slew of tricky plebiscites. Eurocrats have painful memories of past referendums. A fully fledged “constitution” was rejected by French and Dutch voters in 2005. Indeed deeper ties in Europe have always been controversial. In 1992 French voters agreed by just 51% to adopt the Maastricht treaty, which led to the monetary union.
Bold federal steps would help. But a sturdier constitution would result in even more fractious politics. If pushed, German officials will insist that they have no fundamental objection to a mutualisation of debt. At the same time they insist it would have to be accompanied by a corresponding centralisation of fiscal power over how national governments spend, which is likely to upset many European governments. For countries in southern Europe, fiscal union is seen as freedom; for Germany it is seen as tighter control.
Either way resentment is brewing, particularly in southern Europe. Italians have been among the most communitaire of Europeans. In a survey for the commission in 2000, just before the euro became legal tender, only 9% were against
average of 14%. But by May 7th almost 44% were ready to quit. “Italians feel betrayed,” says Gianluca Borrelli of Termometro Politico, the institute that conducted the latest poll. Apocalyptic rhetoric flows from southern Europe’s leaders. Portugal’s prime minister, Mr Costa, declared: “Either the
’s northern capitals, particularly in Berlin. When it comes to common debt, a feeling exists that Spain, Italy and France—which has supported the two southern countries throughout—are trying it on, using the crisis to mask opportunism. “How do you distinguish between genuine necessity and political opportunity?” asks one ambassador from a northern European country. In this view a compromise will be found; yet another chapter in the
’s long history of muddling through.
According to an old joke, economists have predicted nine of the past five recessions. Those predicting the demise of the
’s harshest critics have advocated. However after a decade of crises survivor bias afflicts the
’s supporters and fresh thinking is urgently needed. An uncomfortable journey is justified if the destination is worthwhile. But without a clear answer to the question of what Europe stands for, the next decade or so will resemble a rather pointless ride. ■
For our latest coverage of the covid-19 pandemic, register for The Economist Today, our daily newsletter , or visit our coronavirus tracker and story hub
