The Coronavirus pandemic is having a huge impact on the European labour market.
The International Labour Organization foresees the loss of 12 million full-time jobs in Europe in 2020.
The sectors most at risk include accommodation and food services, manufacturing, retail and administration.
To mitigate the issues, the European Union has put in place a scheme called SURE , which stands for Support to mitigate Unemployment Risks in an Emergency. It’s part of a 540 billion euro package to support European companies and workers.
There are up to 100 billion euros available for the SURE scheme, supported by 25 billion euros in guarantees from EU members. States can apply for the cash after they’ve activated schemes to help those either in regular work or self-employed people who've lost income. The assistance comes in the form of a loan on favourable terms.
So how does it work in practice? We visited a company and employees who would fit the profile of likely beneficiaries of the scheme in northern Italy.
Gemma Monterverdi lives in Brescia near Milan. She works for the family-run textile company Ciocca SpA. Gemma has moved to reduced working hours and this month will receive 80% of her salary:
"My husband also works in the company, so the two salaries will obviously drop. If it is a matter of a month we’ll deal with it. If it is two, we’ll clench our teeth.
"If it's longer, we will obviously have to make a new plan. The company where I work is in good shape. My fear is that they will be forced to do a staff reduction."
The EU's SURE scheme, aimed at protecting jobs - a crash course.
Ciocca SpA has almost stopped its production and already lost 35% of its annual turnover. In order to avoid further losses, company president Filippo Ciocca is ready to gradually put his employees back to work:
"We definitely have to find the tools by which people can be retained, but we cannot immediately start working from the first moment we open the company.
"Reduced working hours schemes were created for moments of normal crisis. I think that the tools that have to be adopted by the state on one side and the European community on the other must also be exceptional."
Almost half of Italian workers are experiencing a loss of income. Since the beginning of the coronavirus crisis, the government has allocated eight billion euros to around seven million workers and another four million people who are self-employed.
Giovanni Scandale is a self-employed taxi driver who's still waiting for some money. He no longer has enough customers to pay for his mortgage or his outgoings. He should get €600 from the government for March and €800 for April.
"It's a figure that is really too small and I hope that the European Union can give us a hand to be able to pay all the various expenses we have," he says.
