The CHF is the strongest and the EUR is the weakeast of the major currencies as NA traders enter for the day.  The USD is mixed with gains vs the EUR as the most at +0.26% and the largest declines vs the CHF at -0.20%.  The other major pairs are only changed by 0.9% or less (from the close from yesterday).
The ranges are modest today with all the pairs well below the 22 day average ranges (red line in the lower chart below). Versus the dollar the GBPUSDU, USDJPY, USDCAD, AUDUSD and NZDUSD are all trading within 8 pips of unchanged and off the day's extremes. The EURUSD has been trending lower in the European session after the pair tested its 100 hour MA late in the Asian session and stalled.  That gave the sellers the edge and they pushed the price lower.
Spot gold is trading down $8 or -0.46% at $1718.55. The high price reached $1729.77. The low price extended to $1713.20.
WTI crude oil futures are trading down $0.37 -0.96% at $38.01. The high price reached $38.75. The low extended to $37.21
In the premarket for the US stocks, the futures are implying a higher opening:
In the European equity markets the major indices are also trading to the upside:
In the European debt market, the benchmark 10 year yields are trading higher by varying degrees. The German 10 year is being shunned the most by investors with a gain of 5.3 basis points. The France's CAC is up 1.9% but still remains below the 0.0% level at -0.031%:
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
