UPDATED 15/4: The Euro to Dollar exchange rate is "grinding higher, mostly due to broader USD weakness" and currently trading at 1.09607, 0.21% lower on the day.
Exchange Rates UK Research team have compiled a roundup of expert FX views on the current EUR/USD outlook from 10 leading FX analysts.
"Prices are grinding higher, mostly due to broader USD weakness. However, the gains are lacking in momentum at this stage. As such, we are likely to remain within a contracting range between 1.0750 and 1.1170, with 1.0970 resistance holding at the moment. Above there, 1.1015 and 1.1080 are the next risk areas for a lower high. A decline through 1.0840 and then 1.0750 would be bearish for a move to re-test the 1.0635 previous lows, with ‘speedline’ support below at 1.06. Still no confirmation of at least a medium-term low at 1.0635. A drop through there and 1.06 would risk a move towards the 1.0340 previous lows from 2017."
"A decisive positive candle got the EUR/USD rally back on track yesterday. The thin volume of the Easter trading period questioned the strength of the near term recovery. However, the bulls fought back really well yesterday in a move which is now threatening to open the legs of the recovery once more. We have been concerned that the resistance in the band $1.1960/$1.1980 would restrict how the recovery developed, but the bulls are in the driving seat of this move now. Leaving aside the thin volume days of the Easter bank holidays, the euro has climbed strongly in three out of four candles. Pressure is growing on $1.1980 for a decisive breakout. As the Europeans take over this morning, there has been a mild slip back, but on the hourly chart this shows as a pullback to a near term breakout of $1.0965. There is a six day uptrend at $1.0935 this morning, and any unwinding move on hourly RSI around 40/50 has been a chance to buy during this uptrend. Initial support is around $1.0950/$1.0965. The bulls will have lost control under $1.0925 and the outlook turns corrective under $1.0890. Above $1.0990 the next resistance is $1.1040.
"Last week, EU finance ministers reached an agreement on further fiscal support to cover health care and related expenses, salary subsidies and added yet another lending programme. While we welcome cross-border agreement, we view it as merely mildly positive for the EUR and take note of heavy obstacles to get things done. More importantly; re-opening businesses and getting to the point of rising (global) economic activity will be what we are looking for to take EUR/USD 1-2 figures higher."
"EUR/USD short-term technicals are neutral - The EUR is bound to remain rangebound in the near-term as it fails to pick up much momentum after the sharp upward moves it has seen in the last week, especially now ahead of key psychological resistance at 1.10. Overnight, the EUR peaked shy of the 50% retracement mark of its late-Mar/early-Apr drop at 1.0966 which should act to limit upside movements, with the currency likely requiring an outsized gain to breach this point and yesterday’s 1.0968 high (key resistance). Support is 1.0896 (intraday low)."
"The market will be keeping watch of Italian BTP yields this week to see if investors remain confident that the ECB will remain the buyer of last resort. The Eurogroup’s bail-out package still leaves concerns over Italy’s debt to GDP trajectory into 2021. Overall, we think the Fed money-printing story wins out in the near term and EUR/$ heads above 1.10. European data this week sees Eurozone Industrial Production for February (Thursday) and the final March CPI, expected as low as 0.7% YoY. We are also starting to hear more from governments about the expected size of the contraction this year. Paris has just said it expects an 8% decline in French GDP this year. Our team is looking for a 5% decline in Eurozone growth."
"Euro/dollar was all over the map in overnight trade given all the headlines we outlined above, but prices remained very much confined to yesterdays 1.0900-1.0950 range. Some buyers are now trying to push the market above this range as some broad USD sales come in. Spot gold prices have just risen to new cyclesession highs yet again ($1,730) and so were wondering if the precious metal will be influential on broad dollar price actionagain today.."
"Downtrend - The downtrend may be expected to continue, while pair is trading below resistance level 1.0952, which will be followed by reaching support level 1.0835 - 1.0793. Uptrend - An uptrend will start as soon, as the pair rises above resistance level 1.0952, which will be followed by moving up to resistance level 1.1051 and if it keeps on moving up above that level, we may expect the pair to reach resistance level 1.1185."
"Euro politicians will probably continue to prefer to just glue the ship together whenever there is a major leak as it is more politically palatable – so it looks unfeasible that permanent Eurobonds will be launched, a temporary extraordinary measure is more likely, which is also the signal with the current 500bn ESM-linked package. ESM is a crisis-tool, while the EUR needs permanent tools. Such temporary measures often eventually turn permanent, but politicians won’t admit to it initially. Should we get a more formal move towards Coronabonds or even Eurobonds, we are tempted to buy EUR/USD (all-in) on such an announcement.
We lean long in EUR/USD already, and one measure that hints of such upcoming spot pressure is the 3m xCcy basis. Currently, we navigate uncharted territory in the EUBSC index at substantially positive levels. If relative balance sheets matter, it may become increasingly lucrative to issue bonds in USDs and swap to EUR, which should (over time) increase the upside pressure on the entire EURUSD xCcy basis curve."
"Euro and sterling traded sharply higher. No data was released but the number of new cases continued to fall. While some attribute this to the Easter break, it has created new optimism. Countries across Europe are beginning to relax restrictions. Norway, Denmark, Czech Republic and Austria have all announced plans to relax rules in the coming weeks. Factories in Germany could restart work as early as April 20th. Even though border restrictions will remain in place for many countries, these are all steps in the right direction."
"Italy already feels aggrieved, as it was left to cope with a huge influx of immigrants from the Middle East in 2018 and now when it needs a strong Europe behind it, the joint issuance of bonds is ruled out. This is at a time when 67% of Italians think that the EU doesn’t help their country. The other good news was that of OPEC and G20 agreed a deal which could see production cuts of 15 million barrels per day (bpd). However, there is no way to ensure that these cuts will be effective. Russia and Saudi Arabia will cut around 10 million bpd, but the other 5 million bpd may well have been lost to a lower oil price anyway. A higher oil price would usually produce a stronger EUR/USD, and as such it hasn’t surprised that EUR/USD has already started to slip lower in thin market conditions."
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
