For the past few months, the global economy has been    slowing, sounding alarm bells for economists around the world     - but now other data is flagging issues in the    economy.
The US deficit could top $1 trillion, European Banks    like Deutsche are in the doldrums and US stocks are trading    much higher than the country's growth.
Here are some charts highlighting some of the issues    the economy is facing.
View Business    Insider's homepage for more stories.
The global economy has been slowing for months, and alarm bells  about the future have been sounding, with data from shipping , construction and factory output slipping around the world.
But now data compiled by Macro Hive is also highlighting other  warning signs about stocks, the economy and even problems in  demographics.
Bilal Hafeez, senior macro analyst at Macro Hive, highlighted  issues with the stock market private equity and European banking  that could all spell risks in the near future.
He added that major issues within demographics such as an ageing  Chinese population and high youth unemployment exacerbated the  problem and could lead to issues in years to come.
Below are just some of Macro  Hive's charts detailing the issues.
1. US stocks at scary high levels.
"Warren Buffet has often argued that broader US equities should  follow US economic growth. The trouble is that US equities,  covering a very wide range of US companies from large to small,  are trading at multiples to US GDP that previously marked a top,"  Hafeez said.
He added that "To make matters worse, larger US companies are  geared more towards foreign growth, which is looking less  appealing than US growth."
2. Huge expectations on private equity.
Hafeez says that this asset is all the rage and even pensions  funds are pushing to invest. "Being able to borrow cheap,  leverage the target company and value the companies with less  public disclosure is a great model for private equity. The  question is whether expectations of private equity gains are too  elevated? Estimates certainly suggest so."
" The IMF has also found that new leverage loans are showing worse fundamentals.  The loans are associated with higher debt loads and have less  cashflow to cover interest payments. This could prove costly for  private equity firms that dominate these form of lending."
4. The US budget deficit about to hit $1 trillion.
Hafeez notes that the budget hitting a $1 trillion has only  happened once outside of a financial crisis, so to do that  outside of a recession he says is "quite an achievement." He  adds, "Markets have responded, but more at the very front-end,  but surely it will only be a matter of time before investors get  nervous. "
5. Negative term premia on long-dated US bonds is something we've never seen before.
"Investors should get paid a bit more for holding longer-dated  bonds than simply the expected rate moves. That term premium for  the US has been as high as 5% in the late 1970s. Today it has  turned negative, which implies you have to pay to be locked into  holding a longer-dated asset. Something isn't right about that."
6. FX volatility at all-time lows.
Hafeez says that investors are getting bored of forex markets due  to uncertainty with the euro. "Expected volatility has collapsed  as a result. But if history is a guide, this is temporary. The  question is whether the big move will be a dollar collapse which  could be inflationary or a dollar rally which could hurt US  exports and anger President Trump."
7. European bank valuations are terrible.
Deutsche Bank's results were published for the third quarter on  Thursday and they made for disappointing reading. Hafeez says  that as a result, the market has no faith in the book value of  the company.  "In any other industry, it would be taken over and  turned around, but banking is different. It's not just Deutsche,  though, other banks in negative-yielding regions are struggling  as well. The more interesting question is what happens if US and  Canadian rates start to fall? Should US banks like JPMorgan trade  at such high valuations?"
"The IMF recently estimated how exposed banks were to vulnerable  segments of the economy They found that by far, Chinese banks had  most exposure. This shows an eerie parallel to Japan of the  1990s. It also probably explains why Chinese authorities have  been reluctant to ease credit - it won't work. "
"Who needs active managers, when stocks have gone up year after  year. Recently, it looks like there are now more mutual funds and  ETFs in passive index trackers than active managers. And when do  active managers do best - typically during market corrections.  Have they been ditched at the wrong time?," he asks.
10. Youth unemployment will lead to instability.
"A shocking third of young workers in Italy and Spain are  unemployed even after the euro crisis of 2012 has passed. Such  structural weakness is a problem that any number of creative ECB  solutions cannot solve. Instead, politicians need to act, and  youngsters will become more activist - not a stable system."
11. China's ageing population is a problem now.
"People have long argued that China could get old before it gets  rich - and it has started to happen. Japan had great demographics  - that is, a larger working-age share of the population - over  the 1970s and 1980s. But it started to turn down in the 1990s and  has been trending down ever since. China is now in the trending  down zone. Add that to the list of worries around China."
