The consequence would have been Italy’s default on its public debt. At first, this would have taken the form of an extension of the sovereign bonds’ maturity. Secondly, a reduction in the nominal value of the bonds would have occurred. The document refers to a target reduction of the debt-to-GDP level of 80% (120% at the time), although different options are considered.
At that point, Italy would have exited the euro. This would have occurred without a pre-determined juridical framework, since the EU Treaty does not contemplate the option of abandoning the monetary union. Technically, a new currency named the Eurolira would have been introduced. Since there would be no time to print new banknotes, the old ones would have to be marked by banks. Banking deposits would be converted in real time to Eurolira.
The “Plan Z” document mentions a severe recessionary impact on the economy, although one that would have been hard to estimate up front. Initially, the exchange rate would be fixed at one Eurolira for one euro. Later, the market would have forced the Eurolira to devaluate in an unpredictable measure.
The drop in the value of the new currency would have depended on what mechanism was chosen for restructuring the public debt. A debt-to-GDP level of 80% was considered consistent with the refinancing of public borrowing requirements through domestic investors only. It was considered essential that Italy avoid resorting to foreign investors in order to prevent an even more dramatic devaluation. With Italy’s primary budget surplus being positive, it would have been possible to service the public debt, had it been reduced to 80% of Italy’s GDP.
One option was not to change the nominal value of bonds, but to announce a major sale of publicly-held goods and firms, coupled with a consistent wealth tax on financial assets held in bank accounts. A second option would have implied a 10-20% reduction in the government bonds’ nominal value, coupled with a maturity extension, trying carefully to avoid a real “default.” The latter, a legally defined category, would have caused enormous legal controversies and huge costs for refunding investors. However, avoiding a declaration of default would have almost been impossible.
