Hello children! I hope you’re having a good week.
On Thursday dad and I finished building a go-kart. It looks great! We painted it red and blue, and I think it’ll go really fast! Unfortunately, it started raining this afternoon so mum said we’ll have to go to the hill tomorrow. Instead, I played Fifa with Toby online and relaxed by watching a film.
On Friday dad and I walked up the hill with the go-kart and we got ready to ride it down. I wore a helmet and dad installed a seatbelt so the go-kart was super safe. I rode all the way down and it went really fast! I had to steer to avoid bushes and trees but it was really fun and the go-kart worked amazingly! I hauled it back up to the top of the hill where mum and dad had prepared a picnic of sandwiches and fizzy drinks! Yum!
On Saturday I went to the football field with Toby and we played together. It was much more fun than Fifa but a lot more tiring! Mum and I made ice lollies in the afternoon because it was such a hot day. We had a barbecue in the evening and dad let us toast marshmallows.
On Sunday I wanted to do arts and crafts after hearing about tree and leaf rubbing. All I had to do was get some paper and a crayon, and place the paper onto the bark or leaf I wanted to draw. Then I used the side of the crayon to rub and got some really cool patterns underneath. I rubbed lots of leaves, trees and colours and made lots of pictures.
On Monday I did some school work which involved writing a short story. I wrote about a space monster travelling to Earth. I had to use adverbs and adjectives, which got quite confusing but eventually I got the hang of it. Mum suggested I draw a picture to go along with my story, so I drew the monster travelling to Earth in its rocket. I spoke to Toby on the phone about his story and he wrote his about a lion and a tiger becoming friends! It was really good fun!
On Tuesday I spent the morning relaxing in the sun and reading my book. I had to do some chores around the house like putting the washing out and watering the plants. In the afternoon I played badminton with dad in the garden and I won! We had to pause for ice lollies because it was getting so hot. I watched a film with mum and dad in the evening and we ordered a pizza for dinner! Yum!
Have a good week kids!
