The other symptoms of a more serious health issue may include:
penile discharge that can be yellow, green, or watery
A person with any of the above symptoms should see their doctor immediately.
Intense rubbing generally causes friction burns. Most friction burns that doctors see in a healthcare setting are due to a road accident.
However, there are other possible causes of a friction burn on the penis, including:
Friction burns from masturbation and sexual intercourse may be more likely to occur if a person does not use lubrication.
The best way to treat a friction burn is to give the area time to heal without doing the activity that caused the burn to occur. Most minor friction burns should go away on their own in time.
It is possible to treat most friction burns on the penis at home. While a person is waiting for a penile friction burn to heal, they should do the following to help make themselves more comfortable and prevent further irritation to the penis:
If the affected skin starts to ooze or drain pus , a person should make an appointment with their doctor. Pus is a sign of infection, and a topical antibiotic may be necessary to help the affected area heal.
Washing the penis daily can help prevent irritation.
During sexual activity with a partner, using a lubricated condom can help prevent friction burns. Aside from preventing penile friction burns, condoms can also prevent unplanned pregnancy and help keep both partners healthy by reducing the risk of STIs.
Additionally, a person can ask their partner to be gentler or use lubrication during sexual activity.
One of the best ways to prevent friction burns on the penis when masturbating is for the person to be more gentle with themselves. Using a water-based lubricant can also help prevent friction burns. Many forms of water-based lubricant are available to purchase online .
People can take other steps to help reduce skin irritation that can cause friction burns, including:
Proper hygiene. Keeping the penis clean by washing it daily with gentle soap and warm water can help prevent irritation. It helps to wash underneath the foreskin, the base of the penis, and the testicles every day.
Gentle and complete drying. After having a shower, be sure to dry the penis thoroughly but gently. Instead of rubbing to dry the penis, pat it dry with a soft towel.
Wear proper clothing. Avoiding clothes that are too tight and not breathable can help prevent irritation, especially when exercising.
People should also be aware of how other health issues can affect the penis. For example, if a person has diabetes that they find difficult to manage, they may be more at risk of yeast infections that can cause penile irritation. Untreated STIs can also irritate this part of the body.
Friction burns on the penis can be painful. A person can treat most friction burns at home unless the burn becomes infected. If this occurs, they should see a doctor.
The best treatments for friction burns are time and rest from the activity that caused the burn.
A person can help prevent friction burns on the penis by avoiding vigorous sexual activity and not wearing tight fitting clothing, especially when exercising. Good hygiene can also help keep a penis healthy.
Last medically reviewed on  June 24, 2019
