Here’s breaking down the pre-market actions.
Nifty futures on the Singapore Exchange traded 49.05 points or 0.47 per cent lower at 10,413.30, indicating a negative start for Dalal Street.
Here’s breaking down the pre-market actions.
Nifty futures on the Singapore Exchange traded 49.05 points or 0.47 per cent lower at 10,413.30, indicating a negative start for Dalal Street.
A nearly 550-point plunge in Nifty50 on Monday was its worst ever. The steep fall made even the most bearish short-term technical call on Dalal Street look good. Even as the 14-day RSI at 19 level was in deep oversold territory, analysts were unsure whether a recovery is on the cards. Bottom fishing should be avoided until the market indicates fatigue on the downside, said Manav Chopra of Indiabulls Securities.
Asian shares and Wall Street futures fell on Wednesday as growing scepticism about Washington's stimulus package to fight the coronavirus outbreak knocked the steam out of an earlier rally. US stock futures fell 1.54 per cent and MSCI's broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan declined 0.04 per cent. Australian shares were down 1.31 per cent. Japan's Nikkei index erased early losses to rise 0.24 per cent.
Oil prices seesawed in early Asian trade, a day after a strong rebound from a major rout triggered by the start of a price war between Riyadh and Moscow. WTI fluctuated between small losses and gains, with the price hovering around $34 a barrel, while Brent crude was up around 0.5 per cent at $37 a barrel. Prices had on Tuesday surged over 10 per cent, a day after plunging almost a third in their biggest one-day drop since the Gulf War in the 1990s.
US stocks closed sharply higher on Tuesday with the Dow up more than 1,100 points, as Wall Street tried to recover from the previous session's massive rout. The Dow Jones Industrial Average surged 1,167.14 points, or 4.89 per cent, to 25,018.16. The S&P 500 climbed 135.67 points, or 4.94 per cent, to 2,882.23. The Nasdaq Composite Index rose 393.58 points, or 4.95 per cent, to 8,344.25.
Net-net, foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) were sellers of domestic stocks to the tune of Rs 6,595.56 crore on Monday, data available with NSE suggested. DIIs were net buyers to the tune of Rs 4,974.80 crore, data suggests.
Rupee: The Indian rupee slumped by another 30 paise to touch a 17-month low of 74.17 against the US dollar on Monday after global financial market meltdown signalled that the world is staring at a coronavirus-led economic recession.
10-year bonds: India 10-year bond yield fell 1.89 per cent to 6.07 after trading in 5.99-6.10 range.
Call rates: The overnight call money rate weighted average stood at 4.94 per cent, according to RBI data. It moved in a range of 3.70-5.25 per cent. (Values not updated, showing blank)
No excise duty hike on petrol, diesel
The government is not looking to raise excise duties on petrol or diesel, or to increase basic customs duty on crude despite revenue pressures, apprehensive that such a move could derail the recovery seen in some segments of the economy, reports ET quoting a senior official. A final call on the any change in duties will be taken at the highest political level. The government had in July last year raised excise duty and cess on both petrol and diesel by Rs 1 per litre each. Petrol attracts excise duty of Rs 17.98 per litre and diesel Rs 13.83 per litre.
President Donald Trump has pitched his proposed payroll tax break on Capitol Hill as pressure mounts on the administration and Congress to work more vigorously to contain the coronavirus outbreak and respond to the financial fallout, AFP reported.
YES moratorium may end within week: SBI
The inconvenience and uncertainty faced by Yes Bank depositors may be short-lived as State Bank of India (SBI) Chairman Rajnish Kumar has said the moratorium could be lifted within a week. Assuring depositors of safety of their hard-earned money, Kumar said once the state-run lender stepped in there shouldn't be any worry about money as the financial system was sound, according to media reports.
The government may consider effectively halving the tax rate on dividend income for individuals in the highest tax bracket, reports ET quoting two people familiar with the development said, likely boosting stocks that are facing a rout globally. The government is looking to tweak the current regulations to bring down the tax on dividends to about 20% from up to 43% for Indian individual investors. The government may offer the concession by offering a flat 20% tax on dividend income.
Saudi Arabia said on Tuesday it would boost its oil supplies to a record high in April, raising the stakes in a standoff with Russia and effectively rebuffing Moscow's suggestion for new talks. The clash of oil titans Saudi Arabia and Russia sparked a 25% slump in crude prices on Monday, triggering panic selling on Wall Street and other equity markets that have already been badly hit by the impact of the coronavirus outbreak. Moscow said Russian oil companies might boost output by up to 300,000 bpd and could increase it by as much as 500,000 bpd, sending the Russian rouble and stocks plunging.
Former union minister Jyotiraditya Scindia on Tuesday triggered a possible collapse of the Congress government in Madhya Pradesh government by resigning from the party after his meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi and getting more than 20 of his loyalists to quit their assembly membership. Congress hit back by expelling its party general secretary and scion of the erstwhile Gwalior royal family on charges of "anti-party activities". Scindia will formally join the BJP on Wednesday. His candidature for the Rajya Sabha will be announced soon after. Scindia is likely to be made a cabinet minister in the next reshuffle in the Narendra Modi government that may take place in April.
President Donald Trump and top economic officials pitched Senate Republicans on a payroll tax cut and other policy proposals meant to ease the economic fallout from the coronavirus outbreak during a closed-door lunch on Tuesday, but there was no immediate sign of a deal. Trump made the rare trip to Capitol Hill on Tuesday after promising "major" and "dramatic" economic steps. US equity futures retreated and Asian equities opened lower as investors awaited details from the Trump administration on planned stimulus to counter the coronavirus impact. S&P 500 futures fell about 1.5%, following a strong rally on Wall Street.
The RBI restrictions on Yes Bank could seen private banks in the state facing some rough weather as the Maharashtra government has issued an order asking all of its departments and civic bodies in the state to not park money in private banks. The Maharashtra government move comes in the backdrop of the Yes Bank crisis which also impacts the rural economy of the state. More than 100 small banks and co operatives in the state have deposits in Yes Bank and are now struggling to withdraw it.
Moody's Investors Service on Monday cut its growth forecast for India to 5.3% for 2020 from 5.4% estimated earlier, as it expects the coronavirus outbreak to dampen domestic demand globally. In its update on Global Macro Outlook for March, Moody's said the virus outbreak has spread rapidly outside China to a number of major economies. Moody's has revised growth forecasts for G20 economies to 2.1 per cent, 0.3 percentage point lower than the previous baseline.
Lakshmi Vilas Bank (LVB), its capital adequacy well below the minimum needed, has approached the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) with a plan to raise $250-300 million (Rs 1,800-2,200 crore) from overseas investors through the sale of a 49-60% stake, said people with knowledge of the matter. The bank has been in talks with three- four investors and one of them has brought a “specific deal” to the table, reports ET. “The bank is looking forward to RBI’s advice on ‘fit and proper’ criteria of investors.
