Norilsk Nickel factory was closed in June this year in an attempt to clean up the city. Photograph: Alec Luhn
But in 2010, President Vladimir Putin did complain during a visit to Norilsk, threatening a “significant increase in environmental fines” if the plant wasn’t modernised. By 2013, owner and chairman Vladimir Potanin, one of Russia’s richest men , had begun investments in environmental measures, including the gradual closure of the nickel factory. In exchange, the Russian government cancelled export customs on the company’s nickel and copper for 2016. Norilsk Nickel plans to invest 300bn roubles (£3.5bn) in modernising manufacturing by 2020.
“The situation is getting better, but it’s no time to celebrate and not do anything,” says Denis Koshevoi, a PhD candidate at the Vernadsky Institute of Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry, who is researching pollution in Norilsk. “The copper factory is only 2km from the city, and it also emits to the city.”
Norilsk Nickel said emissions would be 15% lower after the nickel factory’s closure and the modernisation of the Talnakh enrichment plant. According to deputy director for reconstruction and environment Viktor Ivanov, the company will install 100bn roubles of equipment to manufacture sulphur from emissions at the copper factory and the Nadezhda plant, reducing sulphur dioxide pollution by 75–80% by 2020. But the company also emits 50,000 to 70,000 tonnes of other pollutants annually, he admitted.
'The graveyard of the Earth': inside City 40, Russia's deadly nuclear secret
Air concentrations of nickel and benzopyrene, both carcinogens, have exceeded annual threshold limits in Norilsk in previous years, as has copper. At Norilsk Nickel’s 2015 public discussion, it admitted nickel was over the limit in 20.7% of samples, and copper in 45.9%.
And as the incident with the red river showed, Norilsk’s industry also pollutes local fishing grounds. Of 29.8 million cubic metres of waste water Norilsk Nickel emitted in 2015, only 5.18m were cleaned according to government standards, according to its yearly report. All samples taken in the Norilka river showed concentrations of copper, iron and oil products exceeding the threshold limit value, and all samples taken in the Talnakh river showed copper and cobalt concentrations over the limit. Revich says soil pollution is another concern.
“It used to be that the smog was overwhelming; now things have gotten cleaner,” says Mikhail Zabelin, a biologist at the Arctic Agriculture and Environment Institute. “But no one thinks that everything is rosy. They need to minimise emissions even more.”
