The worst-performing major currency in the world in 2016 happens to be the Russian ruble, according to Barchart.com's Forex Year-To-Date Highs/Lows – Major Rates data. It is always a little tricky measuring those performance numbers, as the Russian ruble is quoted in rubles per dollar (like the yen), so more rubles per dollar reflects a weaker ruble. Regardless of whether you measure it in rubles per dollar or cents per ruble, it is not a pleasant experience to go from over 3.6 cents per ruble (under 30 rubles per dollar) five years ago to under 1.2 cents (over 85, see chart ).
The trouble with the ruble, as with all commodity- and energy-dependent economies and their currencies, is oil (in green on the chart linked above). I described the situation in my Marketmail commentary on Aug. 4, 2015 , including this passage: "Tell me where the oil rout may stop and I will tell you if there is more downside to the Russian ruble and Russia's stock market. If, indeed, oil is headed under $20/bbl. in due course as the Chinese situation unravels, the ruble may break 100 on the USDRUB cross rate. The Russian dollar-denominated RTS index is at 858 at the close last week. I think it is entirely possible that it ends up in the 400-500 range."
exchange rate was at 58 when those comments were made. On Jan. 21, 2016, the ruble hit 85.09. Given that the dollar-denominated RTS Index was at 858 at the time , where was it on Friday, Feb. 26? It was at 725.98 (and we have been as low as 607 on Jan. 21).
The outlook for the Russian stock market and the ruble remains bearish. As a matter of principle, I believe one has to short with the bears and run with the bulls, as difficult as that may be. Playing favorites does not work in stocks or bonds and neither does it work in commodities or currencies. Permabears and permabulls have the same faults — being "perma" means being stuck in one position.
I think we have better-than-even odds of USDRUB at 100 and an RTS Index at 400 or so simply because I am not convinced that oil will hold at $20/bbl. Russia remains the most leveraged economy to the price of oil, which is perhaps why it is so conservatively run from a fiscal standpoint. The Russians would make most countries look ridiculous with their low level of indebtedness and conservative budgets. Even though we have a generational collapse in commodity prices that is greater than 2008, their budget deficit is tiny (-0.5%) and much smaller than what they ran in the 2008 Great Financial Crisis.
Furthermore, as the Chinese forex reserves are collapsing while trying to control the peg on the yuan, with the flight of capital out of China running at $100 billion a month, Russian forex reserves are rising amidst a collapse in commodity prices. This is because the Russians learned the $200 billion lesson from 2008 (that's how much they lost in forex reserves, see chart), that managing the ruble exchange rate is very costly if the price of crude oil is not there to support it. So instead of throwing good money after bad, the Russians have high interest rates to support the currency, even though that is not helping much at the moment, given the situation with crude oil.
The Chinese situation is highly relevant to all of China's close trading partners and all major commodity producers, like Russia. The fact that commodity prices are low does not mean they cannot go lower, as we learned in the Asian Crisis in 1997-1998. The issue this time is that China has a GDP of $11 trillion, much larger than during the Asian Crisis of the late 1990s.
The question of China arose again in a conversation with investors last week where one that had visited China in the 1980s was sharing with me that it was surreal that there is smog and pollution in Beijing today and then there was nary a car on the road.
"They are very industrious people," he said of the Chinese. "You have to admire that."
"I know, and I do admire it," I noted. "But I see a problem in people connecting an impossible-to-manage credit bubble that is presently unravelling in China and their industriousness. One has nothing to do with the other."
I hope the Russians understand that difference as it is costing them dearly at the moment.
Ivan Martchev is an investment specialist with institutional money manager Navellier and Associates . The opinions expressed are his own. Navellier and Associates holds no positions in any investments mentioned in this article. This is neither a recommendation to buy nor sell the securities mentioned in this article. Investors should consult their financial adviser prior to making any decision to buy or sell the above mentioned securities.Investing in non-U.S. securities including ADRs involves significant risks, such as fluctuation of exchange rates, that may have adverse effects on the value of the security. Securities of some foreign companies may be less liquid and prices more volatile. Information regarding securities of non-U.S. issuers may be limited.
