Wing Station owner gets creative with housemade sauces, dry rubs
Wingsu2013Buffalo and Cowboy Rub (10 wings for $10.99)n Wing Station offers 20 flavors for its wings, including a choice of either wet sauce or a dry rub. The same dry rub seasonings can also be used on the hand-cut French fries.
Now is the chance to help your local community succeed. Become a Patron by contributing to Community Impact Newspaper and gain daily insight into what's happening in your own backyard. Thank you for reading and supporting community journalism.
Serial restaurateur gets creative with housemade wing sauces, dry rubs
Serial restaurateur gets creative with housemade wing sauces, dry rubs
Serial restaurateur gets creative with housemade wing sauces, dry rubs
Restaurant owner Lincoln Ward and General Manager Carlos Espinosa expanded their repertoire of food concepts to wings in November 2018 when they opened Wing Station in the Sienna Plantation area of Missouri City.
Nearly a year after opening Wing Station, the pair, who also work together at Ward’s other concept, Pacific Coast Tacos, is preparing to open a second Wing Station the first week of September, this time in Sugar Land near the Riverstone community.
The Sugar Land restaurant will feature a new menu item: hamburgers.
“This gives customers even more of a reason to come in and be able to find whatever they like,” Espinosa said.
Wing Station offers larger-than-average wings, something Espinosa said was a way the restaurant sought to separate itself from the competition. Wings are tossed in rice flour to be gluten free and help the sauces and rubs stick to the wings.
“We also flash fry the wings so they stay crispy,” he said.
In addition to the three heat levels of traditional Buffalo sauce, the restaurant offers 17 other flavors, including wet rubs and dry rubs. It also offers nontraditional flavors such as curry and salty caramel.
Other popular flavors are the garlic herb parmesan, teriyaki and the Cowboy Rub, which combines coffee, brown sugar and cayenne. The rub is modeled after one traditionally used on beef brisket, he said. Wing Station will even mix flavors.
“The Cowboy Rub is something I recommend to customers who aren’t sure what flavor to pick,” Espinosa said. “They always come back and get it again.”
In an effort to cater to busy families, Wing Station added Caesar salad and chicken sandwich options to its menu to create a one-stop shop for both children and parents, Espinosa said.
The chicken sandwich can be made regular style or Nashville hot and is topped with coleslaw and dill pickles.
The Missouri City location is a 1,000-square-foot store with carry-out, delivery and online ordering. The new location will give the concept its first sit-down restaurant with tables and televisions.
“We got a lot of good feedback on the product, so we took a little bit bigger of a footprint in Riverstone,” Ward said.
