Adjusted EBITDA increased 13% in Q1 2020 compared with Q1 2019. The growth was mainly driven by the solid performance of the Search and Portal segment and year-on-year improvement in the profitability of our Taxi and Classifieds segments, which were slightly offset by our investments in Yandex.Drive and Media Services.
Interest income in Q1 2020 was RUB 728 million, compared with RUB 827 million in Q1 2019.
Interest expense in Q1 2020 was RUB 225 million, up from RUB 1 million in Q1 2019.
Foreign exchange gain in Q1 2020 was RUB 4,439 million, compared with a foreign exchange loss of RUB 279 million in Q1 2019. This gain reflects the depreciation of the Russian ruble during Q1 2020 from RUB 61.9057 to $1.00 on December 31, 2019, to RUB 77.7325 to $1.00 on March 31, 2020. Yandex's Russian operating subsidiaries' functional currency is the Russian ruble, and therefore changes due to exchange rate fluctuations in the ruble value of these subsidiaries' monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in other currencies are recognized as foreign exchange gains or losses within the other (loss)/income, net line in the condensed consolidated statements of income. Although the U.S. dollar value of Yandex's U.S. dollar-denominated assets and liabilities was not impacted by these currency fluctuations, they resulted in an upward revaluation of the ruble equivalent of these U.S. dollar-denominated monetary assets and liabilities in Q1 2020.
Income tax expense for Q1 2020 was RUB 3,711 million, up from RUB 2,214 million in Q1 2019. Our effective tax rate of 40.3% in Q1 2020 was in line with Q1 2019. Adjusted for SBC expense, certain losses from the share of Yandex.Market’s financial results which are non-deductible and certain tax provisions recognized, our effective tax rate for Q1 2020 was 28.0%, compared with 26.8% for Q1 2019 as adjusted for SBC expense and similar effects in that year.
Net income was RUB 5.5 billion ($70.7 million) in Q1 2020, up 76% compared with Q1 2019.
Adjusted net income in Q1 2020 was RUB 5.1 billion ($66.2 million), a 5% decrease from Q1 2019.
Adjusted net income margin was 11.0% in Q1 2020, compared with 14.6% in Q1 2019.
In March 2020, Yandex issued $1.25 billion aggregate principal amount of 0.75% convertible senior notes due 2025, for aggregate net proceeds of $1.237 billion, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount and estimated offering expenses.
As of March 31, 2020, Yandex had cash, cash equivalents and term deposits of RUB 197.2 billion ($2,536.8 million), including cash, cash equivalents and term deposits of Yandex.Taxi in total amount of RUB 30.6 billion ($393.1 million).
Redeemable noncontrolling interests presented in our condensed consolidated balance sheets relate to the equity incentive arrangements we have made available to the senior employees of the Taxi and Classifieds segments, pursuant to which such persons are eligible to acquire depositary receipts, or receive options to acquire depositary receipts, which entitles them to economic interests in the respective business unit subsidiaries. Based on our estimates of Taxi and Classifieds business units fair value we concluded that it is appropriate to recognize the redeemable noncontrolling interests as of March 31, 2020 based on fair values of respective business units as of December 31, 2019.
The total number of shares issued and outstanding as of March 31, 2020 was 327,682,222 including 290,544,563 Class A shares, 37,137,658 Class B shares, and one Priority share and excluding 3,934,092 Class A shares held in treasury and all Class C shares outstanding solely as a result of the conversion of Class B shares into Class A shares. Any such Class C shares will be cancelled.
There were also employee share options outstanding to purchase up to an additional 3.3 million shares, at a weighted average exercise price of $37.51 per share, 1.6 million of which were fully vested; equity-settled share appreciation rights (SARs) for 0.1 million shares, at a weighted average measurement price of $32.75, all of which were fully vested; and restricted share units (RSUs) covering 12.0 million shares, of which RSUs to acquire 3.1 million shares were fully vested. Equity awards in respect of business unit subsidiaries are described under Redeemable noncontrolling interests above.
The impact of COVID-19 on our financial results and operations in Q1 2020 was limited to the last two weeks of March, when we began to see a slowdown of growth in our advertising and ride-hailing businesses, and acceleration in FoodTech and Media Services. With regards to our financial position as of the end of March 31, 2020, our analysis of the effect from COVID-19 on goodwill, non-current assets and redeemable non-controlling interests shows no measurable impact. At the same time, the full impact of COVID-19 is still unknown and rapidly evolving. The extent to which the COVID-19 crisis impacts the Company’s results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, among others. The development of the situation with respect to COVID-19 may also lead to change in estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Given the difficulty in predicting how long the pandemic will persist and uncertainty about its effects on the economy and businesses, we are unable at this time to reliably quantify the impact of the coronavirus outbreak on our future financial results. As such, we are withdrawing our 2020 guidance, which we provided on February 14, 2020. As and when there is greater clarity regarding the impact of the current crisis on the business environment generally and on Yandex in particular, we may provide further guidance regarding 2020.
Yandex’s management will hold an earnings conference call on April 28, 2020 at 8:00 AM U.S. Eastern Time (3:00 PM Moscow time; 1:00 PM London time).
We recommend using the dial-in option only if you plan to ask questions. In this case please connect at least 10 minutes prior to the call start time (using dial-in number and passcode specified below) and clearly state the information requested after the tone.
To access the conference call live, please dial:
A replay of the call will be available until May 5, 2020. To access the replay, please dial:
Yandex (NASDAQ and MOEX:YNDX) is a technology company that builds intelligent products and services powered by machine learning. Our goal is to help consumers and businesses better navigate the online and offline world. Since 1997, we have delivered world-class, locally relevant search and information services. Additionally, we have developed market-leading on-demand transportation services, navigation products and other mobile applications for millions of consumers across the globe. Yandex, which has 36 offices worldwide, has been listed on the NASDAQ since 2011.
This press release contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from the results predicted or implied by such statements, and our reported results should not be considered as an indication of future performance. The potential risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ from the results predicted or implied by such statements include, among others, macroeconomic and geopolitical developments affecting the Russian economy or our business, changes in the political, legal and/or regulatory environment, competitive pressures, changes in advertising patterns, changes in user preferences, technological developments, and our need to expend capital to accommodate the growth of the business, as well as those risks and uncertainties included under the captions “Risk Factors” and “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects” in our Annual Report on Form 20-F for the year ended December 31, 2019 and “Risk Factors” in the Shareholder Circular filed as Exhibit 99.2 to our Current Report on Form 6-K, which were filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on April 2, 2020 and November 18, 2019, respectively, and are available on our investor relations website at http://ir.yandex.com/sec.cfm and on the SEC website at www.sec.gov . All information in this release and in the attachments is as of April 28, 2020, and Yandex undertakes no duty to update this information unless required by law.
To supplement our condensed consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we present the following non-GAAP financial measures: ex-TAC revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted ex-TAC EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, adjusted effective tax rate, adjusted net income margin and adjusted ex-TAC net income margin. The presentation of these financial measures is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. For more information on these non-GAAP financial measures, please see the tables captioned “Reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to the nearest comparable U.S. GAAP measures”, included following the accompanying financial tables. We define the various non-GAAP financial measures we use as follows:
Adjusted EBITDA means U.S. GAAP net income plus (1) depreciation and amortization, (2) SBC expense, (3) accrual of expense related to the contingent compensation payable to employees in connection with certain business combinations, (4) one-off restructuring expenses, (5) interest expense, (6) loss from equity method investments, (7) other loss/(income), net and (8) income tax expense, less interest income
Adjusted EBITDA margin means adjusted EBITDA divided by U.S. GAAP revenues
Adjusted net income means U.S. GAAP net income plus (1) SBC expense adjusted for the income tax reduction attributable to SBC expense, (2) accrual of expense related to the contingent compensation payable to certain employees in connection with certain business combinations, (3) foreign exchange losses/(gains) adjusted for (reduction)/increase in income tax attributable to foreign exchange losses/(gains), (4) one-off restructuring expenses and (5) amortization of debt discount related to our convertible debt adjusted for the related reduction in income tax
Adjusted net income margin means adjusted net income divided by U.S. GAAP revenues
These non-GAAP financial measures are used by management for evaluating financial performance as well as decision-making. Management believes that these metrics reflect the organic, core operating performance of the company, and therefore are useful to analysts and investors in providing supplemental information that helps them understand, model and forecast the evolution of our operating business.
Although our management uses these non-GAAP financial measures for operational decision-making and considers these financial measures to be useful for analysts and investors, we recognize that there are a number of limitations related to such measures. In particular, it should be noted that several of these measures exclude some recurring costs, particularly share-based compensation. In addition, the components of the costs that we exclude in our calculation of the measures described above may differ from the components that our peer companies exclude when they report their results of operations.
Below we describe why we make particular adjustments to certain U.S. GAAP financial measures:
We believe that it may be useful for investors and analysts to review certain measures both in accordance with U.S. GAAP and net of the effect of TAC, which we view as comparable to sales commissions and bonuses but, unlike sales commissions and bonuses, are not deducted from U.S. GAAP revenues. By presenting revenue, adjusted EBITDA margin and adjusted net income margin net of TAC, we believe that investors and analysts are able to obtain a clearer picture of our business without the impact of the revenues we share with our partners.
SBC is a significant expense item, and an important part of our compensation and incentive programs. As it is a non-cash charge, however, and highly dependent on our share price at the time of equity award grants, we believe that it is useful for investors and analysts to see certain financial measures excluding the impact of these charges in order to obtain a clearer picture of our operating performance.
We may incur expenses in connection with acquisitions that are not indicative of our recurring core operating performance. In particular, we are required under U.S. GAAP to accrue as expense the contingent compensation that is payable to certain employees in connection with certain business combinations. We eliminate these acquisition-related expenses from adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income to provide management and investors a tool for comparing on a period-to-period basis our operating performance in the ordinary course of operations.
Because we hold significant assets and liabilities in currencies other than our Russian ruble operating currency, and because foreign exchange fluctuations are outside of our operational control, we believe that it is useful to present adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and related margin measures excluding these effects, in order to provide greater clarity regarding our operating performance.
Adjusted net income and adjusted EBITDA for Q1 2020 exclude expenses related to the restructuring of our corporate governance structure, which was approved by our shareholders in December 2019. We believe that it is useful to present adjusted net income, adjusted EBITDA and related margin measures excluding impacts not related to our operating activities.
We also adjust net income for interest expense representing amortization of the debt discount related to our convertible senior notes due 2025 issued in Q1 2020. We have eliminated this expense from adjusted net income as it is non-cash in nature and is not indicative of our ongoing operating performance.
The tables at the end of this release provide detailed reconciliations of each non-GAAP financial measure we use from the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure
(in millions of Russian rubles and U.S. dollars, except share and per share data)
