Financial results of segments are presented in the new segment structure that we introduced in Q1 2019. The historical data is provided in the supplementary slides.
**Our E-commerce segment revenues include revenues of Yandex.Market through April 27, 2018. As a result of deconsolidation, we record our share of Yandex.Market’s financial results within the loss/(income) from equity method investments line in the consolidated statements of income.
Search and Portal segment offers a broad range of services in Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Turkey, other than those described below. Since Q1 2019 our Search and Portal segment also includes Yandex.Health, previously reported in Other Bets and Experiments;
E-commerce segment includes Yandex.Market for the period prior to April 27, 2018, the date of the completion of the Yandex.Market joint venture between Yandex and Sberbank;
Taxi segment includes our Taxi business (including Yandex.Taxi and Uber in Russia and neighboring countries), Food Delivery business (including Yandex.EATs, UberEATs and Yandex.Chef, a meal kit subscription service) and Self-Driving Cars division;
Media Services segment includes KinoPoisk, Yandex.Music, Yandex.Afisha, Yandex.TV program, our production center Yandex.Studio and our subscription service Yandex.Plus;
Other Bets and Experiments category includes Zen, Yandex.Cloud, Yandex.Drive, Geolocation Services and Yandex.Education. Geolocation Services and Yandex.Education previously were a part of our Search and Portal segment;
Eliminations in our revenues represent the elimination of transactions between the reportable segments, primarily related to advertising. Eliminations related to our adjusted EBITDA mainly reflect reallocation of a portion of Search and Portal D&A expenses related to leasehold improvements to office rent expenses of our business unites.
Adjusted EBITDA increased 29% in Q3 2019 compared with Q3 2018. The growth was mainly driven by the solid perfomance of Search and Portal segment and continuing improvment of our Taxi segment profitability, which were slightly offset by investments in Media Services and car-sharing business as well as by development of our Cloud and IoT initiatives.
Adjusted EBITDA of Taxi was RUB 170 million in Q3 2019, up from negative RUB 711 million in Q3 2018. The significant increase of adjusted EBITDA was driven by consistently improving profitability of our ride-sharing business, partially offset by our investments in our autonomous vehicles and foodtech initiatives.
Interest income in Q3 2019 was RUB 847 million, compared with RUB 928 million in Q3 2018.
Interest expense in Q3 2019 was RUB 30 million, down from RUB 260 million in Q3 2018.
Foreign exchange gain in Q3 2019 was RUB 254 million, compared with a foreign exchange gain of RUB 154 million in Q3 2018. This gain reflects the depreciation of the Russian ruble during Q3 2019 from RUB 63.0756 to $1.00 on June 30, 2019, to RUB 64.4156 to $1.00 on September 30, 2019. Yandex's Russian operating subsidiaries' functional currency is the Russian ruble, and therefore changes due to exchange rate fluctuations in the ruble value of these subsidiaries' monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in other currencies are recognized as foreign exchange gains or losses within the other income/(loss), net line in the condensed consolidated statements of income. Although the U.S. dollar value of Yandex's U.S. dollar-denominated assets and liabilities was not impacted by these currency fluctuations, they resulted in an upward revaluation of the ruble equivalent of these U.S. dollar-denominated monetary assets and liabilities in Q3 2019.
Income tax expense for Q3 2019 was RUB 3,341 million, up from RUB 2,326 million in Q3 2018. Our effective tax rate of 43.3% in Q3 2019 was higher than in Q3 2018, primarily due to increase in stock-based compensation which is non-taxable. Adjusted for SBC expense and certain tax provisions recognized, our effective tax rate for Q3 2019 was 31.7%, compared with 25.4% for Q3 2018 as adjusted for SBC expense and similar provisions in that year. The increase in the adjusted effective tax rate was primarily driven by certain additional valuation allowances provided in Q3 2019.
Net income was RUB 4.4 billion ($68.0 million) in Q3 2019, down 1% compared with Q3 2018.
Adjusted net income in Q3 2019 was RUB 6.9 billion ($106.7 million), a 12% increase from Q3 2018.
Adjusted net income margin was 15.3% in Q3 2019, compared with 18.9% in Q3 2018.
As of September 30, 2019, Yandex had cash, cash equivalents and term deposits of RUB 85.4 billion ($1,326.4 million), including cash, cash equivalents and term deposits of Yandex.Taxi in total amount of RUB 25.7 billion ($399.3 million).
Redeemable noncontrolling interests presented in our condensed consolidated balance sheets relate to the equity incentive arrangements we have made available to the senior employees of the Taxi and Classifieds segments, pursuant to which such persons are eligible to acquire depositary receipts, or receive options to acquire depositary receipts, which entitles them to economic interests in the respective business unit subsidiaries.
The total number of shares issued and outstanding as of September 30, 2019 was 328,485,996 including 290,767,337 Class A shares, 37,718,658 Class B shares, and one Priority share and excluding 1,830,318 Class A shares held in treasury and all Class C shares outstanding solely as a result of the conversion of Class B shares into Class A shares. All such Class C shares were cancelled.
There were also employee share options outstanding to purchase up to an additional 3.3 million shares, at a weighted average exercise price of $36.85 per share, 1.5 million of which were fully vested; equity-settled share appreciation rights (SARs) for 0.2 million shares, at a weighted average measurement price of $32.76, all of which were fully vested; and restricted share units (RSUs) covering 12.7 million shares, of which RSUs to acquire 4.3 million shares were fully vested. Equity awards in respect of business unit subsidiaries are described under Redeemable noncontrolling interests above.
Based on our recent performance, we currently expect our ruble-based revenues excluding Yandex.Market to grow in the range of 36% to 38% for the full year 2019 compared with 2018.
We are changing the lower end of our financial outlook for Search and Portal and now expect its ruble-based revenue to grow in the range of 20% to 21% in the full year 2019 compared with 2018.
This outlook reflects our current view, based on the trends that we see at this time, and may change in light of market and economic developments in the business sectors and jurisdictions in which we operate.
Yandex’s management will hold an earnings conference call on October 25, 2019 at 8:00 AM U.S. Eastern Time (3:00 PM Moscow time; 1:00 PM London time).
To access the conference call live, please dial:
A replay of the call will be available until November 1, 2019. To access the replay, please dial:
Yandex (NASDAQ and MOEX:YNDX) is a technology company that builds intelligent products and services powered by machine learning. Our goal is to help consumers and businesses better navigate the online and offline world. Since 1997, we have delivered world-class, locally relevant search and information services. Additionally, we have developed market-leading on-demand transportation services, navigation products, and other mobile applications for millions of consumers across the globe. Yandex, which has 34 offices worldwide, has been listed on the NASDAQ since 2011.
More information on Yandex can be found at https://yandex.com/company.
This press release contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. These include statements regarding our anticipated revenues for full year 2019. Actual results may differ materially from the results predicted or implied by such statements, and our reported results should not be considered as an indication of future performance. The potential risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ from the results predicted or implied by such statements include, among others, macroeconomic and geopolitical developments affecting the Russian economy or our business, changes in the political, legal and/or regulatory environment, competitive pressures, changes in advertising patterns, changes in user preferences, technological developments, and our need to expend capital to accommodate the growth of the business, as well as those risks and uncertainties included under the captions “Risk Factors” and “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects” in our Annual Report on Form 20-F for the year ended December 31, 2018, which is on file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and is available on our investor relations website at http://ir.yandex.com/sec.cfm and on the SEC website at www.sec.gov. All information in this release and in the attachments is as of October 25, 2019, and Yandex undertakes no duty to update this information unless required by law.
To supplement our condensed consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we present the following non-GAAP financial measures: ex-TAC revenues, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted ex-TAC EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, adjusted net income margin and adjusted ex-TAC net income margin. The presentation of these financial measures is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. For more information on these non-GAAP financial measures, please see the tables captioned “Reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to the nearest comparable U.S. GAAP measures”, included following the accompanying financial tables. We define the various non-GAAP financial measures we use as follows:
Adjusted EBITDA means U.S. GAAP net income plus (1) depreciation and amortization, (2) SBC expense, (3) accrual of expense related to the contingent compensation that may be payable to employees in connection with certain business combinations, (4) interest expense, (5) loss/(income) from equity method investments, (6) income tax expense, less (1) effect of Yandex.Market deconsolidation, (2) interest income and (3) other (income)/loss, net
Adjusted EBITDA margin means adjusted EBITDA divided by U.S. GAAP revenues
Adjusted net income means U.S. GAAP net income plus (1) SBC expense adjusted for the income tax reduction attributable to SBC expense, (2) accrual of expense related to the contingent compensation that may be payable to certain employees in connection with certain business combinations, (3) amortization of debt discount related to our convertible debt adjusted for the related reduction in income tax, less (1) foreign exchange (gains)/losses adjusted for increase/(reduction) in income tax attributable to foreign exchange (gains)/losses and (2) effect of deconsolidation of former subsidiaries
Adjusted net income margin means adjusted net income divided by U.S. GAAP revenues
These non-GAAP financial measures are used by management for evaluating financial performance as well as decision-making. Management believes that these metrics reflect the organic, core operating performance of the company, and therefore are useful to analysts and investors in providing supplemental information that helps them understand, model and forecast the evolution of our operating business.
Although our management uses these non-GAAP financial measures for operational decision-making and considers these financial measures to be useful for analysts and investors, we recognize that there are a number of limitations related to such measures. In particular, it should be noted that several of these measures exclude some recurring costs, particularly share-based compensation. In addition, the components of the costs that we exclude in our calculation of the measures described above may differ from the components that our peer companies exclude when they report their results of operations.
Below we describe why we make particular adjustments to certain U.S. GAAP financial measures:
We believe that it may be useful for investors and analysts to review certain measures both in accordance with U.S. GAAP and net of the effect of TAC, which we view as comparable to sales commissions and bonuses but, unlike sales commissions and bonuses, are not deducted from U.S. GAAP revenues. By presenting revenue, adjusted EBITDA margin and adjusted net income margin net of TAC, we believe that investors and analysts are able to obtain a clearer picture of our business without the impact of the revenues we share with our partners.
SBC is a significant expense item, and an important part of our compensation and incentive programs. As it is a non-cash charge, however, and highly dependent on our share price at the time of equity award grants, we believe that it is useful for investors and analysts to see certain financial measures excluding the impact of these charges in order to obtain a clearer picture of our operating performance.
We may incur expenses in connection with acquisitions that are not indicative of our recurring core operating performance. In particular, we are required under U.S. GAAP to accrue as expense the contingent compensation that is payable to certain employees in connection with certain business combinations. We eliminate these acquisition-related expenses from adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income to provide management and investors a tool for comparing on a period-to-period basis our operating performance in the ordinary course of operations.
Because we hold significant assets and liabilities in currencies other than our Russian ruble operating currency, and because foreign exchange fluctuations are outside of our operational control, we believe that it is useful to present adjusted net income and related margin measures excluding these effects, in order to provide greater clarity regarding our operating performance.
We believe that it is useful to present adjusted net income and related margin measures excluding the effect of deconsolidation of former subsidiaries and to present certain other financial metrics described above in order to provide a clearer picture of our underlying operating performance and to provide meaningful period-to-period comparisons. Adjusted net income in 9 months 2018 excludes a gain from deconsolidation of Yandex.Market following the formation of Yandex.Market joint venture by Yandex and Sberbank in April 2018.
We also adjust net income for interest expense representing amortization of the debt discount related to our convertible notes issued in Q4 2013 and Q1 2014 which matured in Q4 2018. We have eliminated this expense from adjusted net income as it is non-cash in nature and is not indicative of our ongoing operating performance.
The tables at the end of this release provide detailed reconciliations of each non-GAAP financial measure we use from the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
(in millions of Russian rubles and U.S. dollars, except share and per share data)
