Street in the middle of the coronavirus outbreak in Rome, Italy, on March 16, 2020.
European stocks rose Friday, as investors appeared willing, for now,  to put their faith in vast stimulus moves from central banks and governments to shore up economies against the fast-spreading coronavirus pandemic.
Up for a second straight session, the Stoxx Europe 600 index SXXP,
Central banks and governments have sped up efforts to cushion the economic blow already being delivered by the coronavirus pandemic, which has ground many industries to a halt.
On Friday, the Bank of England suspended 2020 stress tests for the eight major U.K. banks and building societies, a day after cutting interest rates for the second time in a week. The BoE and European Central Bank have announced expanded asset-buying programs this week as well.
In the U.S., two of the Trump administration’s top economic officials expressed hope on Thursday that Congress could pass a vast economic recovery package by Monday. More moves were seen by the Federal Reserve, which extended dollar swap lines with central banks on Thursday.
The greenback has surged as investors  have panicked into the currency, but that appeared to ease on Friday as the ICE Dollar Index DXY,
fell 0.8%, though it is still up 3% this week.
Analysts warned, though, that gains may not last and next week could see a renewal of volatile trading after what could be a weekend of difficult coronavirus headlines from Europe. Infection  and death rates continue to climb in locked down countries such as Italy and Spain. Cases are also rising across the U.S., where California has just been placed on a statewide lockdown.
The “full extent of the economic damage remains unknown, yet markets tend to move ahead of the real world and will be pricing for 2021-22 already — global stocks will overshoot and bottom out well ahead of the real economy,” said Neil Wilson, chief market analyst for Markets.com.
“On the other hand, a drawdown of this scale usually takes months to play out. Picking a bottom is always the hardest part of trading,” he told clients in a note.
U.S. crude futures US:CLJ20 were down 6.7%, reversing an intraday move that saw futures up 6.2% earlier, to trade at $23.38 a barrel, in a week that has been marked by wild swings. Global benchmark May Brent crude futures UK:BRNK20 fell 1.7% to $28 a barrel after earlier gains.
The moves for crude come as Russia indicated it would like to see higher prices, and the Trump administration reportedly said it may intervene in oil-price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia. Heavily weighted oil companies gave up some gains, with BP BP,
