On the FTSE 100, miners regained some ground, despite the continued spread of the Chinese coronavirus that first triggered nerves among investors.
European shares regained ground today after shedding around 2.5pc on Monday. Main stock markets closed with gains of close to 1pc.
Across the pond, the Dow Jones jumped 0.7pc in midday exchanges after US consumer confidence rose by more than expected in January.
Topping the blue-chip index, InterContinental Hotels – which is expected to take a hit from a fall in travelling while the outbreak persists – regained some ground, ending the day up 140p at £47.10.
The biggest faller was Diageo, which closed down 46p at £31.47 after analysts at JP Morgan said they expected a slowdown in key markets would lead to the drinks maker reporting profits at the lower end of its target range.
Citymapper is to explore a sale for its transport app Credit: Citymapper
Citymapper has put itself up for sale after attracting interest from some of the world's biggest technology companies despite mounting losses, my colleague Matthew Field writes.
The UK start-up has appointed advisers, New York-based bank Raine, to lead on exploratory discussions with potential buyers, Sky News reported.
The start-up has reportedly received unsolicited interest in licensing deals for its technology as well as interest in a full takeover.
While the identities of the prospective buyers was not immediately clear, technology sources have long cited Apple as a potential suitor. Sky News added Microsoft and Google's parent company, Alphabet, could be interested in the start-up.
HSBC, Goldman Sachs and Facebook are restricting staff travel to China. amid ongoing coronavirus fears.
Europe’s largest bank has banned all staff travel to mainland China until further notice and travel to Hong Kong for two weeks.
The lender has also asked staff who have recently visited the country to undergo a self-imposed quarantine, according to Reuters.
Goldman Sachs and Facebook have announced similar staff precautions.
Stocks in London have rebounded today, with the FTSE 100 closing 0.93pc higher to 7,480.69 and the FTSE 250 pushing ahead 0.61 to 21,433.06.
However London's benchmark index has still lost 100 points over the last two sessions amid coronavirus worries.
Just Eat has struck a deal to deliver McDonald's in the UK, making it the second delivery company to partner with the US giant after it teamed up with Uber Eats in 2017.
The food delivery company said the partnership with McDonald's, which it described as "exclusive" even though the Uber agreement remains in place, would begin later this year in the UK and Ireland.
Sherri Malek, an analyst at RBC, said the partnership was "another significant win" for Just Eat after it announced a delivery tie-up with bakery chain Greggs earlier this month. She added the deal should bolster the company's orders as McDonald’s and Greggs are the two largest players in the breakfast and lunch categories.
It came as Just Eat said UK order growth slowed to 8pc in 2019, compared to 17pc growth achieved the previous year.
Thanks for following along today as always. We will be having a look at how markets closed very shortly.
"Stock markets in Europe have pulled back some of the ground that was lost yesterday," says David Madden of CMC Markets.
"The positive move in equities is probably down to short covering plus bargain hunting as the health crisis has deepened. The longer the news story hangs around, traders might build up a tolerance to it.
"The Chinese central bank has made it clear it is willing to use monetary tools in a bid to lift economic sentiment, should they feel it is required. The message from Beijing reassured traders somewhat, but the acid test will be whether the rebound lasts or not."
With the sun once again setting upon the UK, the time has come for my significantly more energetic colleague LaToya Harding to seizing the live blog wheel. Thanks for following along – I’ll be back tomorrow, when we’ll be bringing you the latest updates ahead of the Federal Reserve’s rates decision.
One of the market slump’s biggest victims? Copper
Although markets have looked a bit more cheerful today, one commodity has been on a continuously bad run since coronavirus first hit the scene: copper, which has been caught between the short-term effects of China being closed down for the Lunar New Year holiday, and the potentially longer-term worry of the virus itself.
Put simply by RBC’s Sam Crittenden, “China is the largest consumer of metals and most hard hit by the virus”. Here’s how that fall has looked:
The rescue wipes out US private equity fund Carlyle, which bought Addison Lee for £300m in 2013
Addison Lee’s banks have struck a deal to take control of Europe's biggest minicab firm.
My colleague Oliver Gill reports:
Lenders have agreed to inject £45m of new cash into the debt-laden business , according to sources.
The rescue wipes out US private equity fund Carlyle, which bought Addison Lee for £300m in 2013.
It is understood terms were thrashed out in meetings that took place overnight.
US consumer confidence jumped to a five-month high this month, extending a recent comeback as Americans took a brighter view of conditions on the labour market.
The Conference Board’s consumer confidence survey, which speaks to 3,000 households, rose to 131.6 from a December reading of 128.2
The index, which has historically hugged close to the unemployment rate, has become detached from the measure in recent years.
So just how bad have things got for Boeing? Very bad, says our Industry Editor Alan Tovey, who has taken a close look at what analysts are expecting ahead of the company’s annual report tomorrow. He writes:
Boeing is set to report a $9bn ($6.9bn) profit plunge when it posts annual results tomorrow as the impact of the 737 Max’s grounding blows a hole in the aerospace giant’s balance sheet.
Analysts expect the company to report profits of about $1.5bn, compared with the $10.5bn last time round. Revenues are also forecast to fall about 20pc to $80bn.
Here’s what analysts are saying:
Jeremy Bragg, aerospace analyst at Redburn, says the company is likely to book another multi-billion charge as braces for falling margins as costs from the Max run into future years.
As expected, Wall Street has made an upbeat open, with moderate gains across all the US’s main indices.
In Europe, the picture is much the same, though the pound has slid somewhat amid continued trader nerves ahead of Thursday’s decision on rates.
A group of grounded 737 Maxes Credit: Mike Blake/REUTERS
Responding to those durable goods and capital goods order figures (see 1:52pm update), Pantheon Macroeconomics’ Ian Shepherdson said:
The jump in the headline hides much weaker details, with orders for non-defense capital goods down 0.9pc, the worst performance since April. The monthly numbers are noisy, though, and the trend is drifting down slowly, much less bad than the rollover implied by business surveys. This story seems unlikely to change much in the near future.
Combining two of the day’s key topics, here’s the latest on the 737 Max saga – Ryanair has warned employees of possible job losses spurred by the grounding. Reuters has the story:
Ryanair has warned pilots of possible base closures and job cuts as the date for delivery of its first 10 of Boeing’s grounded 737 MAX aircraft slipped into the autumn. In a memo dated Jan. 27 seen by Reuters, the low-cost airline said Boeing would not deliver the first aircraft until September or October at the earliest, as Ryanair does not take deliveries during its peak summer months of June, July and August.
US durable goods orders jumped in December while capital equipment orders fell.
The swing in durable goods orders from a 2.1pc fall the previous month to a 2.4pc gain reflect a sharp rise in big-ticket orders, particularly for military hardware, that offset a decline in commercial aircraft orders.
Meanwhile, the unexpected drop in orders for capital equipment suggested an ongoing weakness in business investment.
Demand for commercial aircraft fell a sharp 74.7pc, reflecting the struggle Boeing has had getting its troubles Boeing has had with its troubled 737 Max plane following two fatal crashes.
The UK will accept Huawei tech within its 5G network Credit: Dominic Lipinski/PA
Here are some of the day’s top stories:
City regulator puts pressure on banks to justify new 40pc overdraft charges : Banks’ overdraft charges are being scrutinised by the financial watchdog after its review of these deals led to most banks charging about the same amount.
Crest Nicholson boss pledges return to the top after turbulent year : Crest Nicholson has vowed to return to the top tier of housebuilding after admitting it has fallen down the rankings in recent years following a rocky spell of trading.
Harry de Quetteville: We must get over Huawei’s 5G victory and focus on the real threat : Like the launch of Sputnik in 1957, Huawei is not really a fight about technology. Rather, it is emblematic of a superpower showdown, a simple, scary signifier to the West that its preeminence is being challenged.
If you interested in the thinking begind the Government’s decision on Huawei, the National Cyber Security Centre’s technical director Dr Ian Levy has written an interesting blogpost on the security analysis that is conducted on the UK’s telecoms networks. He writes:
It is worth noting that this is about managing risk. Nothing we do can entirely remove risk in any telecoms network with any vendor and so our intent is to get the risk down to an acceptable level in all the different networks using all the different vendors.
Sentiment has improved slightly across European equity markets, with investor shaking off some mid-morning doubts to push equities up. We’re still a long way off rebuilding yesterday’s losses.
There’s still a while to go until trading opens on Wall Street, but the US’s top indices are eyeing similar gains, in the half a point region.
The 300,000 investors of the Neil Woodford's flagship equity Income fund will face losses of more than 60pc as the money in the defunct portfolio starts being returned to the manager’s former backers.
My colleague Jonathan Jones reports:
Link Fund Solutions, the fund’s administrator, said it would return money generated from selling down 74pc of the fund’s £2.9bn in assets. This will come from the portion of the portfolio invested in cash and large British companies, run by BlackRock since Mr Woodford was sacked in October .
The remainder of the fund still invested in difficult-to-sell unlisted companies while the fund’s administrator attempts to find a buyer for the stocks.
Units in the fund have been valued between 58.9p and 46.4p and investors will face varying losses depending on when they bought the fund and which fund shop they used.
Following the Government’s decision to allow its technology within parts of the UK’s 5G network, Huawei vice-president Victor Zhang said the Chinese tech firm felt “reassured” by the decision. He added:
We agree a diverse vendor market and fair competition are essential for network reliability and innovation, as well as ensuring consumers have access to the best possible technology.
Government report essentially says that the risk of Huawei placing 'hidden backdoors' in its equipment is low as there are considerably easier, less risky ways for the Chinese state to launch a cyber attack on the UK pic.twitter.com/ygv55e697V
A lot of attention is being paid today to new proposals unveiled by the Migration Advisory Committee, which advises the Government on matters related to immigration.
In a newly-released report detailing its latest research into a points-based immigration system, and suggesting salary threshold restriction for workers coming to the UK, the MAC proposed cutting the salary threshold for new entrants to £25,600. It currently stands at £30,000.
Read more: Boris Johnson should reduce salary threshold for migrants who want to enter UK after Brexit, says report
In an – extensive – report, the body said:
The general threshold should be set at the 25th percentile for the eligible occupations as it currently is, but the expansion of eligible jobs to include medium-skill occupations would mean this would currently be about £25,600, a reduction of around £4,400 on current levels. This means that most employers will be able to hire migrants at wages which many existing workers in those occupations are currently being paid.
That proposed change has been welcomed by several business groups this morning, though they struck a cautious tone over the scale and pace of changes.
The BCC’s Jane Gratton said:
Businesses want a flexible immigration system that provides access to the staff they need, without costly delays or red tape.
While a reduction in the salary threshold is welcome and the list of eligible jobs has been expanded, it is disappointing that recommendations did not take account of regional salary differences. This risks limiting access to skills for companies in regions and nations across the UK.
The Institute of Directors’ Edwin Morgan added:
As the report says, there is no perfect immigration system, and it’s extremely hard for governments to predict what skills businesses will need in future. The Government have been clear they want to restrict immigration, but this will always involve trade-offs in terms of economic dynamism.
Chinese telecoms giant Huawei will help to build Britain’s 5G network, despite it being designated a “high-risk vendor”.
Despite facing intense pressure from the White House and his own back benches, Boris Johnson has given the green light to the company.
As anticipated, Huawei will be allowed to develop “non core” parts of the network and it faces a market share cap of 35 per cent.
The decision will anger the US, after Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo warned the move could damage intelligence sharing and a post-Brexit trade deal with America.
You can follow the latest updates on our politics live blog – I’ll track the business reaction here.
Just in: the government has approved the use of Huawei technology in Britain’s 5G network. However, it will only be permitted to supply tech to the non-“core” parts of the network, and restricted to a 35pc cap within those peripheral parts.
— Gordon Rayner (@gordonrayner) January 28, 2020
— Paul Waugh (@paulwaugh) January 28, 2020
Breaking: Boris Johnson is controversially allowing Huawei into Britain’s new 5G mobile network despite also formally designating it “a high risk vendor”. National Security Council decisions taken this morning.
Mr O'Leary called Flybe a ‘loss-making turkey’ Credit: Simon Dawson/Bloomberg
Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary has launched a stinging attack on the Government's business strategy, saying it is “doomed to fail” as he escalated the row over the rescue deal given to ailing carrier Flybe.
My colleague Simon Foy reports:
In his latest letter to Chancellor Sajid Javid, Mr O’Leary reiterated his view that the Government’s decision to allow Flybe to delay air passenger duty (APD) payments was “in breach of state aid rules”, and added that ministers were being “blindsided” by the regional airline’s billionaire owners.
Mr O’Leary said: “If the first critical business decision of your new Government is to bail out a loss-making turkey like Flybe, for the sole benefit of billionaires like Richard Branson, Delta Airlines, and Cyrus Capital, then your business strategy is doomed to fail.”
The CBI has also released its latest distributive trades  survey, measuring sentiment among firm which, uh, distribute (i.e. retailers, wholesalers and the motor trades). That gauge is looking more positive, with a return to growth after a dip into the doldrums at the end of last year.
Obviously, most UK economic data is being carefully watched in case it might change minds over at Threadneedle Street ahead of Thursday’s rates decision. That being said, Pantheon Macroeconomics’ Samuel Tombs thinks this release probably won’t make the cut for consideration. He writes:
We doubt that January’s CBI Distributive Trades Survey will have any bearing on the MPC’s interest rate decision.
He nonetheless called the figures “moderately encouraging”, and consistent with “year-over-year growth in retail sales volumes rising to 2.5pc in January, from 0.7pc in December”.
UK retail sales stayed flat in January according the CBI, marking a second unchanged month in a row, with companies holding little hope of any change next month.
The business consortium said sales “were seen as poor for the time of year, but to a lesser degree than in December”. It added:
Sales performance varied across the retail sector. In contrast to flat overall sales volumes, growth in internet sales picked up to the long-run average and is expected to accelerate slightly further next month.
2020 looks set to be another tough year for the sector as growth in households’ disposable income is set to remain modest and retailers continue to battle longer-term issues such as digital disruption and the cumulative burden of policy costs. The upcoming Budget provides an opportunity for the Chancellor to support retailers, primarily by fixing the broken business rates system.
John Lewis Partnership will no longer publish weekly updates on how many goods it has sold Credit: Kirsty O'Connor/PA
The owner of struggling John Lewis and Waitrose will stop publishing weekly updates on how many goods it has sold as it inches closer to bringing the two businesses together.
My colleague Laura Onita reports:
The mutual, which is owned by its employees, said the next update would be in September. It will no longer break down sales and operating profits between the two brands either.
This will make it more difficult to tell how the two businesses are doing independently.
The partnership said it would include figures in trading updates focusing on general merchandise, grocery and services.
Fashion house Burberry is the biggest faller on the FTSE 100 today, as investors remain nervous that coronavirus will knock the group’s earnings in east Asia.
UBS said the outbreak “heightens the risk for the luxury goods stocks in the near term”, adding:
Fundamentally we remain positive on the sector. However, the potential de-rating and downside risk to estimates should the virus continue to spread, thus impacting the global tourism, and especially the Chinese consumer, makes us more cautious in the near term.
Luxury titan LVMH – which owns brands including Louis Vuitton and Moët – is set to report its full-year results after the close tonight, becoming the first group in the sector to do so post-outbreak. UBS analysts said they expect a “solid” fourth quarter performance, adding: “we believe that the focus for investors will be on the implications of the virus rather than the numbers themselves”.
They added that the potential impact of disruption was far greater than in 2003, during the Sars pandemic, because of the expansion of China’s share of global consumption, writing:
We believe that it may be risky to compare the current coronavirus outbreak to the 2003 of Sars due to back then smaller contribution of Chinese consumption to the luxury sector as well as different economic backdrop, which resulted in a faster pace of a recovery.
They said smaller firms would be the most vulnerable to any disruption.
Virgin Money shares have risen slightly today Credit: Handout
Virgin Money said first-quarter trading had remained in line with expectations, with its loan book shrinking as mortgage lending fell
The FTSE 250 bank – formerly CYBG – said it had performed will in a “difficult market”, with an 0.1pc decline in overall customer lending since the end of September.
Increases in its personal and business lending operations weren’t enough to offset a 0.8pc fall in mortgages, which makes up the lion’s share of its loan activity. The lender said the drop was expected, pinning it on a decision “not to compete aggressively” during the “seasonally competitive period”.
Chief executive David Duffy said:
In a difficult market, our own performance has remained on track and we continue to make strong progress on our ambition to disrupt the status quo.
Jefferies analysts branded it a “no surprises” update, adding the company’s commentary
...alludes to a pick up in sentiment post the election but an industry facing challenges from competitive pricing pressures and the obvious commentary around not knowing the final Brexit settlement.
Europe’s stock markets have shed most of their early gains now, and are cruising along pretty flat, following some more bad news of the coronavirus front.
Saga focuses on products and services for over-50s Credit: James Davis Photography / Alamy
Shares in Saga – which provides products and services for over-50s – have pushed upwards today, after the group reiterated that it expects profits to be in line with its guidance.
The group said margins would be at the higher end of its anticipated range across its motor, home and insurance divisions, reflecting “lower new business strain”.
The group said it was seeing “good progress and a significant improvement in the quality of execution” of its new strategic directive, which involves a renewed focus on quality.
Euan Sutherland, its recently-appointed chief executive officer, said:
Although Saga continues to face challenging markets in insurance and travel, we have a clear focus on improving performance and cost efficiencies within the Group, while strengthening our financial position and reducing debt.
The company’s shares have performed poorly over the past year, dropping more than 60pc.
While the Bank of England’s decision hangs in the balance, investors appear much more certain about which way the US Federal Reserve will swing when it makes it own rates decision tomorrow.
Implied probability based on market positioning suggests traders are anticipating rate will be held, with Fed ratesetters holding onto the powder they have left.
Lee Hardman, a currency analyst at Japanese bank MUFG< said:
The emergence of the coronavirus and building signs of contagion in the financial markets provides another reason for the Fed to maintain a cautious outlook at this week’s FOMC meeting.
Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell Credit: Jacquelyn Martin/AP
Sterling – which perked up a little on Monday after better-than-expected mortgage data – is dropping again today, as traders stay cautious ahead of Thursday’s Bank of England rates decision.
Positioning in currency markets suggests the Monetary Policy Commitee’s decision remains on a knife’s edge, with a 55pc chance of rates being held.
A rate cut would likely soften sterling, as it is less attractive for investors to hold currencies that attract a lower interest rate.
On top of that uncertainty, a faintly pessimistic tone ahead of the initiation of post-Brexit trade talks may be increasing nerves.
More corporate news: retirement property-builder McCarthy & Stone reported full-year results in line with expectations, despite a fall in profits.
The company reported an adjusted operating profit of £68.1m for the 14 month period ending October 31 2019, meeting market estimates despite a “challenging market and strategic structural changes”.
Its revenues for the period rose to £725m, up from £672m the year before, a gain which the group said had been supported by an increased average selling price.
McCarthy & Stone said reservations for its properties had been muted somewhat during November and December due to General Election doubts, but said “increased marketing activity” was driving interest.
Chief executive John Tonkiss said:
The group’s new strategy has driven a solid FY19 trading performance in a difficult market.  We have a strong balance sheet, a continued focus on delivery of operational improvements across our business and an ongoing commitment to delivering high quality developments and five star customer satisfaction.
Irn-Bru-maker AG Barr is leading risers on the FTSE 250 currently, popping up more than 11pc after saying it anticipates its full-year profits to come in at the top end of expectations.
AG Barr said it had adjusted its promotional and pricing position to “align more closely with the market” over the period, which it said lowered sales volumes but increased the “realised price” per sale.
Chief executive Roger White said:
Our focus remains the delivery of long-term value growth.  We are taking action to reset our business and we enter the new financial year with confidence and a strong trading plan.
Hargreaves Lansdown’s Nicholas Hyett praised the group for getting through a “pretty miserable” 2019, adding:
While 2020 will benefit from less demanding comparatives, an increasingly health conscious consumer remains a challenge for the group and we’ll be interested to see how new low sugar alternatives to the famously sugary Irn-Bru have been faring when full-year results come out in March.
The housebuilder blamed Brexit uncertainty for volatility in its operations Credit: Chris Ratcliffe/Bloomberg
Housebuilder Crest Nicholson has beaten estimates for its full-year revenues narrowly, despite a sharp drop in overall profits.
The FTSE 250 group blamed “concerns over political and economic uncertainty stemming from Brexit” for volatility in its operations, with profit dropping from £168.7m to £121.1m, in line with previous guidance offered by the group.
Nonetheless, its full-year revenues came in at £10.9bn, ahead of City estimates of £1.07bn, and its profit margin improved. The group said it had made good progress in implementing its updated strategy.
Chief executive Peter Truscott said December’s General Election result should be a catalyst for the business:
We believe the decisive political outcome should provide support for the sector in the near term. While it is too early to form a view on the impact for FY2020 trading we are seeing some encouraging signs. Footfall and visitor numbers on our developments have increased and traffic on our website is up.
Peel Hunt analysts said the results held “few surprises”, adding:
The outlook has certainly improved post the general election and the solid forward sales position of £504m provides some comfort.
As indicated by futures trading, European stock markets have clawed back some of their losses this morning, all trading slightly higher despite ongoing uncertainty.
We see some relief early doors for Europe but global equity markets are still rocking, with boards lit up red as investors manage risk in the face of China’s coronavirus outbreak. There are no signs of this letting up – but at least market expectations have shifted markedly since the middle of last week to better reflect the risk of a rapid rise in confirmed cases.
The problem is investors have very limited visibility of the current situation in China, have virtually zero knowledge of epidemiology and virology, and have no clue how bad it will get or lasting the impact will be. Risk models are not geared for this situation.
Settling the probes would put to rest corruption allegations that reached high into the ranks at Airbus Credit: ERIC PIERMONT/AFP
Airbus said it had reached agreement in principle with authorities in the UK, France and the US to settle bribery allegations that have shadowed the European airplane manufacturer for years.
The accords remain subject to approval by courts in the three countries, as well as the US regulator, Airbus said in a statement, following earlier reports by Bloomberg News and other media.
“For legal reasons, Airbus cannot make any comments on the details of its discussions with the investigating authorities,” the planemaker said. The Serious Fraud Office declined to comment late on Monday, as did the US Department of Justice and representatives at the office of France’s financial prosecutor, the Parquet National Financier.
Settling the probes would put to rest corruption allegations that reached high into the ranks at Airbus and were partly responsible for an exodus of top management.
