FX Strategists at UOB Group noted EUR/USD is expected to keep the consolidative stance unchanged in the next weeks.
24-hour view: “We expected EUR to strengthen yesterday but were of the view ‘1.1330 is unlikely to come into the picture’. However, EUR soared to an overnight high of 1.1348 before easing off quickly. While upward pressure has eased somewhat, it is too soon to expect a sustained pullback. The current movement is viewed as part of a consolidation phase and for today; EUR is likely to trade between 1.1270 and 1.1350.”
Next 1-3 weeks: “While EUR closed on a relatively strong note for the second day in a row (1.1306, +0.43%), there is no change to our view. As highlighted yesterday (23 Jun, spot at 1.1270), the movement in EUR is viewed as a consolidation phase and EUR is expected to trade between 1.1170 and 1.1380 for a period. Looking forward, the risk appears to be higher on the upside but EUR has to close above 1.1400 in order to indicate it is ready to move towards the March’s peak at 1.1492. At this stage, the odds for such a scenario are not high.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
