The US reported fewer cases of coronavirus but could be due to the usual weekend lags.
US Federal Reserve Chief Powell will testify before Congress this Tuesday.
EUR/USD is holding on to familiar levels amid the absence of clear clues.
The EUR/USD pair surged to 1.1287 this Monday, changing course during US trading hours to close the day little changed on the upside in the 1.1230 price zone. Financial markets struggled with pandemic-related headlines throughout the day, as the number of cases has continued to rise over the weekend, mainly in the US Southern States. European equities posted modest daily gains, while US indexes followed the lead, with a bit more momentum. The US reported fewer cases this Monday, but there’s a trick to the improvement: usually, the number of cases reported during the weekend decreased, although Arizona informed that one of its testing centers didn’t provide an update, while is a well-known trend that fewer cases are reported on Mondays amid fewer testing and delays during the weekend.
German inflation beat estimates according to June preliminary estimates, recovering from 0.5% to 0.8% YoY. However, the EU Economic Sentiment Indicator for the same month printed at 75.7 from 80 in the previous month. The US, on the other hand, published May Pending Home Sales , which were down by 5.1% YoY against the expected -44.6%,  and the Dallas ed Manufacturing Business Index for June, which improved from -49.2 to -6.1.
This Tuesday, the EU will publish the preliminary estimate of June inflation data, while the US will release the Chicago PMI for June, seen at 45 from 32.3. More relevant, Fed’s head Powell, along with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, will testify before the House Financial Services Committee.
The EUR/USD pair is hovering around 1.1230 as the day comes to an end, neutral in the short-term. The early attempt to surpass a Fibonacci resistance failed, reflecting the absence of interest. In the 4-hour chart, the pair is trading below a mildly bearish 20 SMA, also below the 100 SMA. Technical indicators, in the meantime, hover around their midlines. The downside is being contained by buyers aligned around 1.1170, while the pair would need to break above 1.1310 to turn bullish.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
