Sino-American relations remain tense after the Pentagon listed 20 companies aiding supporting the Chinese military, opening the door to new sanctions. Earlier this week, White House adviser Peter Navarro said the trade deal is over – triggering a sell-off – before walking back his comments. Further details are set to move markets.
Trade relations between the US and the EU are also sensitive after Washington threatened to slap $3.1 billion on Brussels. The bloc said such levies would be "very damaging."
The European Central Bank's meeting minutes are set to shed light on the level of concerns among policymakers when they opted to bump up the bond-buying scheme. The document will also likely claim that the €600 billion boost was "proportional" – aiming to appease the German constitutional court.
New coronavirus cases and deaths remain low in Europe, but various outbreaks in Germany and Spain could impede plans to reopen the skies to normal flights and to salvaging the tourism season.
Apart from US data and coronavirus statistics from southern states, markets may pay more heed to the presidential elections. Democrat Joe Biden is ahead against President Donald Trump by some 9-10%. A clean sweep by the opposition party would weigh on stocks amid regulation fears.
All in all, euro/dollar traders have a lot on their plates – and most news is negative.
The world's most popular currency pair has been sliding back down alongside the downtrend support line – that previously served as resistance. On its way down it has dipped below the 50 and 200 Simple Moving Average on the four-hour chart . While momentum remains to the upside, EUR/USD failed to break above 1.1350, creating a double-top.
Overall, bears are in the lead.
Support awaits at the round 1.12 level, which worked as support last week. It is followed by 1.1170, the previous week's low. Further down, the next noteworthy cushion is only at 1.1075, levels seen in early June.
Resistance awaits at 1.1260, a temporary cap last week. It is followed by 1.1290, another swing high, and then by the mighty 1.1350.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
