Another small bodied daily candlestick suggests that it is still too early for the bulls to get excited on EUR/USD. The payrolls report eventually weighed on the pair, and once more it left a candlestick with a lot of bluster (long shadows) but little real conviction (small difference between open and close). Subsequently, as the dust settles we continue to see EUR/USD ranging. With today being a US public holiday, this outlook is unlikely to change much coming into the weekend (aside from perhaps some initial chop around the Eurozone PMIs). Taking a step back, the euro continues to find buyers around the range lows between $1.1165 and $1.1200 area. However, for the past few weeks now, the weight of sellers bares down on the market between $1.1300/$1.1350. Momentum indicators are flattening off, with the daily RSI still holding firm above 50, whilst Stochastics have also lost their negative impetus. There have now been five closing candles in a row which have lacked conviction, so this is a market looking for direction.
Hantec Markets' various market reports and commentary are issued by Hantec Markets Limited, who is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the UK, No. 502635. The reports are prepared and distributed for information purposes only.
Trading in Foreign Exchange (FX), Bullion and Contracts for Differences (CFDs) is not be suitable for all investors due to the high risk nature of these products. Forex, Bullion and CFDs are leveraged products that can result in losses greater than your initial deposit. The value of an FX, Bullion or CFD position may be affected by a variety of factors, including but not limited to, price volatility, market volume, foreign exchange rates and liquidity. You may lose your entire initial stake and you may be required to make additional payments. Please ensure you fully understand the risks involved, seeking independent advice if necessary prior to entering into such transactions. Before deciding to enter into FX, Bullion and/or CFD trading, you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. You should only invest in FX, Bullion and/or CFD trading with funds you are prepared to lose entirely. Therefore, only your excess funds should be placed at risk and anyone who does not have such excess funds should completely refrain from engaging in FX and/or CFD trading. Do not rely on past performance figures. If you are in any doubt, please seek further independent advice.
The reports do not constitute personal investment advice, nor do they take into account the individual financial circumstances or objectives of the clients who receive it. All information and research produced by Hantec Markets is intended to be general in nature; it does not constitute a recommendation or offer for the purchase or sale of any financial instrument, nor should it be construed as such. All of the views or suggestions within the reports are those solely and exclusively of the authors, and accurately reflect their personal views about any and all of the subject instruments and are presented to the best of the authors' knowledge. Any person relying on these reports to undertake trading does so entirely at his/her own risk and Hantec Markets does not accept any liability.
