Analysts at CIBC consider that a combination of factors call for a medium bullish run in the euro . The see the EUR/USD pair trading at 1.14 during the third quarter and at 1.15 in the fourth.
“A notable development from the macro devastation caused by the Covid crisis has been the galvanisation of politicians to look at fixing one of the key deficiencies of the system, namely a lack of fiscal transfers. Although we are not yet considering debt mutualisation, there has been progress on that end. For instance, Germany has come around to the concept of rescue funds largely made up of grants (and not loans only). Furthermore, the German government has left the ‘black zero’ budget policy behind via two significant fiscal expansions, the latter equating to a larger than expected €130bn. Although there has been pushback against the EU’s proposed €750bn rescue plan from the ‘Frugal Four’ (Austria, Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands), we expect this pushback to dissipate. In part, their opposition could be seen as a negotiating tactic as the rescue fund is being debated in parallel with the new 7 year Multi-Annual Financial Framework (MFF).”
“The combination of a plan advocating joint debt issuance, German fiscal expansion, and the extension of the ECB PEPP programmes underlines our bias towards medium run EUR impetus. While real money longs have extended to levels not seen since May 2018, leveraged investors continue to maintain a modest negative positional skew, leaving room for position adjustment. The risk to our EUR bullish view is if talks on the EU rescue fund breaks down.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
