EUR/USD has formed a new retracement wave below W H3 pivot. We could see a continuation move down if price holds.
The fear of further Corona Virus outbreak is spreading through Forex and Equity markets. Heavy ranges with occasional roller coasters make it hard for trends to establish. From the analysis point of view the EUR/USD is still in uptrend on 4h but it is changing the direction. We might see a further drop if the price still keeps it below W H3 pivot. Targets are 1.1170 and 1.1150. A bounce above 1.1278 might still retest the high of this week 1.1348.
For more daily technical and wave analysis and updates, sign-up up to our ecs.LIVE channel.
Elite CurrenSea Training Program(s) should not be treated as a recommendation or a suggestion to buy or sell any security or the suitability of any investment strategy for Student.
The purchase, sale, or advice regarding any security, other financial instrument or system can only be performed by a licensed Industry representative; such as, but not limited to a Broker/Dealer, Introducing Broker, FCM and/or Registered Investment Advisor. Neither Elite CurrenSea nor its representatives are licensed to make such advisements.
Electronic active trading (trading) may put your capital at risk, hence all trading decisions are made at your own risk. Furthermore, trading may also involve a high volume & frequency of trading activity. Each trade generates a commission and the total daily commission on such a high volume of trading can be considerable.
Trading accounts should be considered speculative in nature with the objective being to generate short-term profits. This activity may result in the loss of more than 100% of an investment, which is the sole responsibility of the client. Any trader should realise the operation of a margin account under various market conditions and review his or her investment objectives, financial resources and risk tolerances to determine whether margin trading is appropriate for them. The increased leverage which margin provides may heighten risk substantially, including the risk of loss in excess of 100% of an investment.
