Economists at Rabobank believe the US dollar has room to weaken in the next weeks, however, EUR/USD may have already priced in the improvement in global conditions and expect a return to risk-off environment to lead the pair below 1.10 by year-end.
“The value of the USD is likely to fall further if there is additional rotation back into EM assets. However, it could be argued that the risk trade is, or could soon become overvalued, at this point there is likely to be another wave of demand for the safe-haven USD.”
“Although the bounce in asset prices has been achieved with the support of copious amounts of central bank and fiscal support, these policies are unlikely to be able to protect all businesses from the developing demand shock. Already this can be seen in rising unemployment rate and growing savings ratios. Although investors have largely written off Q2 economic data as inevitably appalling, Q3 data still has the capacity to shock.”
“While we see the potential for the USD to weaken further in the weeks ahead if risk appetite stays strong, on a three-to-six month view we see shock for another round of safe-haven buying which could take EUR/USD back below 1.10 before year-end.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
