The pair is still trading narrowly within a 25 pips range today, with the low touching 1.1205 earlier before moving to around 1.1230 in the past hour.
Despite US futures keeping softer with S&P 500 futures down 0.6% and Dow futures down 0.8%, major currencies aren't too affected besides some slight strength in the yen.
The dollar side of the equation remains more mixed for the most part thus far.
For EUR/USD, sellers continue to keep near-term control but are struggling to go in search of a firmer break under 1.1200. They managed to tread waters under the figure level briefly in trading yesterday, but were unable to hold a break into the close.
As for today, there are large expiries also seen at the level and that may be a factor to keep price action more limited around the 1.1200 handle for now.
But if anything else, it is also telling that the market is still struggling for direction in general over the past two days. US stocks were also seen struggling yesterday initially but ended up trading higher and that is leaving investors with little to go on.
Looking ahead, we can expect more pessimistic coronavirus headlines coming out from the US later today and the key question will be is it enough to finally put a more meaningful drag on the market? Or will dip buyers step in to keep price action more contained?
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
