EUR/USD made a bullish bounce at the 23.6% Fibonacci support level. Now price is trying to break above the 21 ema zone, which is a full uptrend alignment.
The EUR/USD made a bullish bounce at the 23.6% Fibonacci support level. Now price is trying to break above the 21 ema zone, which is a full uptrend alignment. But the price will need to make a break or flag to confirm it.
The EUR/USD is approaching a key resistance level (orange line). This is a head and shoulders zone that could create a reversal (orange dotted arrows) if the bearish price action is strong. But if price action goes sideways, then it’s a bull flag pattern. This indicates a bullish breakout. The same is valid if price action breaks the resistance zone and then builds a flag. Both patterns confirm a wave 3-4-5 (purple) pattern.
The main target is aiming for the next zone at 1.1475-1.15, which is the confluence of both the 100% Fib and Wizz 9 target. If price action does build a deeper retracement, then the next 38.2% Fibonacci level is expected to be a support together with the 144 ema. Only a break below the 50% Fib invalidates (red x) the bullish outlook and wave 4.
The analysis has been done with the indicators and template from the SWAT method (simple wave analysis and trading). For more daily technical and wave analysis and updates, sign-up to our newsletter
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
