The turnaround in the risk mood spurred a reversal in EUR/USD yesterday, having fallen to a low of 1.1185 where near-term support around 1.1191 held before bounding to a high of 1.1275 and then retreating a little.
As we get the session going, the dollar is on the back foot as risk sentiment is tilting slightly more positive with US futures now posting gains of around 0.3% to 0.4% from flat levels earlier. In turn, this is pushing EUR/USD to session highs of 1.1276.
The overnight high at 1.1275 will offer some near-term resistance but levels around 1.1290-00 remain the key line in the sand limiting any real upside potential in the pair.
So far this week, price action remains more choppy bouncing on either side of the key hourly moving averages with downside limited around 1.1190-00 and upside limited by resistance closer towards 1.1290 as seen on Monday.
Buyers may be keeping near-term control for now but a lot will come down to how the market reacts to the US jobs report and coronavirus figures later to see if there is any real conviction to break out on either side of the extremes noted above.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
