The EUR/USD pair is up this Monday, nearing the 1.1300 level, and could extend its advance to 1.1350 after German inflation beat estimates in June, FXStreet’s Chief Analyst Valeria Bednarik reports.
“German inflation beat estimates according to June preliminary estimates, recovering from 0.5% to 0.8% YoY. However, the EU Economic Sentiment Indicator for the same month printed at 75.7 from 80 in the previous month. The US, on the other hand, will publish later today May Pending Home Sales , expected to have fallen by 44.6% in the month, and the Dallas ed Manufacturing Business Index for the same month, seen at -59 from -49.2.”
“In the 4-hour chart, EUR/USD is battling with a horizontal 100 SMA, although above the 20 and 200 SMA. Technical indicators, in the meantime, are advancing within positive levels, indicating increasing buying interest.”
“The pair could accelerate its advance on a break above 1.1310, the immediate resistance , although gains beyond 1.1350 seem unlikely amid ongoing uncertainty and first-tier data scheduled for later this week.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
