The player will sign a contract with the club for the next four seasons, until the end of the 2023/24 campaign, with a buy out clause of 400 million euros
FC Barcelona and Juventus have reached an agreement for the transfer of player Miralem Pjanić. The cost of the operation will be 60 million euros plus 5m in variables.
The player will sign a contract with the club for the next four seasons, until the end of the 2023/24 season, with a buy out clause of 400 million euros.
The player will remain with Juventus until the 2019/20 season is over.
Born on 2 April, 1990 in Tuzla (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Miralem Pjanić is a versatile player who after becoming a key member of the Juventus squad is joining Barça to show his quality in midfield.  He began his career in French football at Metz in 2007. Despite relegation, the midfielder had an excellent season and subsequently made the move to Olympique Lyonnais. Pjanić then began to make a name for himself in the world of football and became an essential member of the French side, helping them reach the semi-finals of the Champions League for the first time in their history during the 2009/10 season.
After playing 115 games and scoring 16 goals he headed for Italy, where he joined AS Roma in 2011. During 5 seasons and 200 games he scored 30 goals and gave 40 assists before signing for Juventus in 2016.  In Turin he once again showed his maturing talent and became a vital cog in one of the best club side's in the world, winning Serie A three times, as well as two Coppa Italia and one Italian Super Cup with la Vecchia Signora.
Pjanić played for the Luxembourg national side at youth level but at senior level he chose to represent Bosnia and Herzegovina. He is the 3rd most capped player in their history (92 games) and the 6th best goalscorer (15) and played at the 2014 World Cup and could figure in the Euro2020 competition next summer if Bosnia and Herzegovina can make it through the play offs.
Pjanic has played in every midfield position, whether that be as an attacking midfielder at Metz or in a slightly deeper role at Olympique Lyonnais and Roma. His ability to join attacks whilst coming from deep as well as his excellent free kick taking abilities have seen him score his fair share of goals. Furthermore, his technical quality, vision of the game and commitment make him one of the best midfielders in football today.
