ForexLive European FX news wrap: Currencies choppy, US futures climb
It was a session with little meaningful headlines as the market continues to try and digest the happenings during the week in European trading today.
We are still caught in the eye of the coronavirus storm and the market still isn't too sure about how to proceed as lockdown measures are being eased, but economic releases are showing the pain from all of this - which will echo further in the coming weeks/months.
Risk was more tepid earlier in the session and that saw the dollar gain some ground while the euro fell further after European leaders disappointed once again yesterday.
EUR/USD eased to a low of 1.0727 before keeping around 1.0760 as the dollar and yen gave up some gains as US futures stabilised near flat levels.
However, as we moved towards the tail end of the session, US futures rose higher and that pushed the dollar and yen a little weaker but the overall changes in the currencies space still leaves a lot to the imagination ahead of North American trading.
EUR/USD pushed higher to 1.0806 before settling just under there right now. Meanwhile, cable moved from a low of 1.2300 to 1.2377 and is now around 1.2350 levels.
AUD/USD also trended lower initially to 0.6337 before steadying around 0.6350-60 and then racing to a session high of 0.6384 as equities fared better.
Elsewhere, the bond market was less enthused with Treasuries still keeping near flat levels.
The weekend risk is still something to consider later in the day but if anything, the mood still suggests that the market is still being fickle-minded about the current situation.
Let's see if there will be any meaningful headlines to shift that narrative later today.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
