Forex - Euro, Pound Gain Ahead of Trade Talks; U.S. Dollar Slips on Virus Worries
Investing.com - The Euro and the pound both traded higher on Thursday in Asia ahead of U.K. and EU trade talks that were set for March 2.
Despite the gains today, traders are concerned that tough rhetoric from both sides recently suggests negotiations will be anything but smooth.
The EU's chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, said the bloc would not agree a deal "at any price" and rebuffed the idea of offering the U.K. a Canada-style trade agreement.
The U.S. dollar index that tracks the greenback against a basket of other currencies was down 0.1% to 98.832.
Reports that the spread of the new coronavirus globally continued to gather pace were cited as headwinds for the greenback.
The U.S. confirmed its first community transmission of the virus on Wednesday, as the Centers for Disease Control and Preventionn (CDC) said a California patient, who did not have a relevant travel history or exposure to another patient with the new coronavirus, was infected.
Meanwhile, the Bank of Korea unexpected kept rates unchanged even after the number of cases in South Korea rose above 1,500 today from just around 31 in a little more than a week.
On Wednesday, the World Health Organization said that for the first time the virus was spreading faster outside China, where it originated.
The USD/JPY pair lost 0.3% to 110.04 as the Japanese yen attracted some safe-haven demand.
The AUD/USD pair rose 0.2% to 0.6550, while the NSD/USD pair was little changed at 0.6292 as S&P Global Ratings affirmed New Zealand’s credit quality rating.
Forex - Euro, Pound Gain Ahead of Trade Talks; U.S. Dollar Slips on Virus Worries
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read Investing.com's comments guidelines and agree to the terms described.
