ForexLive European FX news wrap: Currencies mixed, US futures keep higher
Major currencies are sitting more mixed on the day as the market mood is also a little undecided in European morning trade.
European stocks are trading in a mixed mood, generally a little lower and more tepid. Meanwhile, US futures are still keeping around 0.6% to 0.8% higher on the session.
The euro and pound eased lower, with cable falling under 1.2400 while EUR/USD also tested fresh one-week lows just under 1.0800 but both are off their lows now.
The yen kept firmer during the session, with USD/JPY moving from 106.30 to 106.08.
Meanwhile, the dollar is mixed across the board as it is keeping slightly lower against the aussie and kiwi - though the ranges are still relatively narrow.
Elsewhere, oil prices gave up gains to fall into negative territory now and that is pushing USD/CAD higher to 1.4080 currently.
It seems that the market is still in search for some form of clear catalyst and for now, light flows are dictating the game and the technical levels are still being respected.
Looking ahead, we'll have US ADP employment change coming up so let's see how that will shape up North American trading as investors continue to figure out the risk mood.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
