This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
European stocks have been in the doldrums for years—but investors are starting to show some interest. In the past week, European equities saw their first inflows in 16 weeks, and the biggest inflows since February 2018, according to Bank of America Merrill Lynch Data Analytics. At the same time, the European Stoxx 600 index pushed to new 52-week highs.
Some reasons for the bullishness: The European Central Bank’s massive stimulus package in September, China’s ongoing stimulus, and recently, hopes that a Brexit deal could revive growth. Germany is teetering on recession, and auto sales plunged last year following a new initiative to measure fuel consumption and emissions .
Now, there’s a sense that Europe will weather even a hard Brexit. On Thursday, the Institutional Strategist newsletter increased its weighting in European equities and reduced cash in its model portfolio on the theory that Europe may “throw the kitchen sink, monetarily and fiscally, at the economy,” partly by boosting spending on military and security services. If so, then European stocks “could run more than the 50% to 100% moves that occurred after the [global financial crisis] and in 2012-13,” the newsletter wrote. Even if United Kingdom politics are in a stalemate, the exporter-heavy FTSE 100 will benefit from a weaker pound.
Ian Kirwan, a London-based investment manager at Eaton Vance and manager of Calvert International Equity (ticker: CWVGX), says that he continues to have “deep-seated concerns” about the longer-term health of Europe’s economy. Nevertheless, in July, he began adding a “few hundred basis points” to his European exposure, including cyclical names. Kirwan also added some European financials, which were trading at 20-year valuation lows amid negative interest rates: “When you start to get improvements in the [purchasing managers reports], you get a rise in bond yields.” He declined to name specific investments because he is still transacting.
“Some of these stocks we’re looking at are already pricing in a mild recession,” Kirwan says. “My outlook is that we avoid recession next year. And there’s a real value opportunity in the U.K.,” where home prices have fallen 15% to 20% since 2016.
Over the past 10 years, the iShares MSCI Eurozone (EZU) exchange-traded fund has returned 3.1% a year, compared with 13% for the SPDR S&P 500 ETF (SPY). But over the past month, the iShares ETF has returned 3.6%, versus 1.4% for the SPDR ETF.
Valuations also favor European equities. The S&P 500 index trades at 18.3 times forward earnings and yields 1.9%. Earnings are expected to grow 5% over the next 12 months. The MSCI Euro Index, meanwhile, trades at 14 times earnings and yields 3.9%. Earnings are expected to grow 4.6%. The FTSE 100 index of U.K. blue chips trades at 13 times earnings and yields 4.9%. Earnings are expected to grow 3.7%.
Given the uncertain economic climate, blindly buying the index makes no sense, says Gertjan van der Geer of Geneva-based of Pictet Asset Management and manager of the John Hancock Global Thematic Opportunities fund (JTKAX). Among Van der Geer’s picks are companies that benefit from strong, steady growth and operate in his central investment themes. One, Kingspan Group (KGSPY), is an Irish-domiciled manufacturer of building insulation, which “in the goal of energy efficiency is one of the key enablers to get green or LEED certification,” he says. Another is Vonovia (VNA.Germany), a German operator of smart residential buildings. “The return on invested capital is fantastic,” he says.
A German stimulus has yet to materialize, but the ECB has been nudging governments to boost fiscal spending amid rock-bottom borrowing costs. In May, the Green Party also won heavily in European parliament elections , demonstrating European concerns about climate change. That could mean stimulus spending on green technologies.
Sean Darby , the global strategist at Jefferies, has noted that green tech provides a “populist uplift with potentially very big multipliers for the European economy.” Among his recommended stocks are energy company E. ON (EOAN.Germany), wind-turbine company Nordex (NDX1.Germany), and GEA Group (G1A.Germany).
Bespoke recommends that investors be overweight European equities via ETFs like WisdomTree Europe Hedged Equity (HEDJ), which hedges euro currency exposure,and does well when local-currency stock prices are rising. In its Bespoke Tactical Macro Portfolio, it also owns iShares MSCI Germany (EWG) and iShares MSCI Sweden (EWD).
Make no mistake, Europe will remain underowned for some time.
“It has been an underperformer for so long that we don’t need to be first in,” says Charles Ryan, a portfolio manager at Evercore Wealth Management, who owns no European-domiciled companies.
What would change Ryan’s mind? Significant revisions in earnings-growth estimates. For now, indicators are “modestly getting better, but I don’t think I’d put dollars today to work in Europe as a global investor.”
European stocks have been in the doldrums for years—but investors are starting to show some interest.
