Global equities are once again proving their resilience as investors keep shrugging off concerns about second virus waves, which still appear to be mostly a US story within the G10, as new clusters in Europe do not look worrying enough to prompt a halt in reopening plans. Yesterday, the Federal Reserve's Jerome Powell delivered a sense of urgency to keep the virus under control, a view that may well be reiterated today during the House Testimony (1730 GMT). The recent cautious stance on the economic recovery by the Fed should also emerge, but will hardly generate any surprise in markets. Instead, in line with their glass-half-full approach yesterday, they may benefit from any confirmation that the Fed’s money printing machine will continue to provide a backstop to market downturns. Data-wise, the US calendar includes consumer confidence which should continue to show signs of a rebound. Market sentiment may remain relatively supported as we head into the US events today thanks to a boost overnight from encouraging Chinese PMIs, while the widely-expected signing of the Hong Kong security law left little dent in the markets. FX markets appear to be in stabilisation mode with G10 pairs trading mostly rangebound since the start of the week. The dollar failed to drop on the jump in equites yesterday, but it’s surely premature to call for any weakening in the USD-equities correlation, also considering month-end hedging is likely playing a role. At the same time, the USD is finding support from positive US data, so a jump in consumer confidence may keep the dollar’s downside limited today.
The euro continues to show solid momentum in the face of USD resilience as it awaits a new catalyst for another leg higher. The release of June inflation numbers may provide another EUR/USD bullish argument, and a move above 1% in core CPI could be greeted as a sign of some return to normality in price dynamics. Meanwhile, the EUR can benefit from news that a large coalition within the German parliament is offering its support to the European Central Bank in the dispute with German Constitutional Court on the quantitative easing programme.
Today’s speech by Prime Minister Boris Johnson is expected to include the pledge for an infrastructure boost as a way to revive the battered UK economy. GBP, however, is still mostly driven by Brexit uncertainty, and the impact of Johnson’s remarks should be short-lived compared to any headline from this week’s UK-EU talks.
The release of Canadian growth data at 1330 GMT today will tell markets how deep the economic slump has been in April. Consensus is centred around a -17% year-on-year read: although there is room for a less grim result, markets will struggle to find the positives in such depressed figures and the Canadian dollar may still remain capped today.
