The British pound is flat against the euro on Thursday.
GBP versus EUR was higher by 6 pips (+0.06%) to 1.1134 as of 4pm GMT.
GBP/EUR briefly probed 2-month lows before levelling off underneath 1.115 on Thursday. Yesterday the exchange rate tanked -0.87% leaving it lower by -0.3% for the week.
Mostly ‘dovish’ comments from the Bank of England’s Michael Sanders kept any prospect of a recovery in the pound in check after yesterday’s sell-off. Saunders generally maintained the impression given by other UK central bankers that monetary stimulus was more likely to increase than decrease.
Saunders described economic risks as tilted to the downside and sees the risk of the UK falling into a ‘lowflation trap’. A big downside risk to Sterling in recent days has been the mention of negative interest rates but Saunders neither confirmed nor denied he was moving his vote in that direction.
The break lower in the pound to its lowest in two months might have gathered more steam were it not for a generally positive tone across markets where European stocks charged higher for a third day.
With the S&P 500 breaking above 3000 and its 200-day moving average, similar attention has been paid to the EUR/USD and 1.10 as well as its own 200-day moving average. A consistent move beyond 1.10 in the euro versus the dollar would provide a positive influence on other euro currency pairs like EUR/GBP (negative to GBP/EUR).
German consumer price inflation (CPI) rising by a measly +0.6% year-over-year met expectations but when digging in the details the key German economic region of Saxony saw inflation rise by 0.9% rather than the 1.1% expected. Meanwhile in Spain deflation reared its head with a decline of -1.0% y/y.
Currencylive.com is a news site only and not a currency trading platform.
Currencylive.com is a site operated by TransferWise Inc. ("We", "Us"), a Delaware Corporation. We do not guarantee that the website will operate in an uninterrupted or error-free manner or is free of viruses or other harmful components. The content on our site is provided for general information only and is not intended as an exhaustive treatment of its subject. We expressly disclaim any contractual or fiduciary relationship with you on the basis of the content of our site, any you may not rely thereon for any purpose. You should consult with qualified professionals or specialists before taking, or refraining from, any action on the basis of the content on our site. Although we make reasonable efforts to update the information on our site, we make no representations, warranties or guarantees, whether express or implied, that the content on our site is accurate, complete or up to date, and DISCLAIM ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. Some of the content posted on this site has been commissioned by Us, but is the work of independent contractors. These contractors are not employees, workers, agents or partners of TransferWise and they do not hold themselves out as one. The information and content posted by these independent contractors have not been verified or approved by Us. The views expressed by these independent contractors on currencylive.com do not represent our views.
