Gold price hits all-time highs in euro, yen; USD next?
Neils Christensen Friday February 14, 2020 10:09
According  to some market analysts, the new highs in gold against two major currencies is  a further sign of gold's growing investment appeal as a safe-haven asset.
As  a non-yielding asset, gold's opportunity costs look attractive as the Germany  10-year yield currently trades around minus 40 basis points. Meanwhile, Japan's  10-year bond offers a negative yield of three basis points.
Marc  Chandler, managing director at Bannockburn Global Forex, said that gold does  look like an attractive asset compared to European and Japanese bonds. However,  he added that the record highs the yellow metal has marked against the two  currencies have more to with structural issues in the euro and yen
Chandler  noted that the euro has lost significant ground against the U.S. dollar since  the start of the year, falling from $1.125 to its latest low at $1.085. He  added that the euro still has more room to fall against the U.S. dollar. The euro is trading at its lowest level against the greenback in two years.
At  the same time, the U.S. dollar continues to trade at the top of its range  against the yen.
"The  dollar's rally has been extremely impressive this year," Chandler said.  "The rally we see in gold is just a function of weakness in the other  currencies."
Mike,  McGlone, senior market strategist at Bloomberg Intelligence, agreed that the  record highs in gold in other currencies are a reflection of growing weakness  in the forex market.
"Currency  debasement is typically a primary force for advancing the price of the  benchmark store of value, but it's less about the price of gold advancing and  more likely reflects the value of paper currency in decline," he said in a  report Friday.
However,  McGlone said that it could be only a matter of time before the U.S. dollar  takes a hit. Although the U.S. dollar has shown impressive strength so far in  2020, it has not shaken bullish sentiment in the gold market. Gold has held  critical support around $1,550 in the face of a stronger U.S. dollar.
McGlone  said that any equity market correction could be the trigger that pushes gold  back to its 2011 all-time highs.
"It  may be a matter of time before gold revisits its peak of about $1,900 an ounce,  guided by an extension of record highs in the metal when denominated in other  major currencies, notably the euro," he said.
Although  Chandler isn't paying a lot of attention to gold's move in other currencies, he  said that he remains bullish on the yellow metal, reiterating his call for  prices to push to $1,700 an ounce. He added that gold remains an attractive  asset in a world with bond yields falling further into negative territory in an  environment of heightened global geopolitical uncertainty.
Gold is not just  resilient against the U.S. dollar; it is also holding up despite record  valuation in U.S. equity markets. April gold futures last traded at $1,584.50  an ounce, up 0.36% on the day.
