Home / Forex Analysis / Gold Futures Rebound From Recent Losses, Settle Notably Higher
Gold Futures Rebound From Recent Losses, Settle Notably Higher
Gold prices edged higher on Monday, rebounding from one-month lows touched late last week, with investors betting on hopes of more stimulus from global central banks to help put the economies back on track.
The U.S. Federal Reserve is scheduled to announce its monetary policy decision Wednesday (June 10). Although the recent data on employment turned out to be a huge positive surprise, the central bank is widely expected to come out with more stimulus measures. The bank may well issue a warning of sorts with regard to near term economic outlook due to the impact of the coronavirus pandemic.
The yellow metal’s uptick was supported by a weak dollar. The dollar index drifted down more than 0.3% to 96.64.
Gold futures for August ended up $22.10 or about 1.3% at $1,705.10 an ounce.
Silver futures for July ended higher by $0.414 at $17.893 an ounce, while Copper futures for July settled at $2.5655 per pound, gaining $0.0100 for the session.
The OECD is scheduled to release its economic outlook on Wednesday, while euro area finance ministers will meet Thursday to discuss the EU’s recovery package.
The ECB President Christine Lagarde has urged the European Union to quickly pass the coronavirus stimulus package proposed by the European Commission to restore confidence and avoid a deeper recession.
Risk Disclaimer - By using this web site you agree to its terms and conditions.
All materials, including but not limited to articles, directories, photos, lists, etc., on this website are the sole property of ForexTV or the respective copyright holders and are intended for informational/educational purposes using hypothetical and sometimes anecdotal illustrations. The unauthorized use of any and all materials is prohibited and restricted by copyright law. Any use of materials on this site must be approved in advance by ForexTV.
Before deciding to invest in foreign exchange you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. The possibility exists that you could sustain a loss of some or all of your initial investment and therefore you should not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. You should be aware of all the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial advisor if you have any doubts. Forex (or FX or off-exchange foreign currency futures and options) trading involves substantial risk of loss and is not suitable for every investor. The value of currencies may fluctuate and investors may lose all or more than their original investments. Risks also include, but are not limited to, the potential for changing political and/or economic conditions that may substantially affect the price and/or liquidity of a currency. The impact of seasonal and geopolitical events is already factored into market prices. The leveraged nature of FX trading means that any market movement will have an equally proportional effect on your deposited funds and such may work against you as well as for you. Past results are no indication of future performance. Information contained this web site is intended for informational purposes only and was obtained from sources believed to be reliable. Information is in no way guaranteed. No guarantee of any kind is implied or possible where projections of future conditions are attempted.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Accept Cookie Policy
