Pound to euro exchange rate: Will Brexit uncertainty affect your travel money?
THE POUND remains rangebound against the euro today as worries remain over the potential of a no-deal Brexit. Despite a revelation in suggested plans last week, sterling still hovers around the lower end of the spectrum. What does this mean for your travel money?
The pound remains heavily influenced by Brexit policy decisions, following another week filled with discussions between the UK and EU leaders. Despite an announcement of suggested plans by the British government, the GBP is today hovering around a lower rate. It is a minor drop compared with Fridays rate. Fluctuations continue to be likely, with the euro and sterling acting as a so-called "Brexit barometer".
Pound to euro exchange rate: What does Brexit mean for the pound? (Image: Getty Images)
The pound will remain driven by Brexit-linked headlines in the week ahead, with market participants paying close attention to the progress of negotiations.
The pound is currently trading at 1.1220 according to Bloomberg at the time of writing.
Much of the pound's weakness comes as the possibility of a no-deal Brexit looms.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson remains firm in his decision that the UK must “push forward” to get a deal done.
However, his plans are undermined by a remain driven “surrender act” that forces him to ask for an extension if a new deal cannot be reached when EU leaders gather on October 17.
Michael Brown, currency expert at Caxton FX , spoke to Express.co.uk regarding the latest exchange rate figures.
“Sterling remained rangebound against the euro on Friday, edging a touch lower, as concerns over a potential no-deal Brexit persisted amid a lack of a breakthrough in UK-EU talks over Boris Johnson’s revised proposals,” explained Brown.
“The pound will remain driven by Brexit-linked headlines in the week ahead, with market participants paying close attention to the progress of negotiations.
“The pound will continue to trade as a ‘Brexit barometer’; rallying when the market senses an increased chance of a deal, and weakening when the market feels a no-deal exit becoming more likely.”
Pound to euro exchange rate: The pound is currently trading at 1.1220 against the euro (Image: Bloomberg)
While a deal is the most beneficial outcome for the strength of the pound, it seems Johnson is no longer “ messing about .”
He has assured the EU that Britain will not remain in the EU after October 31 if the impending talks collapse.
Speaking with President Macron he says that the UK has made some significant compromises in recent weeks, and assured the French Prime Minister that his current proposals have the most support to date, with both the DUP and Brexiteers suggesting they would back it.
A senior Number 10 source said: “This is the chance to get a deal done: a deal that is backed by parliamentarians and a deal which involves compromise on all sides.
“The UK has made a big, important offer but it’s time for the European Commission to show a willingness to compromise too.
“If not the UK will leave with no deal. The surrender act and its authors are undermining negotiations, but if EU leaders are betting that it will prevent no deal , that would be a historic misunderstanding.”
Boris Johnson: The British PM remains firm in his decision to leave the EU on 31 Oct (Image: Getty Images)
The future remains uncertain for Britain, and the exchange rate is likely to rise and fall in rapid succession over the coming days.
What does this mean for Britons heading to Europe for October holidays?
The Post Office is currently offering an exchange rate of €1.0793 for £400 or more, or €1.0950 for £500 and over.
Britons should keep an eye on the ever-changing rates , and plan in advance of any news that may suggest a no-deal outcome.
Currency expert Rob Stross at WeSwap, a peer-to-peer currency exchange service, offered some additional advice for getting the most out of your holiday money .
“It is worth bearing in mind that it is best to find free ATMs while abroad,” he said.
“You can also avoid further charges by withdrawing more money less often. If an ATM or merchant asks if you want to be charged in the local currency, always say yes.
“When withdrawing cash abroad, ATMs could charge you up to five per cent for every transaction.
For travellers still in the process of planning their holiday, the location you choose can make a huge difference.
A recent report from the Post Office’s Travel Money department revealed that your pound will go further in certain countries.
According to the findings, Japan is the “best value destination” at the moment.
This is particularly important for Britons heading to Tokyo for the Rugby World Cup which is currently in play.
