Currently, the UK government only advises essential travel.
The COVID-19 Exceptional Travel Advisory Notice still states: “The Foreign & Commonwealth Office currently advises British nationals against all but essential international travel.
However, this restriction is due to be lifted tomorrow.
Pound euro exchange rate: Countries given the green light will likely be nearly all EU destinations (Image: Getty Images)
"As per the seasonality study though, if GBP/USD usually weakens in July, then any uplift in the pound this month may be short-lived.
"This is especially the case considering August is usually even more disappointing for GBP/USD, depreciating 70 percent of the time over the past 20 years.
"Sterling demand may be losing steam given the upper shadow on the daily chart suggesting more GBP sellers are entering the market at these levels. Nevertheless, a weekly view of GBP/USD indicates a run to $1.26 cannot be ruled out in the short-term.”
Britons are currently waiting with bated breath to find out how foreign travel will pan out over the next few months.
After much discussion concerning ‘air bridges’ between the UK and other ‘safe’ countries, this proposal is understood to have been scrapped.
Instead, the government is replacing it with quarantine exemptions.
Pound euro exchange rate: Travel money providers are now back in service (Image: Getty Images)
The 14-day quarantine rule to be axed from July 10, it has been announced. From this date, Britons living in England will be able to confidently travel to a number of countries deemed “lower risk.” The full list of nations will be announced later today.
Almost all other European nations will be on the list with the exception of Sweden.
Turkey, Norway and Iceland are also understood to be included.
Transport Secretary Grant Shapps spoke about the new travel rules in a BBC interview today.
“The actual list itself will be published this afternoon… so these are countries where it is now possible to travel if you’re in England to those countries and back and not have to quarantine at the end of the holiday,” he said.
He explained that countries have been categorised depending on how low the risk of coronavirus is.
“Essentially we've got two groups,” he said, “we've got countries which are in the sort of green category - they have very low occurrences - and then countries who are in the amber group - they will include France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and quite a lot of others, which we will be publishing later today."
