POUND STERLING has become the unlikely winner of the coronavirus crisis according to leading economists who claim the currency's surge against the euro will temper Brussel's combative stance over Brexit..
Pound sterling will continue to surge against the euro as long as the European Union struggles to contain the economic crisis in Italy, according to leading experts. Economists have labelled the British pound sterling as the "winner" in the economic turmoil triggered by Europe's coronavirus crisis, which has left the future of the entire bloc in doubt. Standard Bank even forecast that sterling will strengthen to 80 pence per euro - a level not reached since the Brexit vote to leave the European Union - and it could go higher.
Pound to euro exchange rate: Sterling ‘stuggles’ in sudden downturn
The news sent shockwaves across the EU after suggestions the jump in the pound against the euro could force major concessions from Brussels in Brexit talks.
Standard Bank said financial markets' optimism for the pound could see the EU's Brexit negotiators concede "more favourable terms" to the UK following the pandemic.
The bank’s head of foreign-exchange strategy Steven Barrow said: "The stigma of being associated with the EU – and the eurozone in particular – will only increase as a result of the coronavirus crisis.
JUST IN: Pound to euro exchange rate: Sterling surges to one-month high
Barnier is on edge after the euro dropped to the pound (Image: GETTY)
Standard Bank even forecast that sterling will strengthen to 80 pence per euro - a level not reached since the vote to leave the European Union (Image: GETTY)
Christian Nolting, global chief investment officer at Deutsche Bank Wealth Management, warned that eurozone will continue to sink in economic markets if the EU struggles to find a "cohesive answer" to the fallout.
He told Bloomberg: "The eurozone has struggled with discussions on Italy, so far not using ESM money, and you see the spread of Italy bonds widening again in the last two days.
The drop in the euro follows news that Italy’s ruling coalition remains divided over whether to use the EU bailout fund to help the country’s battered economy.
Italy’s ruling coalition remains divided over whether to use the EU bailout fund (Image: GETTY)
Italy has always declined to use ESM funds in the past to avoid tough fiscal conditions imposed by northern European member-states.
Members of the Italian coalition government have lashed out at Mr Conte's response, saying rejecting the EU offer will lead to an unprecedented crisis.
