Pound to euro exchange rate: Sterling remains 'strong' as Brexit talks hit critical point
THE POUND put in a "strong performance" against the euro yesterday, rising almost one percent compared to the previous day. Today, all eyes will be focused on the latest post-Brexit trade negotiations which, if successful, could give the GBP another welcome boost.
The pound had a strong day yesterday against the euro with its “biggest one-day advance” on the common currency in a few months. Currently, there is a positive risk sentiment across investors which will only be improved once successful compromises and negotiations are made in the latest round of Brexit talks. Today, the pound is currently trading at a rate of 1.1230 against the euro according to Bloomberg at the time of writing.
Pound to euro exchange rate: GBP remains ‘choppy’ as Brexit talks loom
This is a massive improvement on yesterday’s rate which saw it at 1.1122.
Sterling has now managed to claw its way back against the euro, even clearing that 1.12 handle barrier.
Michael Brown, Currency Expert at Caxton FX , spoke to Express.co.uk to provide exclusive insight into the current exchange rate.
He said: “Sterling put in a strong performance against the common currency on Monday, rising just shy of one percent and chalking up its biggest one-day advance in a couple of months, as the pound continues to benefit from the positive risk mood sweeping across asset classes.
Pound to euro exchange rate: Sterling remains 'strong' as Brexit talks hit critical point (Image: EXPRESS)
Pound to euro exchange rate: The pound is currently trading at a rate of 1.1230 against the euro (Image: BLOOMBERG)
“Today, with the data calendar barren, attention will centre on the latest round of post-Brexit trade talks, as the clock ticks down to the end of June deadline for extending the transition period.”
Trade negotiators from the UK and the EU will meet for a forth round of post-Brexit negotiations today.
However, despite the positive outlook this could have on sterling, Brussels and Britain are not expected to come to an agreement on how to proceed.
It is not expected that Britain will ask the EU for an extension to the post-Brexit transition period.
