Michael Brown, currency expert at international payments and foreign exchange firm Caxton FX, spoke to Express.co.uk regarding the latest exchange rate figures.
“Sterling traded in a choppy manner against the euro,” said Brown.
“It held just above the 1.20 handle, as the pound failed to hold earlier gains made after data showed CPI inflation jumping to a six-month high.
“Today, focus will remain on the pound, as the UK’s economic health check continues with this morning’s retail sales figures; set to snap a record-long five-month streak of zero growth.”
So what does this means for Britons heading off on holidays and looking to buy travel money?
The Post Office is currently offering a rate of €1.1593 for over £400 and €1.822 for over £1,000.
Pound euro exchange rate: The Post Office is currently offering a rate of €1.1593 for over £400 (Image: Getty Images)
It’s important to organise your holiday money well in advance of your trip to ask sure you’re not getting stung at the airport.
Currency expert FairFX recommends keeping a close eye on currency movements to help you buy at the optimum time.
What’s more, you could consider setting up a currency tracker which will alert you to good rates for you to take advantage of.
Ian Strafford-Taylor, CEO of FairFX, commented: “We all expect to pay a little more for convenience, but time and time again we’re finding that airport bureau de change desks are ripping off holidaymakers with extortionately high walk-up exchange rates.
As families head into Europe over the bank holiday, they risk losing out on valuable extra holiday money by leaving it so late to exchange their cash.”
Pound euro exchange rate: Currency expert FairFX recommends keeping a close eye on currency changes (Image: Getty Images)
“Holidaymakers are already at the mercy of rollercoaster currency rates thanks to continued Brexit uncertainty, but now risk further rate turbulence as the already high airport margins are getting worse still.
What's more, when you're away on your holiday, always use local currency, advises FairFX.
"If you have the option of paying by card – or withdrawing cash – in pounds rather than the local currency, always say no.
"This allows the other party to decide the exchange rate, a process known as Dynamic Currency Conversion, and it’s unlikely the rate they decide on will be in your favour. "
