Dizzee Rascal at the O2 Academy Brixton, London in 2017. Photograph: WireImage
I got a home studio in November, just before all this happened. It’s made me sit down and go deep into production, setting up my own equipment, recording myself for the first time. When you’re in there on your own you can really perfect it. And, yeah, the timing has been good.
I was supposed to play Glastonbury this year. At this point they need to hurry up and just let me headline that thing. Those sets I played on the Pyramid stage [in 2010 and 2013], got me a headlining reaction – bigger than the actual headliners. That’s the thing about my sets – there’s not a lot of downtime, not a lot of dip, it’s just energy all the way through.
I’ve got some fans who are very vocal that they don’t like my work from 2010 [Bonkers went to No 1 the year before]. Then you’ve got other people who love it, but don’t necessarily know the early stuff – so a big part of planning would be getting that balance. But one thing I like about coming back to the festival each year, it’s always the young ones at the front. As much as I appreciate the fanbase that have followed me from the beginning, it’s the younger ones who have the energy to be smashed around by the bass, standing right in front of the speakers.
Now everyone’s listening to radio again. It just shows that in dire times, you get back to the original medium
When the first shows started getting cancelled, I just accepted it: that’s that, then. My thing is, the sun’s out and I’m not dead. So I’m not too stressed out. There are a lot more important things going on for other people. Live shows will come back but I can still go on the radio, my album’s still coming out, I can still reach people. I’m surprised at how positive I’m feeling.
Radio was the original communication – in wartime, when this country was being bombed. Now everyone’s listening to it again. It just shows you that in dire times, you get back to the original medium, the fundamentals. Before I did festivals, before I did raves, I did pirate radio. No one knew what I looked like, people listened to sets, taped it and the tape would get passed around. Coming from that has made me realise I can deal with whatever’s happening.
