Greece's first opponents at Euro 2004 did have Ronaldo, though, as they squared up against Portugal in the opening match of the tournament.
Ronaldo scored but it was a 93rd-minute consolation goal as the Greeks silenced 50,000 home fans in Porto with a famous 2-1 win – reaching their target number of victories for the tournament in their very first outing.
"That win released us," Tsiartas said. "We felt free."
Charisteas' equaliser against Spain in their second group game meant Greece would just need a victory against winless Russia to progress to the quarter-finals.
Despite going down 2-0 in the opening minutes and only managing to pull one goal back, Rehhagel's side still managed to qualify for the knockout stages as Portugal defeated Spain to send their neighbours crashing out.
Greece next faced a last-eight contest against a France squad featuring Zinedine Zidane, Thierry Henry, Patrick Vieira and Robert Pires among others, with the defending champions considered near-certainties to progress.
However, a second-half counterattack resulted in Charisteas heading past Fabien Barthez for the only goal of the game, as Greece held on to set up a semi-final match against Czech Republic .
With the Czechs' attacking talent at the peak of its powers, players such as Pavel Nedved, Milan Baros and Jan Koller made them hot favourites to progress to a second Euros final in three tournaments.
However, Greece stood firm through 90 minutes before Dellas scored the only silver goal in international football history when he headed in Tsiartas' corner in extra time to send Greece into the final, where they would again meet Portugal.
More than 100,000 people crowded Athens' Omonia Square in celebration, while expats stopped traffic in Sydney, Australia – but surely Portugal could not make the same mistake as in the opening match?
With the likes of Ronaldo and Luis Figo in attack, and 63,000 crazy fans supporting the side at Lisbon's Estadio da Luz, the trophy was there for the taking.
The hosts had 17 shots, 10 corners and 58 per cent possession, but it was not enough to breach the resolute Greece back four. With their only corner, and one of only four shots in the match, Charisteas headed in the winner to send the entire Greek nation into delirium.
Greece won all three of their knockout matches by a 1-0 scoreline, with headed goals that were all similar in design and concept. Five Greek heroes were named in the Team of the Tournament, including Zagorakis, who also took home the prize for Player of the Tournament.
It was tactical mastery by Rehhagel, who showed that hard work, patience, discipline and clinical finishing can triumph over skill, talent and ability.
Greece were no longer an irrelevant football nation having secured an achievement that would forever define their existence in the game.
