solarisBank AG is the first Banking-as-a-Service platform with a full banking license that enables companies to offer their own financial products. Through APIs, partners gain access to solarisBank’s modular services including digital bank accounts and payment cards, identification and lending services, as well as services provided by integrated third party providers. Through this, solarisBank creates a highly developed technological banking ecosystem for fintechs and established digital companies, as well as banks and corporates.
After having established itself as the banking partner of choice for blockchain and crypto businesses, solarisBank founded solaris Digital Assets GmbH in 2019 to further drive the adoption of digital assets. The 100% subsidiary of solarisBank offers a custodial solution for digital assets to complement its existing banking services.
The Berlin-based company was founded back in 2016 and is led by CEO Dr. Roland Folz, board members Jörg Diewald, Dr. Jörg Howein and Thom Rasser, as well as COO Dr. Daniel Seifert and CTO Hima Mandali. To date, solarisBank has raised more than EUR 160 million from renowned investors, including ABN AMRO’s Digital Impact Fund, BBVA, finleap, HV Holtzbrinck Ventures, Lakestar, Samsung Catalyst Fund, SBI Group, Storm Ventures, Visa, Vulcan Capital, and yabeo.
HV Holtzbrinck Ventures was founded in 2000 and today, with more than € 1 billion under management, is one of the largest and most experienced independent European early stage venture funds. Over the years it has invested in over 185 companies, including great successes like Zalando, Delivery Hero, HelloFresh, Flixbus, SumUp, Scalable Capital, and many others.
Vulcan Capital is the multi-billion-dollar investment arm of Vulcan Inc., the company founded by Microsoft co-founder and philanthropist Paul G. Allen. Vulcan Capital focuses on generating long-term value appreciation across a portfolio, which spans diverse industry sectors and investment asset classes, ranging from early-stage venture investments to public equity value investing, leveraged buyouts, acquisitions, special situations and fixed income. Vulcan Capital was formed in 2003 and is headquartered in Seattle with additional offices in Palo Alto and Singapore.
Samsung Catalyst Fund is Samsung Electronics’ evergreen multi-stage venture capital fund that invests in the new data economy and strategic ideas for Samsung’s device solutions, mobile, and consumer electronics groups. Investments span across Mobile & Cloud Services, DeepTech Infrastructure, Biology + Tech, and Safety & Security. Through Samsung Catalyst Fund, entrepreneurs are enabled by Samsung’s global brand, manufacturing and distribution, domain expertise, recruiting network, and world-class Innovation Fellows for advice and mentorship. For the latest news, please visit www.samsungcatalyst.com .
Storm Ventures is a Silicon Valley based venture capital firm that focuses on early-stage investments in B2B companies. Storm has invested in leading B2B companies, including Airespace (sold to Cisco), Blueshift, EchoSign (sold to Adobe), Marketo (sold to Adobe), MobileIron, Sendoso, Splashtop and Workato.  Storm has also invested in leading European startups, including Algolia, Digital Shadows and Talkdesk.
yabeo is a Munich based venture investment firm that invests in the early stages of technology companies and develops them sustainably. yabeo's success lies in growing companies, scaling organizations and rolling out new technologies. yabeo currently manages assets under management of more than EUR 100 million across all investment platforms. As a venture capital investor, yabeo's goal is to lead companies to long-term growth and strong brand positioning. yabeo actively supports its investments with long-term management expertise and a comprehensive network in order to achieve sustainable business success together with the founders. yabeo's investment focus is on innovative FinTech, InsureTech and HealthTech as well as Social Impact companies that have the potential to establish a sustainable leading market position by incorporating enabler technologies such as artificial intelligence and blockchain. www.yabeo.de
solarisBank AG is the first Banking-as-a-Service platform with a full banking license that enables companies to offer their own financial products. Through APIs, partners gain access to solarisBank’s modular services including digital bank accounts and payment cards, identification and lending services, as well as services provided by integrated third party providers. Through this, solarisBank creates a highly developed technological banking ecosystem for fintechs and established digital companies, as well as banks and corporates.
After having established itself as the banking partner of choice for blockchain and crypto businesses, solarisBank founded solaris Digital Assets GmbH in 2019 to further drive the adoption of digital assets. The 100% subsidiary of solarisBank offers a custodial solution for digital assets to complement its existing banking services.
The Berlin-based company was founded back in 2016 and is led by CEO Dr. Roland Folz, board members Jörg Diewald, Dr. Jörg Howein and Thom Rasser, as well as COO Dr. Daniel Seifert and CTO Hima Mandali. To date, solarisBank has raised more than EUR 100 million from renowned investors, including BBVA, Visa, Lakestar, ABN AMRO’s Digital Impact Fund, Arvato Financial Solutions, SBI Group, finleap and yabeo.
