This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Updated Aug. 30, 2019 2:12 pm ET / Original Aug. 30, 2019 1:05 pm ET
Currencies have been the market story of August. And moves in foreign exchange continue to roil stocks—they pushed down the Dow on Friday—sending warning signs to investors.
The euro crossed below $1.10 to the dollar on Friday morning, hitting $1.0965, its lowest level in the past year. That leaves the European currency down about 4% for 2019 and 6% over the past year.
It’s a sign that Europe’s economic troubles are concerning investors. Currency values are supposed to be more stable than stock prices, so 6% is a significant change.
A so-called hard Brexit—the United Kingdom leaving the European Union without a negotiated deal—would be bad for European growth. And that looks more likely now: New Prime Minister Boris Johnson asked the Queen to suspend Parliament this week, leaving less room to maneuver for politicians who want an exit pact.
That’s not great news for the British pound either. The British currency is down 5% year to date, and 6% over the past year, to about £1.21  to the dollar.
Brexit fears are weighing on British stocks, too. Britain’s FTSE 100 index is up about 1% year to date, far worse than the almost 17% return of the S&P 500 over the same span. (The pound was at about $1.50, or 24% higher, in the days before the Brexit referendum in June 2016.)
Don’t forget about China. The yuan also hit new lows against the dollar this week. Remember Aug. 5? The Dow fell more 767 points, or 2.9%, that day, after the yuan weakened past 7 to the dollar.
Japan’s yen, on the other hand, is up about 2% in August. The currency tends to rise when people grow more worried about the global economy, slipping back when the worst is over, wrote Morgan Stanley strategist Hans Redeker in a Thursday research report. “Risk warnings are on the rise,” he said.
A relatively stronger U.S. dollar is bad for U.S. exporters . The U.S. is a big exporter of machinery, such as the giant backhoes Caterpillar (ticker: CAT) makes, as well as planes produced by Boeing (BA). Farmers have also suffered as a stronger dollar made U.S. grain more costly for foreign buyers,
Friday’s decline in the euro is one reason the Dow Jones Industrial Average has given up Friday’s early gains . The Dow was flat in early afternoon.
President Donald Trump complained about the currency’s strength on Aug. 8, linking the issue to the Federal Reserve’s interest-rate policy .
Differentials among interest rates are one reason currencies can strengthen or weaken . Investors want to buy U.S. assets when interest yields are higher here than elsewhere, and they need dollars to do that.
A falling currency can also signal future rate cuts, something that happens as economic growth slows. The decline in the euro reflects investors’ concern about the European economy.
There’s lot of negative news on that front, but as an example, industrial production in Germany, Europe’s biggest economy, fell 5.2% in June, a bigger decline than analysts expected. The July figures haven’t been released.
Christine Lagarde, who will take over from Mario Draghi as head of the European Central Bank on Oct 31, said Thursday that the eurozone still has room to cut interest rates, if needed.
As the calendar turns to September, investors can use currency markets as another indicator of how stocks will perform the rest of 2019.
Currencies have been the market story of August.
