Want the best local news sent to your inbox daily? Sign up to our newsletter
When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
The coronavirus has had a seismic affect upon the world, highlighting that no one is impervious in these times, including businesses.
The currency market has witnessed a change in the price of money thanks to the coronavirus pandemic.
Alexey Gulyi, chief analyst at EverFx, offers his expert opinion on how the Pound currency has been affected and what the future could hold for the market.
In the United Kingdom, the pound to euro forecast has been free-falling, thanks to the effects of Brexit vote and change of guard. These two factors have made the Boris led administration to engineer countermeasures to help stabilise the currency.
The United Kingdom is among the biggest economies in Europe; hence its relationship with the continent is affected.
Brexit undoubtedly ushered in unique economic effects. The relationship brought in three significant changes in how markets reacted:
Trading arrangements - the European Economic Union had harmonised how commercial and financial sectors ran throughout the continent. It provided a free trade area, a customs union, and a reserve bank. The reserve bank came up with the Euro to stabilise the European market against other regions. With the United Kingdom leaving the Union, the price of the Sterling Pound reduced significantly. Commercial engagements were affected, with labour as the highest hit sector.
Leadership uncertainties - the change in guard ushered in a wait-and-see approach between the United Kingdom and the European Union. A record three Prime Ministers in less than five years, all from the Conservative Party. From the institutional David Cameron to the calculative Teresa May, and the progressive Boris Johnson, each had their approach. Teresa May was keen to implement Brexit, but with an economic deal that will cushion Britons from price action in the Economic Union. Boris is a forward-leaning leader whose policies improved the British commercial advantage, strengthening the Pound in the process.
Separation talks - countries within the United Kingdom started the quest for cessation. Scotland was at the forefront. The cessation has since died down. However, the political disturbances affected the currency markets within and without the borders of the United Kingdom.
The health pandemic has shifted the focus to internal governance structures. The United Kingdom’s healthcare system is among the best in the world.
Taken ill, treated and healed, the Prime Minister showed Europe and the world that the country is reliable and able to contain the pandemic within its ranks. It is a strong case within economic circles, boosting social advantage and bargaining power.
The effects of Brexit have died down since the policies have shifted from foreign to the health office. The shutdown in most European countries has halted international trading arrangements.
For a country that was learning to be self-sustaining, the reduced cross border trade least affects its current priorities. Together with financial remedies from the treasury, it has strengthened the price of the British Pound against other European currencies.
Countries exhibiting severe effects due to the disease are worst affected economically. Their currencies are free falling with less investment, both morally and commercially, into their systems. Italy and Spain are case studies.
The significance of a lockdown is to gauge the elasticity of government’s expenditure. Private businesses stop operations, leaving the UK government as the largest spending entity. Other than essential services, the money supply is at its least.
The government takes over the provision of basic amenities to the citizens up to their doorsteps. Since the pandemic is worldwide, there is quantitative easing across the world, stabilising the global financial markets.
Compared to Europe, the stability of the currency rests on how swift the economy resurges from this pandemic. Parameters of growth become how different sectors pick up, the policies set to avert a resurgence of the disease, and how self-sustainable the economy will be henceforth.
However, from estimations, the European Union members, through the European Bank, can institute a stimulus package (corona-bond) to remedy their members as they begin the healing process.
As the European countries collectively prepare for post-coronavirus, the government has developed a package for local investors. The economy has witnessed slow businesses and focuses on essential goods and services.
The results are job losses and lowering of production index, especially from the manufacturing sector. This is the lowest recorded slump in 28 years.
The government, through the Bank of England, has created a £330 billion stimulus package to the affected industries. The loan will cushion their losses and maintain capacities in the wake of this pandemic.
Besides, the bank has started buying bonds and charges 0.1 per cent interest on loans, the lowest recorded in the history of banking in the United Kingdom.
From January 2020, the Euro exchange rate has been unstable. Despite its unification characteristics in Europe concerning the Pound, individual countries are grappling with the weight of the pandemic.
The discussion on corona-bonds will further affect its rating against the Pound, and eventually, the dollar. Standardising its interest rate amidst demand will lower its value of the Euro compared to competing currencies.
In February 2020, the Pound traded the highest against the Euro, recording £1 for €1.188. It came tumbling down to €1.117 in March but has slightly risen to €1.138 to the Pound. The trend rate today will vary between -0.005 per cent to +0.02 per cent.
Week highs and lows should guide the parameters to measure the marginal price of money between May and August 2020. This duration is vital as it is the likely recovery period for the pandemic.
The single currency technically has the advantage over the dollar. However, positioning of the Sterling Pound will determine its strength as the year settles in. Money supply is a significant measure of a growing economy, which affects the price of money.
