Among the central bankers, Philadelphia Federal Reserve President Patrick Harker thinks a digital U.S. dollar is inevitable , but argues that the U.S. should not be the first country to issue a CBDC. Fed Governor Lael Brainard further cautions that given the status of the U.S. dollar as the reserve currency of the world, “central bank digital currency for general purpose use—that is, for individual consumer use—would raise profound legal, policy, and operational questions.” She is specifically concerned with privacy, monetary policy, financial stability, and operational risks after digitizing the U.S. dollar. Regardless, the Fed is actively researching a digital dollar and recruiting experts on digital currencies , and the FedNow payment system under development will achieve the same goal as whole-sale CBDC  – expediting interbank money transfers.
Supported with the blockchain technology, a CBDC is also more difficult to counterfeit than paper notes and coins. Initially designed to support bitcoin, the blockchain technology employs complex cryptography to prevent double-spending —the digital equivalent of making an identical copy of a banknote. Furthermore, the blockchain for a CBDC will most likely to be permissioned , or restricted to authorized users, adding another layer of defense. Unlike other digital forms of money, a CBDC would have a single ledger under tight control by the central bank, as distributed copies of the ledger could be stored only on nodes operated by the central bank itself or other authorized parties.
As stated by former International Monetary Fund Chair and the new ECB president Christine Lagarde , a CDBC “could satisfy public policy goals, such as financial inclusion, and security and consumer protection; and to provide what the private sector cannot: privacy in payments”. The report published by BIS notes that the level of anonymity is one of the key decisions for designers of a CBDC, and technologies exist to render the transactions of a digital currency private and untraceable. The ability for central banks to trace payments is instrumental in meeting anti-money laundering and counter terrorism financing (AML/CFT) requirements. Moreover, transparency of a CBDC also makes it easier for government agencies to fight criminal activities such as tax evasion and bribery. However, this also raises questions about how governments might use payment information.
About the same time as Christine Lagarde became president of European Central Bank, a draft document proposed by the Finnish presidency of the Council of the European Union recommends ECB and central banks of EU countries to take concrete steps toward issuing CBDCs. In December, while announcing an initiative to start a digital currency project in early 2020, Bank of France Governor Francois Villeroy de Galhau also urged the ECB to move quickly toward an e-euro . With an open advocate for digital currencies at the helm of one of the world’s most powerful central banks, we could expect a digital euro initiative to gain momentum. For the first time in history, there are no technical barriers for sovereign monies to compete like any other technology services. The trend toward CBDCs will probably continue, and the ramifications could be felt for years to come.
