Robinhood, the zero-commission brokerage platform that    is popular with millenials, has seen a surge in trading volume    as the market entered a volatile period due to the coronavirus    pandemic.
Robintrack is a platform that uses data from    Robinhood's API to track how many of its users own a particular    stock over time.
The compiled data is put into a charting format that    helps show the relationship between the price of a stock and    popularity with Robinhood users.
Here are the 10 most popular stocks on Robinhood in the    month of April.
Robinhood, the zero-commission brokerage platform that's popular  with millenials, has seen a surge in trading volume as the stock  market entered a volatile period due to the coronavirus pandemic.
Robintrack is a platform that utilizes data from Robinhood's API  to track how many Robinhood users own a particular stock over  time.
The compiled data is put into a charting format that helps show  the relationship between the price of a stock and its popularity  with Robinhood users.
The data helps identify stocks where investors are either:
Buying the dip, which is apparent when the    number of Robinhood account users owning a particular stock    surges as the stock price falls.
Taking profits, which is apparent when the    number of Robinhood account users owning a particular stock    falls as the stock price rises.
Going full FOMO, which is apparent when the    number of Robinhood account users owning a particular stock    rises as the stock price rises.
Jumping ship, which is apparent when the    number of Robinhood account users owning a particular stock    falls as the stock price falls.
The data is also helpful for contrarian investors to go against  the herd and identify popular stocks to sell short or unpopular  stocks to buy long.
Here are the 10 most popular stocks among Robinhood users in the  month of April.
Apple was the 10th most popular stock on Robinhood in April.
The iPhone maker was owned by 356,304 users at the end of the  month, compared to 311,472 users in the prior month.
The 14% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied with a 15.5% jump in Apple's stock price in April,  signaling that investors continue to add shares as the stock  price moves higher.
Carnival was the ninth most popular stock on Robinhood in April.
The cruise line company was owned by 406,391 users at the end of  April, compared to 186,315 users in the prior month.
The 118% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied with a 20% jump in Carnival's stock price in April,  signaling that investors continue to ride shares of Carnival  higher following its more than 80% decline due to the coronavirus  pandemic.
Microsoft was the eighth most popular stock on Robinhood in April.
The software company was owned by 425,189 users at the end of  April, compared to 389,770 users in the prior month.
The 9% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied by a 13% jump in Microsoft's stock price in April,  signaling that investors continue to add shares as the stock  moves higher.
Delta Air  Lines was the seventh most popular stock on Robinhood in  April.
The airline operator was owned by 426,267 users at the end of  April, compared to 194,565 users in the prior month.
The 119% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied with a 9% decline in Delta's stock price in April,  signaling that investors are buying the dip in Delta.
American  Air Lines was the sixth most popular stock on Robinhood in  April.
The airline operator was owned by 446,267 users at the end of  April, compared to 222,935 users in the prior month.
The 100% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied with a 1% decline in American's stock price in April,  signaling that investors are buying the dip in American.
GoPro was the 5th most popular stock on Robinhood in April.
The camera company was owned by 451,662 users at the end of  April, compared to 389,087 users in the prior month.
The 16% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied with a 34% jump in GoPro's stock price in April,  signaling that investors are sticking with and adding to their  GoPro position as the stock rises.
Disney was the fourth most popular stock on Robinhood in April.
The house of mouse was owned by 509,091 users at the end of  April, compared to 416,987 users in the prior month.
The 22% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied with a 12% increase in Disney's stock price in April,  signaling that investors continue to add shares as the stock  price moves higher.
General  Electric was the third most popular stock on Robinhood in  April.
The industrial conglomerate was owned by 686,309 users at the end  of April, compared to 509,417 users in the prior month.
The 35% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied with a 14% decline in General Electric's stock price  in April, signaling that investors are buying the dip in General  Electric.
Ford was  the second most popular stock on Robinhood in April.
The auto manufacturer was owned by 786,210 users at the end of  April, compared to 649,147 users in the prior month.
The 21% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied with a 5% increase in Ford's stock price in April,  signaling that investors continue to add shares as the stock  moves higher.
Aurora  Cannabis was the most popular stock on Robinhood in April.
The cannabis company was owned by 969,595 users at the end of  April, compared to 854,685 users in the prior month.
The 13% jump in Robinhood accounts that own the stock was  accompanied with a 18% decline in Aurora's stock price in April,  signaling that investors are buying the dip in Aurora Cannabis.
