The Euro-to-Dollar exchange rate is seen trading -0.21 pct in the red ahead of the European open on Monday May 4, quoted at 1.09376 at interbank rates.
Exchange Rates UK Research team have compiled a roundup of expert FX views on the current EUR/USD outlook from 11 leading FX analysts.
"There is still a near term recovery on EUR/USD playing out as the dollar has turned corrective in recent sessions. However, for now, this still seems to be counter to a continued negative outlook for the pair. Trading below a clutch of falling moving averages, and below a near five week corrective downtrend, rallies appear to be a chance to sell. The strength of conviction in this outlook is though wavering this morning as the market consolidates after a third positive candle in the past four sessions. This is testing the stability of the downtrend that falls at $1.0865 today. The near term outlook remains dominated by the increasingly important pivot resistance at 108.90 which has grown as resistance in the last two weeks. A continued failure of this rally under the pivot will re-establish the broader negative outlook on EUR/USD, especially if the support at $1.0810 is broken once more. Momentum has ticked higher with the recent rebound, but we still see this as part of an ongoing negative medium term bias. This outlook would need to be re-evaluated on a decisive close above $1.0890."
POST ECB: "The euro has been steady on this announcement, but the ECB is continuing to show that it will act to preserve the euro. We continue to see EUR/USD holding ground in the wake of these decisions and it will be interesting to see if the key near term resistance of $1.0890 can be breached."
"Although the Bloomberg USD Index has bounced from range lows, the EUR is curiously holding on to the end-of-month gains. We still see this move as part of a correction, so while under 1.0980-1.1010 resistance we look for a slide back through 1.0890/70 support to confirm a return to the lower range. If we hold onto these levels and extend through 1.1010, there is room for a broader recovery towards 1.1170 again. Overall, we still lack evidence that 1.0635 was a medium-term low for a recovery back towards 1.14-1.15 region. A clear break of 1.0635-1.0590 suggesting a more direct move down towards the 2017 lows in the 1.0340 region may be seen."
"EUR/USD short-term technicals are neutral - the EUR is attempting to break through the high 1.09s but a cross above 1.10 will prove to be a difficult task as its mid-April peak at 1.0991, the 61.8% Fib retracement of its Mar 27-Apr 24 decline at 1.0997, psychological resistance at 1.10, and its 100DMA at 1.1006 will all conspire to stall the EUR’s rise. Beyond this point, the 200DMA at 1.1035 will stand in its way. The road down is much clearer for the EUR as a move below support at 1.0920/35 could quickly precipitate a decline to the high 1.08s."
"Looking beyond the short-term price action, we retain the view that the euro risk premium and the risk of a bloc’s fiscal crisis should not be a theme and driver of the common currency this year (the latest ECB measures increased our conviction). This should allow EUR/USD to appreciate in the coming months and reach 1.15 in the summer once the anticipated USD weakness kicks in. As we highlighted in The FX road to recovery, USD screens as the least attractive G10 currency to position for the post Covid-19 recovery in global growth and easing of the lockdown measures. Coupled with the lost interest rate advantage and the large Fed's balance sheet, the dollar decline should facilitate higher EUR/USD."
"We remain broadly bullish on the outlook for the USD. That said, compared with many other currencies, and in particular those in emerging markets, we do not judge the EUR as being especially vulnerable versus the greenback. Still, politics may be a drag on the EUR if anti-EU sentiment rises in response to fiscal pressures and rising unemployment. The actions of the Fed in boosting liquidity provision to markets were successful in taking the edge off the panicked buying of USDs last month. The improved access to dollars through swap lines and, for central banks in developing countries, the offer of overnight dollar loans has been a crucial element in easing immediate USD shortages. The increased supply of dollars in tandem with the Fed’s aggressive policy actions on interest rates and on QE has sparked a discussion about whether the USD is now primed for a correction. In our view the USD cannot be expected to weaken decidedly until investors feel confident enough to move back into emerging markets. This could be some way off. That said, despite our strong USD view, the EUR should be protected by the Eurozone’s large current account surplus. The currencies most vulnerable to large outflows during the current crisis have been in emerging markets. Within the G10, commodity currencies –which tend to be most sensitive to fears about a drop in global demand– have been among those weakening most. While the EUR does not fall into this category, April brought fears about a lack of solidarity in Europe over support for the countries hardest hit by the crisis. Going forward, speculation that the North of the region will recover soonest due to lighter lockdowns and greater fiscal ammunition, suggests scope for a prolonged period of strain within the Eurozone that could weigh on the EUR. We see risk of EUR/USD dipping to 1.05 on a 3 month view. "
"One may interpret ECB’s actions as to some extent providing a ’shadow cut’, which could weigh on spot EUR/USD. However, in our view, relative interest rates are a very marginal and often confounding factor as a driver of spot and we thus see this as less important for FX. EUR/USD is currently mildly supported towards 1.09-1.11, say, by a combination of stabilising global sentiment, an up-tick in the usual reflation trades and tapering of broad USD momentum. We do not expect this will be able to materially change the long-term trajectory of a weak EUR but it may nonetheless provide some support. The ECB has made attempts to remedy the market volatility that European institutions have generally themselves proved a source of but EUR is set to be haunted by this ‘break up’-risk for some time still. That said, EUR/USD is now trading on the low side of recent ranges and one may be cautiously hopeful that the negative institutional risk premium does not build further near term."
"EUR/USD made a move above 1.10 on Friday – its strength is remarkable considering the ECB’s negative outlook and the additional stimulus they provided this past week. However, as our colleague Boris Schlossberg noted, perhaps the simplest reason is the divergence in monetary and fiscal policies between the EZ and the US. Although both regions are trying to maintain expansionary posture, the massive monetary and fiscal spend in the US is far greater and is starting to perhaps weigh on the dollar."
"The ECB meeting did see the bank deepening its commitment to easy terms for the banking sector as the rates on TLTRO loans can drop as low as -1.00% - a direct bank subsidy. Lagarde also announced a new PELTRO or “pandemic emergency” LTRO. But Italian BTP spreads were not notably improved or changed on the day as little was said otherwise with existential implications (nor is the ECB able to go there except by obfuscation on the mix of its purchases.). Still, the euro rallied hard later in the day – and I suspect that the timing of that rally, coming as it did long after the end of the Lagarde press conference, points more to unwinding of consensus EUR shorts across the board more than any narrative we can gin up from this ECB meeting, as EURUSD; for example, was trading near the lows of the day as the ECB press conference was concluding (also, not coincidentally, the high of the day for US stock futures)."
"It doesn't sound like the ECB is finished, although they are looking at exit options. But they will do whatever is necessary to support the economy and to ensure credit continues to flow. Although this phrase was not used today, remember President Lagarde's declaration: “There are no limits to our commitment to the euro.”
"EURUSD] Given the EU's ongoing disunity and exceptionally poor economic figures, the EUR's recent appreciation can hardly be justified. I wouldn't buy that currency yet."
"Euro/dollar is displaying an odd bid this morning; effectively de-coupling from its positive correlation with the broader risk tone of late. We've noticed the same thing in dollar/yen today too. Both the EUR and the JPY are negative yielders (funding currencies), and so we wonder if global FX markets are beginning to re-position for Round 2 of the US/China trade war. Such a scenario would bring back risk-off flows obviously but, if we look at the playbook from Round 1 over 2018/2019, increased US/China trade tensions didn't lead to broad USD buying. Commodity currencies like the AUD and CAD underperformed, but the EUR and JPY held up relatively well because of their 2nd tier safe-haven statuses. We acknowledge that 24-48hrs of new developments does not make a new trend here, but were paying very close attention."
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Tim is an economist and has been involved in financial markets for over 20 years as an analyst. He...
