Among the currencies to invest in spring 2020 is the Canadian dollar. China is the second largest importer of crude oil. Demand for crude oil has dropped off radically, taking down the price of both the WTI and Brent benchmarks below the $40 mark and dangerously close to $30. The OPEC+ meetings held in Vienna on March 5-6 to decide on further production output yielded no results as a result of Russia’s decision not to back the plan.
Bloomberg reported on March 8 that Saudi Arabia would ramp up production to 10 million barrels; a move which has bearish implications for crude oil price.
The Canadian dollar is a commodity currency which is linked with crude oil, being the country with the second largest deposits of the black gold in its shale sands. The decision of the Bank of Canada to cut interest rates by 50 Bps on March 6 was a move aimed at shoring up the Canadian economy against the impact of the coronavirus and plunging crude prices by making the CAD cheaper and more competitive. The USD/CAD looks set to present a lot of action in the months to come.
Australia ships most of its copper and gold exports to China. A decline in Chinese factory activity and a rate cut by the Reserve Bank of Australia have weakened the Aussie dollar. There is yet more to come for the AUD/USD even when the coronavirus outbreak is over.
China’s economic recovery and the revamping of its factory activity are critical factors which could decide the direction of the AUD/USD down the road.
The coronavirus outbreak, the extent of its global spread as well as the economic impact on various key countries in the world’s commodity supply chain will be the main drivers of currency price action in the spring.
The direction of the forex market will be decided by how widely the coronavirus outbreak impacts the global economy, the response of central banks and policy makers, and the prevailing risk sentiment in the market at any given time.
Worsening of the Covid-19 global spread (in terms of number of new cases and fatalities) will exert risk aversion. Commodity currencies are expected to weaken, while safe haven currencies will continue to strengthen.
Healthcare companies are battling to find a cure or a vaccine. There is great hope that the next quarter may see the first vaccines being deployed to the hardest hit areas. If there is success, risk aversion may subside and risky assets will start to experience a recovery. For currency pairs such as the British pound, the Brexit trade talks present an added burden which may not be felt too much in Q1 and Q2 2020. But as the deadline for the talks approaches (December 31, 2020), there may be increased volatility on the GBP/USD and EUR/GBP pairs.
