Adam Triggs and Warwick J. McKibbin
Eswar Prasad , senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and professor at Cornell University, notes that China doesn’t even meet the U.S. Treasury’s own definition of a currency manipulator. Mark Sobel, a 40-year U.S. Treasury veteran, made a similar point. “It [China] has not been intervening,” he says. “By Treasury’s own foreign exchange-report criteria, China doesn’t even come close to meeting the terms for manipulation.” Labeling China as a currency manipulator, contrary to its own criteria, undermines the credibility of the U.S. Treasury.
China is not alone. President Trump has regularly accused Europe and Japan of pushing down the value of their currencies to unfairly compete with the United States. It is true that the exchange rates of Germany, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, and the euro area have been persistently undervalued in recent years. But even for these economies, the reality is more complex than what Trump suggests.
Germany’s exchange rate, for example, is undervalued by between 8 and 18 percent. But this is primarily because it shares an exchange rate with the rest of the euro area. And although the common currency gives Germany an undervalued exchange rate, it gives France, Italy, and a host of other euro area economies an overvalued exchange rate, netting-out most of the euro-wide impact.
U.S. punishment of these economies for currency manipulation would rightly leave them feeling aggrieved and make the prospect of a currency war more likely. The costs would be substantial. Most economic models suggest that a currency war will distort trade and investment flows. But it is also likely to cause panic among investors. Unpredictable exchange rates, combined with restrictions on trade and cross-border commerce, will see investors sit on their cash and withhold investment. The hit to growth and employment could be substantial.
The critical question is whether Trump is able to wage a currency war or not. The independent U.S. Federal Reserve has so far held its ground. Although it cut interest rates recently, weakening the U.S. dollar, Fed Chair Jerome Powell was crystal clear that this was a one-off and was not part of a new cycle of rate cuts.
Trump could use the Treasury’s Exchange Stabilization Fund—the fund former President Bill Clinton used to bail out Mexico in the 1990s—to start selling U.S. dollars. But with about only US$100 billion in the kitty, and dollar holdings of just US$23 billion, it is unlikely to be large enough to achieve any sustained depreciation of the U.S. dollar.
The responsible policy players in the United States will try to slow President Trump down. But for how long? And if President Trump cannot weaponize the U.S. dollar, will he simply go back to raising tariffs, quotas, and sanctions still further? One thing is for sure, U.S.–China tensions are getting worse before they get better.
