As economic uncertainty continues due to the coronavirus outbreak in China the demand for safe haven currencies seems likely to continue. The proximity of the main Asian safe haven currency (Japanese Yen) to the Chinese outbreak has led to an even larger demand for USD and CHF. Investors that would typically move capital to the Yen have been cautious as the full impact of the virus unfolds.
The coronavirus has also had the unforeseen impact of thawing relations between China and many trading partners as they cooperate to tackle the virus. If there is significant improvement in the containment of the coronavirus this could lead to quicker than anticipated resolutions to many challenges facing global trade.
This could lead to an increase in risk tolerance for global investors and a decrease in demand for safe haven currencies. This would tend to put downward pressure on the CHF more than the USD as the USD remains the most widely used reserve currency in global trade. In the event of a quick solution to the outbreak being found and the resumption of global trade it should be expected to see an initial rise in the value of the USD relative to the CHF.
The USD to CHF currency pair is one of the most actively traded of the seven major currency pairs and both are considered ‘safe haven’ currencies. Safe haven currencies will tend to increase in value in times of political or global uncertainty as investors seek to avoid increasing volatility or market decline.
While the USD and CHF are both global currencies it is critical to note that the Swiss franc is not a completely free-floating currency. Due to the relatively small size and dependence on exports of the Swiss economy it is economically harmful for the CHF to rise too high.
Beginning in 2011 the Swiss government capped the value of the CHF at 1.20 Euro in a bid to keep exports competitive and prevent recession. This practice ended in 2014 and led to an immediate increase in the value of the CHF and negatively impacted the economy. Since 2014 the Swiss National Bank (SNB) has adopted a policy of not officially capping the value of the franc but of actively controlling it with a low to negative interest rate policy. In an effort to prevent being labelled a currency manipulator by the United States government the SNB has indicated that its stated goal is to end this practice, but it seems likely to continue in the short term as upward pressure continues on the CHF.
Switzerland maintains a close relationship with the European Union and the Swiss franc is inherently correlated with the Euro. There is valuable information to be gleaned from the performance of the EUR/USD pair as well as the EUR/CHF pair , but this should be utilised as a research tool and not as a direct expectation of the USD/CHF performance.
As both the USD and CHF are considered safe haven currencies USD/CHF prediction must look at subtle factors which will affect the value of each independently. Recent USD/CHF analysis has led to a consensus that there is still room for a slight increase in the pair and it is considered a “buy”. While both currencies have experienced increased demand due to the coronavirus outbreak in China the USD remains the dominant reserve currency used in global transactions. The increasing demand for USD shows no sign of slowing down in the near term. It is also considered very likely that the Swiss National Bank will lower interest rates further with the aim of reducing upward pressure on the CHF.
In terms of the USD/CHF forecast 2020, it is possible that there will be a USD correction in the short term due to the improving situation in China and the strong upward pressure on the USD thus far in 2020. If this correction does occur, it is in the opinion of the majority of analysts to be short lived and the USD will continue to rise. While the USD/CHF forecast is considered a buy, it should be noted that the pair trades within a narrow band and the possibility for large profits is minimal. The overall USD/CHF outlook is bullish for 2020 but factors which may affect future forecast should be monitored closely.
As with all securities the currency market contains risks. Traders should base their decisions on their individual risk preferences and their desired outcome. Contracts for Difference (CFDs) are always an option for trading FX pairs. Watch it closely as a way to profit from any unforeseen downturn in the market.
