Nasdaq 100 finds a floor at 7000, but for how long?
The Nasdaq 100 has bounced from 7000 again, but can it hold this vital level and begin a more sustained rebound?
Chris Beauchamp | Chief Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-03-17T18:56:12+0000
After falling nearly 30%, the Nasdaq 100 may have found a floor, at least for now. In May 2019 the great post-December 2018 surge turned around and fell back, but an 11% retracement found support around 7000.
Now, the price is holding that level once more. In addition, it has also moved above 7200, a similar development from earlier in March. Then it rapidly turned around and retested the 7000 zone, but if it can hold above 7200 then it will also have reclaimed the low from the beginning of August.
While this is beginning to provide a positive impression on the daily chart, the hourly chart still shows that the downtrend is intact.
A bottom is a process, not a one-day event, and for the time being the index has yet to break the sequence of lower highs, even if it has managed to hold 7000 for now and thus avoid creating a lower low. The spike at the end of last week hit 8000 but was unable to hold on to its gains, so any sustainable rally needs to move above this to create a higher high, and then ideally drop back to form a higher low above 7000. This is all only conjecture at present, and for the time being the downtrend is still in place, meaning that ‘selling the rallies’ may still be the way to go.
It is true that that price has shown some life, but the overall reading of advancing versus declining stocks on the Nasdaq, the index’s Advance-Decline line, is also still in a downtrend. It has yet to firmly bottom out, while its MACD indicator has yet to create a bullish crossover. Such a signal, along with a move back above the 13-day EMA, would perhaps indicate that a near-term low is in place.
Looking at long-term breadth for the index, the percentage of stocks above their 200-day SMA has fallen to just 8.7%. This is as low as in late 2018, and lower than late 2015 and early 2016. Risk-reward at these points did tend to favour the longs, although a small sample set limits the utility of this view.
Similarly, the percentage of index members at 100-day lows also hit 2018 highs, and firmly exceeded the levels of 2015 and 2016. With the market so overstretched to the downside, it is possible to see how a short-term rebound may gather pace, but as ever it is also important to note that the market is trading on headlines and may fall further in the near-term. Stop losses and good position sizing remains key, along with an ability to cut losing trades and add to winning ones.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Deal on the world’s major stock indices today.
