Take control of your retirement planning with our award-winning, low-cost Self-Invested Personal Pension (SIPP)
Greatland Gold has been on an upward trajectory for the whole year with a barely noticeable decline in early March.
The Australian gold explorer has put out a steady flow of positive announcements this year and it is the most consistent performer in the AIM 100. It was the top performer over six months and in the first quarter, while it was third best performer in the second quarter.
There has been a dearth of AIM new admissions this year, but the most recent has provided a positive story for any companies thinking of floating (management consultancy Elixirr is considering a flotation this month).
Insolvency and financial services provider FRP Advisory Group (LSE:FRP) joined AIM on 6 March and raised money at 80p a share. The share price slipped to 77.5p by the end of March, while in the subsequent quarter it has increased by 58.7%.
Looking at the worst AIM 100 performers, although investment manager Premier Miton (LSE:PMI) has recovered in the second quarter it is still 46% lower in the first half – the third worst performer. Considering the performance of the markets, this decline seems too harsh.
There were net outflows of £389 million in the six months to March 2020. To put that in context, assets under management were £9.15 billion at the end of March and they rose to £9.93 billion by the end of April.
Premier Miton is expected to be making a third quarter trading statement on Thursday 9 July. It is worth keeping an eye on this statement because it may provide evidence that the share price fall has been overdone.
Floorcoverings and ceramic tiles supplier Victoria (LSE:VCP) has reassured the market that, after a sharp downturn in March and April, revenues are recovering.
In a three-week period in June, trading was 85% of pre-Covid-19 expectations. Australian revenues were 105% of pre-Covid-19 expectations, but the European markets are still recovering. Carpet sales should improve as UK stores come out of lockdown.
The €500 million bond issue in the past year has a fixed interest charge and no significant covenants so the debt level is not a worry. There are spare bank facilities that could be used for acquisitions.
Andrew Hore is a freelance contributor and not a direct employee of interactive investor.
These articles are provided for information purposes only. Occasionally, an opinion about whether to buy or sell a specific investment may be provided by third parties. The content is not intended to be a personal recommendation, and is not provided based on an assessment of your investing knowledge and experience, your financial situation or your investment objectives. The value of your investments, and the income derived from them, may go down as well as up. You may not get back all the money that you invest. The investments referred to in this article may not be suitable for all investors, and if in doubt, an investor should seek advice from a qualified investment adviser.
Full performance can be found on the company or index summary page on the interactive investor website. Simply click on the company's or index name highlighted in the article.
We use a combination of fundamental and technical analysis in forming our view as to the valuation and prospects of an investment. Where relevant we have set out those particular matters we think are important in the above article, but further detail can be found here .
Please note that our article on this investment should not be considered to be a regular publication.
ii adheres to a strict code of conduct. Members of ii staff may hold shares in companies included in these portfolios, which could create a conflict of interests. Any member of staff intending to write about any financial instruments in which they have an interest are required to disclose such interest to ii and in the article itself. We will at all times consider whether such interest impairs the objectivity of the recommendation.
In addition, staff involved in the production of investment articles are subject to a personal account dealing restriction, which prevents them from placing a transaction in the specified instrument(s) for a period before and for five working days after such publication. This is to avoid personal interests conflicting with the interests of the recipients of those investment articles.
