¥100,000 Japanese Government Support Money. Do you qualify?
Details on qualifying and the procedure for receiving support money from the government.
In response to the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic the Japanese government announced that as it will be handing out ¥100,000 to everyone in Japan regardless of nationality. The requirements to qualify for this money are simple.
Here are the conditions to qualify.
Foreign nationals applying for government money have to have been living in Japan for at least three months and have an official residence status in Japan.
All individuals seeking government support money must be registered in the Basic Resident Registration System as of April 27, 2020. Registered in the system should be the following information:  name, date of birth, sex, address,
as well as information unique to foreign nationals, such as nationality/region, status of residence,
What is the Basic Resident Registration System?
The Basic Resident Registration System is a record of all residents in Japan. Initially designed for Japanese nationals, it was expanded to include foreign residents in 2012 (who were previously under the Alien Registration System). The system is the basis for basic public services and also allows the Ministry of Justice and the Municipalities to keep up to date records on all foreign residents.
The system require for residents to submit a "move in" and "move out" notification to the respective municipalities.
Who is covered under the Basic Resident Registration System?
Medium to long-term residents (those who have been issued residence cards) who have been granted permission to reside in Japan for more than 3 months.
The head of each household (as designated in the jyuminhyo) must fill out the application form and send it back to the City Office that it was sent from.
A copy of either your driver's licence, My Number card, or Residence Card must be included with the application form. *
*Those with a My Number card can also fill in the application online.
For a step by step guide on the application process visit: How to Apply for the ¥100,000 Coronavirus Government Support Money
The Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications has set up a hotline for inquiries regarding the ¥100,000 support money.
Support is available in the the following languages: Japanese, English, Chinese, Korean, Spanish, Portugues, Vietnamese, Thai, Indonesian, Tagalog, and Nepali
