5-year naira futures hit N578, dollar scarcity strengthens
Last week Nigeria’s central bank withdrew around N460 billion from Nigeria’s banking system.
The Nigerian naira was quoted at N578.37 to $1 at the currency futures market on Wednesday, just off a record low of N584.11 recorded last week as dollar scarcity for businesses and individuals in genuine need continued to raise concerns.
Introduced about four months ago, the 5-year naira futures traded above the N550 to $1 last month at the derivatives market based on dollar scarcity recorded at the spot market.
Commercial bankers, however, stated that Nigeria’s central bank has been trying to improve the liquidity on the interbank market.
Last week Nigeria’s central bank withdrew around N460 billion from Nigeria’s banking system, banking sources told Reuters.
The bank has resumed dollar sales to local clients, selling around $100 million per week, but has yet to sell to foreign-based investors, traders say, after it scrapped a planned auction because of lockdown measures to slow the COVID-19 pandemic.
Local Importers were left scrambling for dollars while providers of foreign exchange, such as foreign investors have not returned back to the country.
READ ALSO: Nigeria’s foreign reserves hit $36.57 billion; Emefiele keeps his word on defending the naira
“Liquidity on the over-the-counter spot market touched a low of around $31 million on Wednesday from around $300 million a day last year,” currency traders told Reuters.
The naira closed at 387.08 on the spot market, while the two-week currency futures trading at 389.84. The naira was quoted at 361 on the official market, backed by Nigeria’s central bank.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
Your email address will not be published.
After hitting a 3-year low during the week, Naira stabilizes as traders wonder what next
The CBN still continues to warn against currency speculators who patronize the black market.
The exchange rate between the naira and dollar at the I&E remained stable on Friday, closing at N386 to a dollar. This was the same rate that was recorded on Thursday as traders mulled over reports that the CBN had adjusted the exchange rate at the SMIS window. There was also stability with the opening indicative rate as it recorded N386.86 to a dollar on Friday. This was the same rate that was achieved the previous day.
At the black market where forex is traded unofficially, the naira also remained stable as it closed at N461 to a dollar on Friday which was the same rate that it exchanged on Thursday. The exchange rate at the beginning of the week was N460 to a dollar. By crossing N460, the exchange rate has broken a psychological ceiling going past N460 for the first time since 2017.
Nigeria continues to maintain multiple exchange rates comprising the CBN official rate, the BDC rates, and the NAFEX (I&E window). Nairametrics reported last week that the government has set plans in motion to unify the multiple exchange rates in line with requirements from the World Bank. Nigeria is seeking a world bank loan of up to $3 billion.
Forex turnover at the Investor and Exporters (I&E) window recorded a decline on Friday, July 3, 2020, as it dropped by 48.7% day on day, a reversal from the huge growth that it achieved on Thursday at the foreign exchange market. This is according to data from the FMDQOTC, an exchange where forex is traded by foreign investors and exporters.
According to the data tracked by Nairametrics, forex turnover decreased from $204.90 million on Thursday, July 2, 2020, to $105.05 million on Friday, July 3, 2020, representing a 48.7% decline on a day-to-day basis. Despite falling short of the over $200 million trading volume that was achieved the previous day and in January, it is still a decent turnover compared to the low trading volumes recently.
This was still enough to provide trading boost to help reduce the pressure and stabilize the market.
According to a July 2020 report from Moody’s, the foreign currency funding gap for Nigerian banks is expected to rise to $5 billion due to the current low oil prices, volatile forex inflows and lower diaspora remittances amid the coronavirus pandemic. These challenges are threatening to renew the foreign currency liquidity pressures that hit Nigerian banks during the previous oil crisis in 2016-2017.
The report also indicated that dollar shortages are expected to persist over the next 12-18 months if low oil prices continue thereby renewing the forex liquidity crisis that led to severe rationing of dollar and ban on importation of some items during the last oil price crash in 2015-2017.
Despite a decent turnover recorded on Friday and the stability of the naira at the I&E window and the black market, the volatility and uncertainty of the forex market still persist due to accumulated demand and liquidity shortages across markets.  The rise in demand and contrasting drop in supply has called for another round of devaluation, which the CBN has insisted it has plans to implement.
The CBN on Friday adjusted the naira at the retail forex auction from N360 to a dollar to N380 to a dollar in a move that most analysts see as part of the plans to unify the exchange rate. A devaluation last occurred in March. The apex bank wants to unify the exchange rate to conserve the dwindling external reserves which has been hard hit by demand by ever-increasing importers and the foreign investors wishing the exit. This current move by the CBN has moved the retail auction for importers and individuals, which is the official rate closer to the over-the counter-spot for investors and exporters. Nairametrics spoke to some traders who are still reviewing what the latest move by the CBN could mean on the future price of forex. Whilst some believe this is a major step towards reunification others believe the real test of the value of the exchange rate could be when the economy finally opens. For now, projection is all speculation, one trader informs Nairametrics.
The CBN still continues to warn against currency speculators who patronize the black market, thus widening the gap between it and the I&E window. The CBN maintains that the perceived demand cannot be substantiated following the drop in economic activities induced by the COVID-19 pandemic suggest demand should be low due to travel restrictions and drop-in economic activities.
The further decline in liquidity could further fuel speculations in the black market where the exchange rate has traded at a premium of N60+ over the last few weeks. The CBN claims most of the demand being cited is not represented by any official documentation and that it has informed foreign investors with genuine forex demand to be “patient” and that they will get their forex.
