The choppiness in the recent four-hour candle price action of AUD/JPY continues; to start the current 4 hour candle, it came in at a price of 74.738, up 16 pips (0.22%) since the previous 4 hours. Out of the 37 instruments in the Forex asset class, AUD/JPY ended up ranking 8th for the four-hour candle in terms of price change.
AUD/JPY entered today at 74.577, down 5 pips (0.06%) from yesterday. Out of the 40 instruments in the Forex asset class, AUD/JPY ended up ranking 29th for the day in terms of price change. Here is a price chart of AUD/JPY.
Coming into today AUD/JPY is now close to its 20 day averages, located at 73.8508 respectively, and thus may be at a key juncture along those timeframes. As for the alignment of the moving averages, well, it’s a bit mixed up; the 20, 50, 100, and 200 do not progress from largest to smallest, or vice versa. The closest is the 20 day average, which is 72.6 pips away. It should be noted, though, the 20 day simple moving average turned upwards, which may be a bullish sign. The clearest trend exists on the 14 day timeframe, which shows price moving up over that time. For additional context, note that price has gone up 8 out of the past 14 days. And for candlestick traders, a special treat: there is a pin bar pattern showing up on the charts as well. Rejoice!
Of note is that traders in aggregate have opinions on AUDJPY, with 9 buy signals on our radar and 15 sell signals. This imputes a buy/sell ratio of 0.6, which is bearish. As for the rationale, technical traders seem to be citing the appearance of divergence, double top, fibonacci, relative strength index, trendline and triangle technical patterns. Here’s a piece we found on tradingview.com ; below is a short snippet from it to give you a taste.
Triangle formation on AUD/JPY hour chart. The breakout hasn’t happened yet. The price is open for both direction.The trendline crush is more likely because of the RSI divergence,but we can trade both with an OCO buy stop-sell stop order.
