After a shaky start to the financial year, the Australian share market jumped in afternoon trade and ended the session higher.
Market analysts expect the volatility, which has been roiling investors since COVID-19 struck months ago, will continue up to the US presidential election in November.
The ASX 200 rose by 0.6 per cent, or 36 points, to close at 5,934 points.
Financials was the best-performing sector, led by a 1.9 per cent rise in NAB shares.
The technology sector also rose, driven by gains in data centre operator NextDC (+8.1pc).
Travel stocks like Webjet (+7.5pc), Flight Centre (+3.2pc) and Qantas (+2.4pc) were finally getting bids, after getting smashed in the past week.
Gold miners Resolute Mining (+7.1pc) and Northern Star Resources (+7pc) were also in demand after the precious metal's spot price lifted (+0.2pc) to $US1,783 an ounce, close to its eight-year high.
On the flip side, the weakest sector was health care, with stocks including CSL (-0.9pc) and ResMed (-1.4pc) falling.
A weaker US greenback helped push the Australian dollar up 0.1 per cent to nearly 69.1 US cents by 4:55pm AEST.
Oil prices went backwards overnight, with Brent crude falling sharply (-1.4pc) to $US41.14 per barrel — as traders cashed in their recent profits, and Libya's state oil company flagged progress in talks to resume exports, potentially boosting global supply.
The market plunged even before COVID-19 was declared a pandemic.
LendLease has revealed that it will suffer a loss in the 2019-20 fiscal year, and will not pay a dividend because of the impact of COVID-19 on its business.
The construction firm said it expects to record a $230-$340 million full year loss, a big drop compared to tis $467 million profit last year..
Due to lockdown restrictions across the globe, Lendlease faced delays in securing fresh projects, with its construction segment experiencing lower productivity and delay in starting work overseas.
The Sydney-based company had raised about $1.15 billion in April to cushion the blow from market uncertainty induced by the pandemic, and also withdrew its earnings forecasts.
Shares in LendLease experienced a wild ride on Wednesday — plunging 7.4 per cent, before swinging to a 0.7 per cent gain at midday.
The stock closed down by 1.3 per cent at $12.21.
Papua New Guinea-focused oil and gas firm Oil Search has announced it will axe a third of its workforce, expected to be nearly 600 jobs.
The Australian listed firm said it had shrunk its full-time workforce to 1,222 — with another 137 to move on by year-end — from all of its locations as it seeks to shore up its balance sheet in an environment of low crude oil prices and slumping demand.
It also said it would boost senior leadership roles for PNG citizens. Expatriate positions in PNG will be reduced to 7 per cent of all jobs, while the percentage of women in the workforce and executive positions will rise to about 28 per cent.
The oil and gas producer currently has women occupying four out of 16 board and management positions, according to its website.
While demand for oil has picked up from the worst weeks of the coronavirus outbreak, an upturn in new infection cases in the United States has revived uncertainty regarding oil prices and demand.
The company's share price rose 0.6 per cent to $3.19.
US markets were boosted by better-than-expected consumer confidence figures and a belief that the Trump administration will unveil even more stimulus, on top of the trillions which have already been injected into the economy.
"What everybody sees is if we can get something that puts an end to the spread [of the coronavirus] or the spread becomes less, there is literally so much money out there that the Fed has put out there that when we turn, it is going to be a rocket ship the other way," said JJ Kinahan, chief market strategist at TD Ameritrade in Chicago.
