The US Dollar exchange rates remained largely flat on Thursday despite foreign exchange investors flocking to safe haven currencies. Against the Euro, the Greenback remained flat, as USD/EUR traded at around €0.9187.
China’s Hubei province reported a sharp increase in new Covid-19 cases thanks to a new method of diagnosis.
The number of cases jumped by 14,840 today, while the number of recorded deaths increased by a record 242 .
The Yen rallied from a three-week low against the US Dollar as the increase in cases reminded markets of the threat to global markets.
Commenting on this, market strategist at Sumitomo Mitsui Trust Bank, Ayako Sera said:
‘When you see numbers like this, you can’t help but move to risk-off trades, which means buy the Yen and sell stocks. If the authorities can reasonably explain this, things might calm down, but I expect risk aversion to continue.’
Thursday saw the US Dollar edged lower against the Pound (GBP), leaving the USD/GBP exchange rate trading around £0.7700.
Sterling received a slight upswing of support after recent UK economic data which supported the Bank of England’s (BoE) decision not to cut rates.
UK GDP data remained flat in the final quarter of 2019 while today’s data showed UK house prices jumped by the most in close to three years.
Meanwhile, on Wednesday, US Federal Reserve Chair, Jerome Powell reiterated that the outlook for the American economy is bright.
Powell emphasised confidence in the economy despite the expected drag from the outbreak of Covid-19 in China.
Speaking during the second day of his congressional testimony, the head of the Fed said:
‘There’s no reason why the current situation of low unemployment, rising wages, high job creation - there’s no reason why it can’t go on. [...] There is nothing about this economy that is out of kilter or imbalanced.’
However, Powell did note that the central bank is watching the outbreak of coronavirus in China, and expects there will be some affects to the US economy.
Will Strong US Inflation Buoy USD Exchange Rates?
Looking ahead to this afternoon, the US Dollar could make some gains following the release of January’s inflation data.
If inflation rises as expected, in line with the Federal Reserve’s target, ‘Greenback’ sentiment will increase.
Meanwhile, Friday could see the Dollar make further gains following the release of January’s retail sales statistics.
If sales rise higher than expected, showing the American consumer is more optimistic than previously expected, USD will rise.
However, this rise could be limited if further industrial production data proves to be weaker than forecast.
If annual production slumps for the fifth month in a row, this could offset upbeat retail sales data.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
