Still driven largely by Brexit news, the British Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate has fallen this week as the perceived chances of an imminent UK election and months more Brexit uncertainty weaken the Pound. Due to today’s higher market demand for safe haven currencies, the Japanese Yen has been able to benefit from the Pound’s latest weakness.
Last week’s Brexit developments caused significant GBP/JPY gains, as the pair surged from 137.12 to 140.69 throughout the week.
Towards the beginning of this week, GBP/JPY even touched on a fresh 5 month best of 141.23.
However, Brexit hopes have since faded and GBP/JPY has shed over a Yen from the week’s opening levels, currently trending near the level of 139.47.
After weeks of strong performance, the Pound’s bullish streak on Brexit hopes may have come to an end this week.
UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s newly reached UK-EU Brexit deal has been met with obstacles in UK Parliament as many analysts suspected, but it is also expected that the Brexit process will be delayed again rather than a no-deal Brexit becoming reality.
As no-deal Brexit fears lightened, the Pound’s potential for losses is limited.
However, Sterling has still tumbled in recent sessions, as hopes for a relatively soft Brexit deal to be reached soon lightened as well, and have been replaced by concerns that Britain is headed towards a fresh snap election after Brexit is delayed.
‘Sterling retraced some of its gains again last night after many optimists had to realise that the hope of a happy end next week has now died,
However, as the extension means that we are entering a new round and as a hard Brexit is unlikely the losses are likely to be limited short term. Sterling will probably remain at its comparatively high levels for now and wait for things to come.’
The Japanese Yen was able firm against the weakening Pound on Tuesday evening and much of today, as the currency found support in market safe haven demand.
The Japanese Yen is a safe haven currency, a currency that is seen as appealing and reliable in times of market uncertainty.
As a result, the latest Brexit uncertainties as well as the possibility of an upcoming UK election have both made global markets more anxious and led to demand for the safe haven Yen.
However, safe haven demand has been limited by continued speculation that US-China trade relations are improving.
Both nations have indicated that talks are going well and that a preliminary deal of sorts could be reached by mid-November.
Safe haven demand aside, the Japanese Yen is also seeing support from speculation that the Bank of Japan (BoJ) could avoid a more dovish tone.
Speculation has risen that despite some bets that the Bank of Japan could introduce further monetary policy easing, the bank may instead look to save ammo for when economic conditions worsen further.
The Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate has tumbled slightly in recent sessions, but its potential for further losses may be limited.
If a Brexit delay is confirmed, the Pound may become jittery on expectations for a possible UK snap election in the coming months, but it will also mean no-deal Brexit fears have faded for now.
As much of the Pound’s poor performance this year has been due to no-deal Brexit fears, this could keep Sterling from falling too far.
The Japanese Yen, on the other hand, will be driven by global factors such as risk-sentiment and central bank speculation.
If there is more dovish speculation surrounding the Bank of Japan (BoJ), the Japanese Yen could shed some of its recent gains.
The Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate could also be influenced by Japanese PMI projections due for publication tomorrow.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
