It is clear from this chart that aside from the US and UK, long-term government bonds are a risky proposition. The Japanese bonds are sure to bring losses with them. It does not make sense to buy yen and then put the capital into long-term Japanese bonds. This is not recommended.
“The NIKKEI 225 increased 1202 points or 5.99% since the beginning of 2019, according to trading on a contract for difference ( CFD ) that tracks this benchmark index from Japan. Historically, the Japan NIKKEI 225 Stock Market Index reached an all time high of 38957.44 in December of 1989 and a record low of 1020.49 in July of 1965.”
Below the Trading Economics chart for the Nikkei from 2015.
Here the chart from 2004 to 2019.
As can be seen from the above charts, the Nikkei has been in recovery mode since 2013 and is now trading in a consolidated band around 21,000 with a recent uptick in September. This is evident from the three-month chart below.
The purpose of showing these charts is to suggest that Japanese equities could be a possibility for investment.
At the present time the US dollar has maintained its position as the foremost global currency. There are, however, operations underway that could threaten dollar supremacy. It is therefore reasonable for US investors to diversify away from the US dollar. This does not mean totally divesting from US dollars, but rather earmarking a small part of one`s portfolio for investments in other international currencies in order to hedge against a dollar depreciation. The Japanese yen is still a strong currency and is holding its own amidst the turmoil in Forex markets brought about by the China-US trade war.
Disclosure: I/we have no positions in any stocks mentioned, and no plans to initiate any positions within the next 72 hours. I wrote this article myself, and it expresses my own opinions. I am not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). I have no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.
To report a factual error in this article, click here .
Your feedback matters to us!
