CIBC expects the US dollar to weaken as a decline in defensive demand exposes the lack of yield support.
Forecasts for other majors will be dependent on the dollar gradually losing traction.
CIBC expects the dollar will act as a barometer of market risk sentiment in the short term, gaining on risk-off days. Although progress is likely to be protracted, eventual move to a vaccine should tilt the odds towards a weaker dollar as defensive demand fades.
According to CIBC; “that also reflects where we stood through the last cycle’s Fed tightening: a greenback that was overvalued on trade fundamentals, offset by wide interest differentials vs. Europe and Japan.
This time around, however, there is no reason to expect that the Fed will embark on a tightening cycle ahead of other major central banks which will undermine yield support and the dollar is expected to weaken gradually.
“Lacking as juicy a yield edge, or a sustained flight to safety bid, the dollar will be less well defended against a slippage tied to trade competitiveness.”
CIBC considers that fiscal policy remains a key focus for the Euro as it discusses the prospect of fiscal expansion and the planned EUR750bn rescue plan. There has been opposition from the frugal four (Austria, Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands).
CIBC expects progress will be made; “we expect this pushback to dissipate. In part, their opposition could be seen as a negotiating tactic as the rescue fund is being debated in parallel with the new 7 year Multi-Annual Financial Framework (MFF).”
The combination of a plan advocating joint debt issuance, German fiscal expansion, and the extension of the ECB PEPP programmes underlines our bias towards medium run EUR impetus.
Although real money longs have extended to levels not seen since May 2018, CIBC notes that leveraged investors maintain a negative skew which leaves scope for further Euro buying.
The risk to their EUR bullish view would be if talks on the recue fund breakdown.
Overall, CIBC expects EUR/USD to strengthen to 1.15 at the end of 2020.
As far as the UK economy is concerned, CIBC considers labour-market pressures to be the major influence. At present, 8.9 million workers are currently on furlough while another 2.6mn self-employed people have been given financial support. There will be an important risk that the jobless total will rise sharply when these support programmes come to an end.
Brexit talks remain the other key Sterling risk factor with more intense talks during the third quarter. An early deal would support Sterling, but CIBC doubts whether this is realistic.
“Despite the UK looking towards an early resolution, the talks are likely to extend beyond Q3. However, our base case remains one of pragmatism eventually winning out. Expect a Q4 Brexit deal to provide some late year Sterling support.”
After interim weakness, EUR/GBP is expected to be around 0.9000 by the end of 2020.
After initial losses, Sterling is forecast to make significant gains against the Canadian dollar, Australian dollar and New Zealand dollars. Sterling/Australian dollar, for example, is forecast at 1.935 by the end of 2020 from 1.822 at present.
CIBC notes the lack of yen volatility during June and considers this is unsurprising given its status of a defensive currency backed by Japan’s substantial net creditor status.
There are certainly reasons to worry about the Japanese economy. “Fundamentally, the picture doesn’t look all that great for the Japanese economy. BoJ Governor Kuroda has admitted that price momentum has been lost which points to accommodative policy staying in place until at least 2023.”
In normal times, the lack of yield support would trigger capital outflows from japan which would tend to weaken the yen. The very low yields available overseas is likely to curb these outflows. Any shortfall in capital flows into the US would tend to weaken USD/JPY.
“Over the longer-term, we’re still of the view that the path to external balance for Japan is for the JPY to strengthen.” USD/JPY is forecast to decline to 103 by the end of 2020.
CIBC notes that the Swiss National Bank (SNB) remains unique in focussing on intervention rather than further interest rate cuts of quantitative easing and expects this policy to continue if necessary.
“We expect the SNB to remain vigilant watchers of the CHF going forward, especially should EUR/CHF threaten to drift back below the 1.06 threshold.”
Nevertheless, it expects that franc appreciation pressures will ease given improved confidence in the Euro outlook.
“We are looking for the prospect of EUR/USD gains to drag EUR/CHF towards 1.09, leaving the SNB to largely sit on the side-lines for now.”
CIBC has adopted a slightly less pessimistic stance on the Canadian dollar, primarily due to a stronger than expected rally in oil prices, but still expects net losses over the next few months.
“Unlike the Eurozone or Japan, Canada entered this recession with a weak current account and trade balance, and the prior expansion’s lackluster growth in real exports suggests it’s overvalued on trade fundamentals.”
CIBC also doubts that the Bank of Canada will be in any position to increase interest rates given the domestic output gap. USD/CAD is projected at 1.38 by the end of 2020.
CIBC points out the strong Australian economic linkages with China and the Chinese economy is recovering which will underpin the Australian outlook.
The bank is, however, concerned over the outlook for tourism and education revenue from China given that the border is still closed. This loss of revenue will be an important negative factor for the currency.
“We don’t doubt that these sectors will recover, but a risk premium is warranted to reflect uncertainty for now. The tailwinds for the currency will come later as the recovery is confirmed and a clearer picture on China engagement is made.”
CIBC does not, however, consider that that the Reserve Bank will actively look to push the currency lower in view of recent comments from RBA Governor Lowe that it is hard to argue that the currency is overvalued.
AUD/USD is forecast at 0.66 by the end of 2020.
CIBC notes that the New Zealand economy is being underpinned by supportive fiscal and monetary policies.
It remains slightly concerned over the risk of a second round of infection and some short-term risk premium remains appropriate, although this primarily reflects the downturn in tourism and education revenue due to the closing of borders.
“A weaker USD overall will be supportive for NZD/USD, though we do not see the market eclipsing highs around the New Year of 0.6750 in an easy manner.”
NZD/USD is forecast to decline to 0.61 by the end of 2020.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Traded Forex for 6 years. Trading consultant for Private Sports Betting Fund out of Edinburgh. Background in...
