coronavirus on the financial markets. You saw such headlines as "coronavirus is
event? Have you found the answers? If you haven't, read the article to get
clues on the correlation between the epidemic and the financial markets; and
the forecast for the upcoming market moves.
viruses that cause such illnesses as the common cold. The virus usually applies
to animals. However, there are cases when it spreads from animals to people.
That is what happened in China. The virus appeared in Chinese city Wuhan on
deadly virus that has already taken the lives of 25 people, 830 are infected.
influencing markets more and more.
medical virus has an impact on the financial world. Traders know that natural
disasters and epidemics always affect the market. However, usually, it's the
market of the suffering country. This time, the coronavirus has affected not
only China but the whole market sentiment. Let's figure out why this has
shaken by the risk of the global recession. Chinese economic data was one of
and the financial power of Beijing. The virus led to the shutdown of three
expansion of the virus. It is mostly noticed in Asian countries. However, one
case was already registered in the US. If the epidemic spreads around the
world, the risks for the world markets will increase even more.
fragility of market sentiment due to the Brexit and geopolitical instability,
thanks to Mr. Trump, US-Sino trade war is not among risks for now. As a result,
any negative event is considered as a risk factor.
decreases. In the case of the virus expansion around the globe, more markets
companies that heavily rely on Chinese tourists. As a result, world
travel-based companies suffered a lot.
Wuhan. Two other cities were also blocked.
Chinese citizens will travel domestically and abroad. The Chinese market will
be closed during the week. However, US stocks can stay under pressure.
the virus that much. The USD/CNH pair had been suffering until January 20,
2020. That means the Chinese yuan was strong enough. The recovery of the pair
rises/falls for a long period. As a result, we can see that the impact of the
virus on the Chinese currency is not that strong now. If the epidemic
increases, the CNH may suffer. Then the pair will target 6.97, 7.0110, and
7.0335. If the effect is limited, the yuan has chances to appreciate, pulling
positive effect of the coronavirus on the refuge assets. However, we can doubt
safe-haven asset that reacts to global risks. If we follow the direction of the
strong during the past weeks. US-Iran geopolitical crisis was the biggest
driver of the pair at the beginning of the year. As a result, the pair reached
trading within a narrow range of 1,545-1,611. All its ups and down mostly
related to the strength of the USD.
has been recovering since the beginning of the year. And this happened not
because of the risks of the virus. The USD is a weak safe-haven asset that
our article " Gold and Japanese yen: who is not a safe-haven asset anymore? ", you know that the JPY is unlikely can be considered as a
refuge. If we take a look at the chart of the USD/JPY, we will see a decline of
pair reached highs of May 2019 and the correction was expected. The pair
rebounded from 110.20 and fell to 109.31. If the decline continues, the pair
will target 108.86, 108.47. In the case of the upward movement, previous
the market mood will be their driver. Nevertheless, the effect will be
short-term and may only arise in the times of the negative news.
sentiment. However, it may be not that strong as some analysts claim. The
spread of the virus will negatively affect the global market outlook. Until
then, we may expect a negative impact on the Asian markets. To catch the market
mood, follow the news with FBS.
change in the way we determine the strength of the domestic currency. If before
the rate cut signaled the weakness of the currency, it's more likely that in
2020, investors will look at other easing measures. In this case, the economic calendar is
not the major way to predict the currency moves. Check the news with FBS
to get the recent updates on the monetary policy.
