Risk appetite has revived across forex markets, lifting both EUR/USD and GBP/USD.
Chris Beauchamp | Chief Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-16T10:11:36+0100
EUR/USD has recovered from the lows of Friday and Monday, but - having rallied 150 points - may now be at risk of creating a lower high.
If the price fails to push on above $1.135 then bearish pressure may resume. Alternatively, we look for a move through $1.135 to clear the path for another challenge of $1.14, which marks the highs of last week. Above here confirms the ongoing rally in this pair. A drop towards $1.12 may see this support from Friday tested again, and below here lower lows will confirm that a more bearish picture is emerging.
Like stocks, GBP/USD has rallied sharply in the past 24 hours and while upward momentum is fading, the sellers seem to have lost control for the time being.
The rally from Monday’s lows took out trendline resistance from last week’s highs and while the price edges lower, any low that holds above this trendline is likely to prove to be another buying opportunity. A rally through $1.27 will open the way to $1.28, the highs from last week, while a more bearish view requires at least a reversal below $1.25 and then a move below $1.245.
We have witnessed a tentative bounce in the USD/JPY price, although gains have now stalled below ¥107.50.
Rising trendline support has held since Friday, while a reversal below ¥107.00 would start to dent the bullish view, and bring ¥106.60 into view. Alternatively, a rally through ¥107.50 suggests the buyers remain in charge, and will target ¥108.60 and higher.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Trade the largest and most volatile financial market in the world.
Speculate from a range of platforms, including on mobile
Don’t miss your chance. Try a risk-free trade in your demo account, and find out whether your hunch could have paid off.
