EUR/USD and GBP/USD continue to fall, while the dollar has seen some strength against the yen.
Chris Beauchamp | Chief Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-26T10:17:05+0100
The EUR/USD losses stalled just below $1.12, and a move below this and through last Friday’s low at $1.117 would be a bearish development, reaffirming the current downtrend.
Alternatively, the price needs to rally through $1.126 and then challenge $1.135, where gains have stalled twice this month.
Not much sign of a bullish momentum appears for GBP/USD , as the price sticks close to $1.24.
A move through $1.245 might signal another attempt to break above $1.255, which would help to establish a higher high and provide a more bullish view. Alternatively, further declines below $1.24 open the way to $1.235 and then on to fresh lower lows.
USD/JPY has essentially gone nowhere since mid-June. However, if it can rediscover the upward momentum seen since Tuesday then a more bullish view might continue to develop.
Above ¥107.50, the price will reinforce the bullish view. Further declines from current levels bring ¥106.20 into view.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Trade the largest and most volatile financial market in the world.
Speculate from a range of platforms, including on mobile
Don’t miss your chance. Try a risk-free trade in your demo account, and find out whether your hunch could have paid off.
