- "In FX, USDJPY weakened to its lowest level since October 2016 – below 102.00 for a short period of time this morning. So-called commodity currencies were also volatile, with AUDUSD down more than 3%, and NOK falling against the EUR by more than 4.5%." Barclays
- "Brent crude futures were down 27% at $33.04 a barrel, after earlier dropping to $31.02 – their lowest level since February 2016. Equities also tumbled, with Japan’s Nikkei index down more than 5% and China’s CSI 300 down more than 3.3%."
The Pound to Dollar exchange rate (GBP/USD) rose slightly overnight, up 0.4%, belying the historic volatility being seen in markets overnight. As the coronavirus spreads in Europe, plunging oil prices added to the turmoil. The British Pound exchange rates are weathering the storm pretty nicely, however, riding on the coattails of the Euro.
Unfortunately, the same can not be said for the FTSE 100 , which is primed for a horrendous open after futures fell as much as 7% overnight.
Analysts at ING are still bearish the British Pound, expecting fiscal stimulus to have a limited effect on the GBP, while Brexit negotiations will also provide an obstacle to gains, as a recent FX report stated,
“The spread of Covid-19 (albeit still relatively limited for now in the UK) has triggered a fiscal response worldwide, and the UK government will likely follow with some targeted measures to curb the impact of the virus on firms. The fiscal stimulus side may, therefore, be partly outshadowed and we do not see the budget release providing sustained support to the Pound. The other key driver of the currency in a longer-term perspective is the UK-EU trade negotiations which, in our view, will drive down GBP in the coming months.”
The Euro was buoyant overnight, soaring 1% as the US Dollar continues to struggle. The EUR to USD exchange rate is now above 1.14 and is defying turmoil in Eurozone stock markets.
Whatever additional factors that may be supporting the EUR, such as the liquidation of carry trades, it is interest rate differentials that are the most apparent boost for the common currency.
Fundamentals continue to look dire as Northern Italy locks down 16 million people, and France bans gatherings of more than 1000 people.
"The EUR has been ignoring a burgeoning recession in Europe for weeks now, in other words, the currency's recent appreciation may well end dramatically!" says Marc-André Fongern, Head of FX Spot & Options, Fongern Global Forex. "However, the increased likelihood of additional emergency rate cuts by the Fed is paralyzing the  USD for the time being. The ECB remains comparatively powerless. Coordinated fiscal measures in Europe are imperative in order to alleviate the impact of the virus on the economy. The EUR is at a crossroads!"
The United States appears to be eye Europe with some trepidation as a number of U.S. stock market futures markets went limit down overnight.
As well as the coronavirus, this was prompted by a huge shock to the oil markets, as Crude suffered its worst day since 1991 (the start of the gulf war).
As is usually the case for the Dollar Index, its performance was mixed between the risk-sensitive and haven currencies, though the heavy weighting of the Euro meant DXY still dropped sharply.
Asian markets were struggling overnight, as Japanese GDP came in YoY at a rather alarming -7%.
The Japanese Yen was surging, while the Australian Dollar was really struggling. This prompted a huge, almost 5% loss in AUD/JPY.
Crude oil’s 25% decline unsurprisingly sent the Canadian Dollar spiraling more than 1.5 lower against the USD.
"Asian stock markets are down sharply again as concerns about the impact of the coronavirus on the global economy remain in sharp focus" say analysts at Lloyds on Monday. "February international trade data for China revealed a plunge in both exports and imports that took the trade balance into deficit. The oil price fell to its lowest level since early 2016 (Brent crude below $35bbl) after OPEC failed to agree on production cutbacks and Saudi Arabia threatened to flood the market. In the US, aides to President Trump are reported to be working on a package of measures. Meanwhile,  German industrial production grew by a stronger-than-expected 3% in January following a 2.2% decline in December."
"Here’s half of what you have to know about the markets today" says Marshall Gittler, analyst at BDSwiss on Monday.
"The number of new coronavirus cases worldwide is climbing. That’s spooking the markets.
"The other half is oil. Much to my surprise (but not the market’s, I have to admit), the OPEC+ meeting broke up on Friday with no agreement. As a result, all the OPEC+ output restraints expire at the end of this month and everyone is free to pump and sell as much oil as they can.
"In response, Saudi Arabia, the world’s largest oil exporter, launched a price war. It said it plans to raise its oil production to more than 10mn barrels a day (b/d) from around 9.7mn b/d recently. Market talk was that the Kingdom might increase output to as much as 11mn b/d, vs the 9mn b/d that it was proposing under the agreement that it had offered (but Russia rejected). Its total capacity is estimated at around 12mn b/d. The kingdom will also offer unprecedented discounts of almost 20% in key markets, with the clear goal of taking market share away from Russia and inflicting pain on US shale producers. As a result, WTI collapsed 36% and Brent plunged 34%, the biggest move since 1991, when the surprisingly rapid end of the Gulf war caused oil prices to collapse.
"One might think that this would be good for the markets, in that it means lower gasoline prices for consumers and hence is a boost for consumers at this sensitive time when so much of the economy is in the doldrums. However, energy accounts for 3.9% of the S&P 500 and so it’s weighing on stock market indices. Furthermore, a lot of banks have a lot of loans outstanding to oil companies and this will hurt bank stocks too. As a result, stock futures are limit down this morning. It’s a risk-off day to end all risk-off days.
"We can expect the Saudi decision to be negative for CAD, which has enough problems of its own nowadays anyway. There is a rough correlation between the change in Saudi output and the USD/CAD rate, with USD/CAD tending to rise (i.e., CAD to weaken) as Saudi output rises. This is no doubt due to oil prices tending to fall when Saudi output rises. You can see the effect particularly in 2014/2015, the last time Saudi Arabia unleashed such an oil price war by ramping up production. The impact on CAD was swift and clear, as it no doubt will be now as well.
"Two things that stood out to me. One, while the currency market reflected the usual pattern for a “risk off” trade – JPY and CHF up, commodity currencies down – the dollar is not benefitting. The “dollar smile” theory postulates that when the proverbial stuff hits the fan, the dollar will benefit as the ultimate “safe haven” currency, but that’s not happening this time."
As of Wednesday, March 4, there have been 110,099 confirmed cases and of 66,134 closed cases, 62,303 have recovered with 3,831 (6%) deaths. Source: https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
Aside from German industrial production data, there is little to get exchange rates moving today, but it doesn’t appear that it will be a problem. Coronavirus cases in the US are now above 500 and rising rapidly, while the price of Crude is now an additional worry for an already shaky stock market.
"Today’s data calendar is light with nothing of note in the UK or the US and only the March Sentix Investor Confidence measure for the Eurozone" say economists at Lloyds on Monday, March 9. "Given the recent sharp declines in equity markets that reading will almost certainly have slipped but it will be interesting to see how the level compares to the lows reached during the last recession or the euro crisis.
"Early Tuesday the BRC retail sales will be watched for signs that spending held up in February after the positive start to the year. The data may also provide some indications of the impact from the coronavirus although it seems unlikely that this will have been pronounced at such an early stage.
"China February inflation data will also be released overnight. In January, the annual rate of CPI inflation rose to a nine-year high of 5.4% on the back of higher food prices. It is expected to have inched down modestly to 5.2% in February but that would still leave inflation at a relatively high level for now, although he fall in oil prices points to a future decline."
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Traded Forex for 6 years. Trading consultant for Private Sports Betting Fund out of Edinburgh. Background in...
