In its latest monthly report, CIBC remains bearish on the Canadian dollar with a soft economy liable to trigger a Bank of Canada interest rate cut in April. Although it remains cautious on the UK outlook, the Pound Sterling to Canadian dollar exchange rate is projected to reach 3-year highs later in 2020 with the US dollar also losing ground.
Risk appetite has dominated market sentiment during the past few days with an increase in volatility across all asset classes.
As the number of global cases has increased, demand for defensive assets has increased amid fears over more substantial damage to the global economy.
The sharp downturn in Chinese demand will have a negative impact on growth conditions in japan, and the Euro-zone while there could also be an impact on Swiss exports. In this environment, there will be expectations that the US economy will out-perform other major economies.
CIBC notes; ‘In currency markets, in recent bouts of risk-off sentiment, we’ve seen investors only chasing the US dollar, as opposed to other majors that are traditionally also safe haven currencies, such as the yen or Swiss franc’.
The bank still expects the dollar to weaken over the medium term, but this potential weakness has been delayed by the coronavirus and on-going weakness in Europe.
‘So long as coronavirus fears dissolve over the next few months, the greenback should give back that strength’.
A key rationale for the expected dollar decline is the current account balance which is liable to be tied into investor fears over the budget deficit.
Currency markets are often dominated by yield factors with investors pushing funds into higher-yield instruments. Structural factors, are, however, also important and current account deficits will tend to weaken a currency if capital inflows are subdued.
Valuation factors will, therefore, be important with the US dollar potentially seen as too expensive to attract international capital. The US will run a current account deficit of over 2% of GDP for 2020 with an EU surplus of close to 4%.
‘In the long-run, the US’s inferior current account balance relative to other countries, such as Europe’s and Japan’s, should favour those currencies and accordingly see the dollar weaken’.
CIBC is significantly more bearish on the Canadian dollar than consensus forecasts even though the bank does expect that the Canadian dollar will be resilient in the short term;
‘If coronavirus fears abate and sentiment eventually improves, oil prices should rebound and the loonie will likely be dragged along for the ride. As such, the C$ should end Q1 slightly stronger than its current level, seeing USDCAD hover around 1.32’.
Thereafter, however, CIBC is more pessimistic with expectations that labour-market strength will fade and GDP growth softens.
Interest rate markets have not priced in a Bank of Canada rate move and any rate cut would, therefore, tend to weaken the currency. The projected rate cut is the crucial element in CIBC expecting the Canadian currency to weaken and the bank expects USDCAD to reach 1.34 by the end of Q2.
CIBC expects further weakness over the second half of 2020 with a USD/CAD forecast of 1.36 by the end of 2020.
This is significantly weaker than the consensus forecast of a decline to 1.30 by the end of this year.
Given that CIBC is also expecting a wider US dollar decline, this implies a significantly weaker Canadian dollar on the main crosses.
As far as Pound Sterling is concerned, CIBC remains generally cautious over the GBP outlook.
The bank, therefore, considers that increased fiscal spending will be necessary to support the growth outlook rather than triggering a notable improvement in the growth outlook.
Overall, CIBC expects the Euro-Pound exchange rate to move higher during the second quarter of this year before ending the year little changed from current levels.
The projected year-end GBP/CAD x-rate is 1.82 from the current level of 1.72 and this would be the strongest level since March 2018. During 2021, CIBC also expects GBP/CAD to trade above 1.90, the highest level since December 2015.
Looking at the Euro , CIBC considers four factors have been crucial for the recent slide; ‘poor demand-side data out of Germany and more broadly out of the Eurozone to end Q4, a rise in political concerns in Germany, Brexit-related uncertainties and impacts of the coronavirus on China and its economy’.
The bank expects some relief during the year with underlying pressures on the economy seen as making a more expansionary fiscal policy as irresistible. It also expects that economic data will gradually improve, although under-performance relative to the US is set to continue.
CIBC, therefore, still expects the EUR/USD exchange rates to make gains for 2020 as a whole, although it has lowered its forecast profile given the weaker than expected Euro-zone outlook.
CIBC maintains a lack of confidence in the Japanese outlook, but the policy mix will be a crucial factor.
‘With the BoJ mindful of the issues related to lower and negative interest rates, we expect further (targeted) fiscal stimulus in an effort to limit growth headwinds - rather than further monetary expansion’.
If the bank resists further monetary expansion, the yen would be less likely to weaken. Nevertheless, the bank still expects yen gains to be slower than forecast previously with the USD/JPY exchange rate at 105 by the end of 2020.
The Swiss franc has gained ground with the EUR/CHF exchange rate briefly trading at 4-year lows just below 1.0600.
According to CIBC, franc strength is partially being driven by solid domestic demand and despite the fact that Switzerland has become increasingly reliant on Chinese demand for its exports.
The Swiss franc is expected to falter with the National Bank (SNB) also opposed to currency strength.
According to CIBC; ‘We don’t expect this [franc strength] to persist, however, given the extent to which the Swiss economy is leveraged to the German economy. Watch for sight deposits to rise in the coming months, as the SNB intervenes to weaken the currency’.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Tim is an economist and has been involved in financial markets for over 20 years as an analyst. He...
