The British Pound to Dollar exchange rate (GBP/USD) endured a choppy day of trade, as investors digested the U.S. jobs report.
Cable tried early in the day to breach 1.25 before being rejected back to the 1.24 handle.
With no significant economic data in the United Kingdom, it is the re-opening that is drawing most of the attention.
Analysts at Scotiabank are focusing on the upcoming weekend, with the easing of lock-downs possibly bringing a much-needed boost to the economy, though how strong demand will be is the real question, as their report states,
“The UK’s “Super Saturday” on July 4 will see pubs, restaurants, and hotels reopenreopen doors after months of lock-downs and could help to lift sentiment vis-à-vis the GBP as the country’s reopenreopening completion after falling behind its European peers; whether patrons show up to these establishments given fears of contagion is another issue altogether.”
For GBP – I can’t understand why it isn’t weaker than it is" says Marshall Gittler, analyst at BDSwiss. "With less than six months to go in the Brexit negotiations, EU’ chief negotiator Barnier said that “serious divergences remain” between the EU and the UK after the latest round of discussion. On the other side of the table, chief UK negotiator Frost said that the negotiations have “underlined the significant differences that still remain between us on a number of important issues.” Yet the risk reversals show no specific concerns about that date, and have actually been moving up recently – i.e., less demand for protection against what seems to me to be the almost-inevitable disaster (unless Boris “The Umbrella” Johnson folds as usual.) Further talks are scheduled for next week."
The Euro tracked fluctuation in the Dollar as usual on Thursday, keeping the EUR/USD exchange rate pinging around in the 1.12 handle.
Eurozone unemployment data showed a better reading than anticipated, as the 7.4% result was only 0.1% worse than last month, and quite a bit better than the 7.7% forecast.
Considering Europe seems to have a good handle on the coronavirus versus the United States, the EUR could be trading more purposefully.
Instead it is just along for the ride, as the Dollar remains the only real drive in the market.
"EUR was the weakest of the G10 currencies despite some distinctly EUR-positive news" says Gittler on Friday. "A broad coalition in Germany’s Bundestag voted to accept the ECB’s explanation for its Public Sector Purchase Program (PSPP), thereby defusing the crisis that emerged when the German Constitutional Court questioned its legality. The vote demonstrates the resolve of Germany’s political establishment to keep Europe together. Moreover, European stock markets gained even more than the US in reaction to the jobs data and the comparatively good news on the virus from the continent. The STOXX 600 jumped by nearly +2%, while the CAC 40 and the DAX rose even more. The enthusiasm showed up in the sovereign bond market too, where the spread of Italian BTPs over 10yr Bunds hit a three-month low. I can’t understand why EUR/USD isn’t stronger than it is. "
A strong jobs report proved to be of benefit to the US Dollar , as it rose after better than expected NFPs and another tightening in the jobless rate.
With a second 50k+ record day of coronavirus cases, it won’t be a very festive long holiday weekend, and the economic impact of this could reverse a number of the job gains.
Because of the re-lockdowns, many people who have been re-hired will be laid off and for this reason it is perhaps the July numbers that will be far more important next month.
There was very little movement in other major currencies, as the Japanese Yen tracked sideways in a very quiet trade on Friday.
The Nikkei 225 rose 0.13%, but with the U.S. closed today, that wasn’t particularly surprising.
Even a better than expected bounce in Australian retail sales failed to move the needle, as AUD/USD only rose 0.05%.
Caixin services data rallied to 58.4 in June, but had no impact on the Chinese Yuan, as USD/CNH remains trapped in a tight sideways range.
As of Friday, July 3, there have been 10,992,462 confirmed cases and of 6,676,660 closed cases, 6,152,472 have recovered with 524,188 (8%) deaths.
"Trading on Friday should be quiet with US markets closed in observance of the July 4th holiday£ says Kathy Lien, analyst at BK Asset Management. "Revisions to Eurozone and UK PMIs are scheduled for release but we do not expect any big moves. Euro held onto its gains on Thursday despite better NFP and Eurozone mixed data.  Producer prices fell more than expected in May while the unemployment rate ticked up to 7.4% from 7.3%. Sterling also marched higher but the best performing currency was the New Zealand dollar which likely benefitted from AUD/NZD selling after fresh lockdown measures were implemented in Melbourne suburbs. Australian data continues to improve with the trade surplus rising and tonight’s retail sales report likely to show recovery in demand. Stronger trade data and higher oil prices sparked gains in the Canadian dollar."
As the U.S. observes independence day weekend, it is going to be a quiet Friday. However, there will be plenty of interesting economic data in the European session.
Lots of high tier PMIs are available as the United Kingdom, Germany and the Eurozone. Norwegian unemployment is also on tap.
Volatility could be seen early but will peter out as the day goes on, with American traders having packed up early on Thursday afternoon.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Traded Forex for 6 years. Trading consultant for Private Sports Betting Fund out of Edinburgh. Background in...
