Risk-off overtook markets on Friday as the Nikkei 225 dropped 0.9% and US stock index futures also slipped.
The Japanese Yen and US Dollar rose against their trading partners, while Gold’s rally helped to confirm the risk-off conditions.
Bitcoin continues to come under pressure since the advent of the BAKKT ICE Futures contract and slipped further towards $8000.
The week winds down with a moderate day of economic data today. A truncated European session begins with the Nationwide House Price Index in the UK, where investors will be looking to see if Britain’s housing market has started to bottom. The Pound will be more interested in Boris Johnson and if he is going to be successful in securing a general election or not. Two central bank speakers are up next as the Boe’s Saunders and the ECB’s De Guindos take the stand. The European session ends with the Italian 10-Year bond auction, which is not as significant for the Euro as its German counterpart.
The North American session will be more important for foreign exchange markets, as Core PCE Price Index data is the Federal Reserve’s most important measure of inflation. This will likely generate some movement in the US Dollar, as it affects the outlook for interest rates in the United States. Personal Spending data and Michigan Consumer Sentiment will provide some more insight into the US retail outlook after disappointing sentiment data early in the week. THe FOMC’s Harker speaks in the early evening before the Baker Hughes Oil Rig Count finishes things off as usual.
17:00 USD FOMC Member Harker Speaks 18:00 USD U.S. Baker Hughes Oil Rig Count
The British Pound to Dollar exchange rate (GBP/USD) is in real danger of reversing back towards its lows after an abysmal couple of days of trade.
Analysts at Scotiabank note political angst and a strong US Dollar as the principal reasons behind Sterling’s slide, though they are still skeptical that the UK PM will be able to trigger the no-confidence vote he desires,
“Cable remains weak on the back of political unrest in the UK as well as a stronger greenback. Hostile discussions in the House of Commons continue today as PM Johnson resists calls to request an extension from the European Union ahead of a Brexit summit in three weeks. The PM is also pushing back against presenting his resignation and may again attempt to trigger an election through a no-confidence vote—although he is unlikely to gather the necessary votes in Commons for such a move”
From a technical perspective, Scotiabank is not optimistic as they see resistance looming tight overhead for GBP/USD, while support is also slipping,
“Intraday support has emerged at 1.2295/00, however, providing a modest lift for the pound. We expect limited upside potential, however, and expect resistance at 1.2375/80 intraday. A low close on the week should support the impression that the Sep rally has stalled for now and that downside risks are building again”
The US Dollar is hitting fresh highs against the Euro, which is not good news for the British Pound. While the Eurozone economy stutters, it grows increasingly difficult for the Pound to rally, with negative rates in Europe capping the BoE’s ability to hike interest rates even if Brexit was to find some resolution.
Latest Pound Sterling Exchange Rates Today: 27-09-2019
