- "The US dollar has been on the back foot, possibly reflecting the general recovery in risk appetite this week, helping the pound rise to 1.25" Lloyds
The British Pound to Dollar exchange rate (See live GBP/USD data, historical charts ) enjoyed a solid day of trade midweek.
Rising through 1.2450 , USD weakness was seen as a risk sentiment remained steady.
Economic data was pretty unremarkable, as the U.K. manufacturing PMI hit expectations, and the house price index dropped slightly more than expected.
Pound Sterling is closing in on the 1.25 handle, but there is some pretty stout resistance on the technical chart in the near future.
"GBP was the best-performing currency after Bank of England Monetary Policy Committee member J. Haskel said the UK economic activity is returning faster than anticipated" says Marshall Gittler, analyst at BDSwiss. “We now expect the second quarter as a whole will not be quite as negative as expected,” he said. I guess that’s what passes for good news nowadays. His comments were important though because they echo what BoE Chief Economist Haldane said on Tuesday. Haldane is a noted optimist, the one guy who voted against increasing the Asset Purchase Fund at the last meeting because he was confident in the recovery. So it was no surprise that he expressed confidence in the recovery. But if Haskel does too, then that’s a different story. Most of the GBP buying yesterday was vs EUR – this may have been one reason for EUR’s weakness."
It was also a good day for the Euro, as EUR/USD rose to the middle of the 1.1250 on Wednesday.
Helping drive the common currency higher was some good data out of Germany, as unemployment and manufacturing stats both came in higher than forecast.
Such a release will only serve to bolster bulls who are of the view that the EU can emerge ahead of the U.S. in short-term growth as the coronavirus dust settles.
A significant part of this theory relies on Germany and France containing the virus better than the United States. So far, the numbers suggest this is absolutely the case.
The U.S. is seeing some massive outbreaks of coronavirus , with statistics out of Texas and Florida of particular concern.
So far there doesn’t seem to have been much reaction in the stock market except that the Nasdaq is outperforming.
Donald Trump has made a huge u-turn on face masks , but it is probably too late to change the political lines that have been drawn in the U.S. around the coronavirus.
It is growing increasingly difficult to square the rising lockdowns with risk-on conditions, but so long as stocks are strong, it seems the USD will remain under some pressure.
The Nikkei 225 dropped 0.3% overnight after Japanese CPI came in at a jaw-dropping (sarcasm) 0% against expectations of -0.1% decline.
None of this had much impact on the Japanese Yen, and there wasn’t much movement in the Australian or Canadian Dollar either.
The Chinese Yuan rose slightly, and USD/CNH looks to be taking a run at the first winning day in the last three.
As of Wednesday, July 2, there have been 10,810,307 confirmed cases and of 6,552,068 closed cases, 6,032,985 have recovered with 519,083 (8%) deaths.
It is a big day today for exchange rates, as the United States releases its hotly anticipated labour market data. After last month’s surprise, hopes are quite high, but BK Asset Management’s Kathy Lien believes there could be a large pinch of salt after the initial euphoria wears off, stating,
“Last month’s positive job growth was a big surprise as everyone expected job losses, so if these improvements are maintained with no major downward revision to the May report, investors will be relieved. We’ll see an initial rally in equities and risk currencies including USD/JPY but the gains could fade quickly as they realize that these numbers could deteriorate quickly if states reverse reopening policies.”
Given very recent lockdowns in the United States, it seems more likely that job gains could be reversed again as California re-closes restaurants, bars and beaches. For this reason, it is the July reading in August that is probably going to be the critical event. None of this makes the upcoming unemployment rate less critical, but a substantial miss could be taken very hard.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Traded Forex for 6 years. Trading consultant for Private Sports Betting Fund out of Edinburgh. Background in...
