Forex - Japanese Yen Slips on GDP Data; Chinese Yuan Rises
Investing.com - The yen traded slightly lower on Monday in Asia after Japan reported a much deeper economic contraction than expected.
The USD/JPY pair inched up 0.1% 109.81 after the Cabinet Office reported today that Japan’s GDP in the December quarter fell an annualized 6.3%, faster than the expected 3.7% contraction.
The drop, which followed a revised 0.5% gain in July-September, was the biggest since a 7.4% decline marked in April-June 2014.
On Sunday, China reported 1,933 new confirmed cases of the coronavirus, down from 2,009 the previous day, and 100 new deaths, down one from 142 the previous day.
The economic impact of the epidemic is still unknown. Some analysts have estimated that China's annual growth could slow to between 4% and 5%, down from the 6% annual growth estimated by the government.
The AUD/USD pair gained 0.2% to 0.6727.
The GBP/USD pair was near flat at 1.3043. The U.K. will release a slew of data this week, including the December jobs report  and the latest inflation figures.
Reports on retail sales, manufacturing and services PMI data for February are also due.
The EUR/USD pair traded 0.1% higher to 1.0838. The euro fell to its lowest level against the U.S. dollar since April 2017 last Friday after Germany, the eurozone’s largest economy, reported that GDP growth stagnated at the end of 2019. The European Central Bank is scheduled to publish the minutes of its January meeting on Thursday.
The U.S. dollar index inched up 0.1% to 99.037. Financial markets on stateside will be closed on Monday for Presidents Day.
The Federal Reserve is due to release the minutes of its January meeting on Wednesday. There are also several Fed policymakers scheduled to speak during the week, including Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari, Dallas Fed head Robert Kaplan and Fed Governors Lael Brainard and Richard Clarida.
Forex - Japanese Yen Slips on GDP Data; Chinese Yuan Rises
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read Investing.com's comments guidelines and agree to the terms described.
