In times of trouble, investors instinctively race off in search of safe havens, and that is exactly what happened after President Donald Trump ordered the killing of Iranian general Qassem Suleimani in Iraq.
Cue a spike in the price of gold, the crypto-currency Bitcoin, and the Japanese yen. All are seen as financial boltholes in their different ways – gold is an ancient store of value, Bitcoin offers shelter when traditional assets are under pressure, and the Japanese yen is a rock solid currency because of the country’s solid current account surplus.
By contrast, investors flee stock markets when geopolitical problems strike. The FTSE 100 ended Monday down 0.64%, while the FTSE 250 was off more than 1%.
The US-Iran stand-off scared away short-term traders; they will wait to see how and when Iran will retaliate, and whether it does something drastic like attempt to close the Strait of Hormuz to shipping. Almost a fifth of the world’s oil passes through the Strait, some 17.2m barrels per day, and closing this could inflict further turmoil on markets.
The uncertainty isn’t hitting every stock, though. As Brent crude shot through $70 a barrel , FTSE 100 oil giant BP climbed more than 2% on Monday, while FTSE 250 listed energy services business Wood Group jumped almost 4%.
Stock market traders are by nature a jumpy bunch, as they try to capitalise on short-term market movements, but investors must ignore short-term threats, whether economic or geopolitical, and keep their eyes on the long-term prize, which is to tap into the greater long-term growth capacity of stocks and shares to build wealth for their future.
If you are investing for 20, 30, 40 years or more, events like these will one day be a mere blip. You need to keep your money exposed to the winning combination of share price growth and in particular, dividend payouts, and ignore political noise like this.
It’s time in the market that matters, not timing the market, as the old investment saying puts it. Any investor who is so nervy that they sold off their holdings because of recent political events probably shouldn’t have been in the market in the first place.
The unpredictability of stock markets was seen in 2019, when investors started the year in a gloomy mood and ended on an unexpected high. The FTSE 100 ended last year more than 10% higher, while in the US, the S&P 500 index climbed more than 25%.
Markets may struggle to repeat the trick this year, so I would advise looking for buying opportunities in the shape of a market dip. Who knows, we may see one over the next few days.
If further geopolitical uncertainty does knock investor sentiment and share prices, I would forget gold, Bitcoin, the Japanese yen, the Swiss franc and cash. Despite their vaunted ‘safe’ status they don’t cut it for me in the longer run.
Screw up your courage, and buy shares instead. In the longer run, they should deliver a far superior total return, which makes them a far better home for your long-term wealth, whatever happens on the political stage.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Harvey Jones has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
