The pair is down for its fourth consecutive day as the yen remains the best performing major currency in trading this week. The pair managed to break above its 200-day MA (blue line) towards the end of last week but the move has since fizzled over the past few days.
There are question marks surrounding why the yen has moved in such fashion over the past few days but I would still argue that the overall play is reflective of the supposed breakout in Treasury yields at the end of last week, which has completely faded now .
Here's a better look of that correlation as seen in USD/JPY as a baseline for yen pairs:
With Treasury yields settling back into its April to May range once again, the question now flips back towards risk sentiment in general.
The pound side of the equation has shown much resilience as of late despite concerns surrounding Brexit and the UK economy, and the lack of a pullback is certainly something to consider in that regards over buyers' conviction.
So, the only question is whether or not there will be a further pullback in stocks/risk that will help to underpin the yen in the coming sessions.
The pullback in stocks/risk today may be overdue but amid the approach to key technical levels, this is where the real test begins. Let's take a look back at GBP/JPY in this case.
Price action broke below the 200-day MA (blue line) earlier in the week and is now testing a confluence of key support levels in trading today:
For buyers, keeping above those levels highlighted will be an important victory from a technical perspective. For sellers, breaking below that opens up the path towards further downside pressure in the pair under 135.00.
In terms of further support, the 50.0 retracement level @ 134.53 will be the next in line to watch should the support levels above give way.
Much like most other currency pairs right now, there is a decent pullback from the recent run amid the Fed yesterday and also equities retracement today, but the question now is whether or not the pullback can lead to something bigger as we approach key levels.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
