GBP/JPY might turn lower as the bearish shooting star candle on-resistance can stoke additional selling.
EUR/JPY and AUD/JPY bullish price action can drive the exchange rates higher.
The waning market sentiment is the main driver for the haven related Japanese Yen’s surge in the coming June, getting back from the earlier crisis for testing the downtrend which has encapsulated the price actions from the top markets.
Both the momentum indicators and RSI seems to propose the more sustained pulling back as the prices precariously rest on top of the 200-day MA.
Sellers might be encouraged by the very steep decrease of the 50-DMA that can see the process penetrate support on 38.2% Fibonacci retracement.
The break below might open up the path for extra JPY losses against the main counterparts and can showcase the strengthening market optimism.
The resurgence of the risk appetite cushioning the AUD/JPY collapse which rises the Rising Wedge Support in early June, as this sentiment has driven exchange rates to remain optimistic above the 200-day MA (72.30).
The creation of the bullish engulfing candle on the 61.8% Fibonacci retracement pushing the prices back from the imposed 74 handles with customers targeting the possible retest for a yearly high.
The AUD/JPY’s overview seems to be skewed on the upside since both the momentum indicators and RSI strengthen in step with the current price action.
Nevertheless, resistance in June 16 high (75.09) might prove to be a huge challenge for the AUD bulls.
EUR/JPY seems to have resumed the earlier climb from the 120 level in the coming days after it slowed down to 4% from the initial high back in June.
Development of the MA might encourage buying pressure as a 50-DMA looks to cross over the slow 200-DMA possible resulting in the bullish.
Furthermore, the price might carve out the Bull Flag continuation pattern showing the path of the weak resistance remaining skewed on the upward trend.
That said, EUR/JPY’s future exchange rates are still dictated by the market sentiments with the existing conditions supporting the risk associated assets.
This risk aversion surge might jeopardize the uptrend that extends from May low and a break that was under 200-DMA and the 50% Fibonacci possibly opening the path to the 61.8% Fibonacci retracement.
While the momentum indicator may strengthen back in the positive region, there are some hints of divergence proposing the inflection zone at a 135 handle might continue suppressing the bullish price action.
To this end, the push for testing this (136.25) 200-DMA remains the stretch for the GBP/JPY and can see them get back to this June low, which was 131.76.
