GBP/JPY steady around 133.00 as Brexit fears ease.
Boris Johnson eases lockdown restrictions and boosts hopes of economic recovery.
Concerns about a second coronavirus wave keep the pound's recovery limited.
The GBP/JPY has remained moving within a tight range between 132.90 and 133.50 with the pound somewhat firmer on Thursday. Investors' hopes of a more constructive approach to Brexit negotiations and the easing of COVID-19 restrictions in the UK are offering some support to a vulnerable GBP.
The pound has trimmed losses against the euro and the US dollar on Thursday, with the investors welcoming Brussels' willingness to strike a compromise on the sensitive issue of the “level playing field” rules for businesses, which might facilitate a breakthrough in the negotiations. Furthermore, UK PM Boris Johnson has announced the easing of lockdown restrictions, boosting hopes of economic recovery.
At the moment, the pair is hovering above 132.70/80 (Intra-day low June 24 low), below here, next support levels might be at 131.80 (June 22 low) and 130.65 (May 22 low). On the upside, immediate resistance lies at 133.60 (intra-day high) and above here, 134.00 (June 23 high) and 135.11 (intra-day level)
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
