The Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate fell from highs of ¥133.08 to lows of ¥130.01 last week as the Japanese currency benefited from its safe-haven status as US-China trade tensions intensified.
However, Tuesday saw the Japanese Yen (JPY) compromised by a weaker-than-expected Japanese leading economic index report for March. The figure fell from 91.9 to 83.8, despite forecasts of it holding at April’s figure.
An analyst at The Japan Times commented on the state of the Japanese economy:
‘The Japanese economy has been hit hard by the coronavirus, with economists expecting gross domestic product in the January-March period to have shrank for the second consecutive quarter. The Cabinet Office will release GDP figures next Monday.’
Meanwhile, the Pound (GBP) struggled at the beginning of last week after markets deemed Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s plans to ease the lockdown as too vague.
As a result, Sterling traders reacted negatively to what they perceived as further uncertainty for the British economy going ahead.
Sterling also suffered following Wednesday’s release of the UK’s flash GDP report for the first quarter, which fell by -2%.
However, economists predicted that the worst was yet to come for the British economy, with the second-quarter’s figure likely to plummet even deeper as the coronavirus pandemic ravishes economy.
Melanie Baker, the Senior Economist at the Royal London Asset Management, commented:
‘The economic damage from roughly only a week of lockdown is striking. Activity growth in April will be much worse.’
Towards the end of last week, however, the Japanese Yen (JPY) began to benefit from rising tensions between the US and China. As a result, investors flocked to safe-haven currencies as the world’s two largest economies collided in a row over trade and Beijing’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic.
GBP/JPY Forecast: Could the Yen Fall on Weak Japanese Manufacturing Data?
Japanese Yen (JPY) investors will be awaiting tomorrow’s release of the flash Japanese GDP figure for the first quarter. If this confirms consensus and falls by -1.2%, then we could see the Japanese Yen compromised by a gloomy economic outlook.
Meanwhile, Sterling traders will be awaiting Tuesday’s release of the UK ILO Unemployment Rate report for Mach. However, with UK unemployment expected to soar following the UK’s lockdown measures.
Tuesday will also see the release of Japan’s Industrial Production report for March. If this continues to fall, then we could see the Japanese Yen shed some of its gains.
Pound (GBP) traders will be keeping a close eye on Wednesday’s publication of the UK’s final inflation data for April. However, with the UK’s economy expected to deteriorate over the course of the coronavirus crisis this is unlikely to buoy the Pound.
Thursday’s Japanese Jibun Bank Manufacturing PMI for May will also provide an indication of the direction of Japan’s economy. However, if it deteriorates considerably, then the JPY/GBP exchange rate could fall.
The GBP/JPY exchange rate will remain sensitive to the UK’s coronavirus developments this week. However, any signs that the British economy could face further set-backs would prove Pound-negative.
However, US-China trade tensions will also dominate market attention in the week ahead. As a result, we could see the Japanese Yen (JPY) continue to benefit from it safe-haven status.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
