The Pound Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate rose by 0.4% today, with the pairing currently trading around ¥131.232 after signs of improving trade relations between the US and China dragged on the safe-haven Japanese currency, with traders seeking out riskier assets instead.
This follows news that Beijing would be open to a ‘partial deal’ on the condition that US President Donald Trump did not impose any further tariffs on Chinse goods.
However, with China being unyielding on subsidies for Chinese companies, and the ‘force technology transfers’, tensions between the two superpowers could still flare-up.
‘The incentive for both sides to get a deal done is intensifying given rising economic pressures on both countries. However, the two sides remain far apart on various structural issues.’
The Japanese Yen also suffered from today’s fall in September’s preliminary Japanese machine tool orders, which fell by -35.5%. This painting a bleak picture of Japanese factory conditions, with exports continuing remaining down against last year.
The Pound (GBP) rose against the weakened Japanese Yen today despite the breakdown in Brexit talks between the UK and the EU. Doubts have also increased over whether Prime Minister Boris Johnson will be able to secure a withdrawal deal by the end of this week.
‘Essentially, what the United Kingdom has done is repudiate the deal that we negotiated in good faith with prime minister [Theresa] May’s government over two years, and have sort of put half of that now back on the table and are saying, ‘That’s a concession’. And, of course, it isn’t really.’
As a result, Sterling has remained subdued against many of its competitors today, with UK markets becoming increasingly jittery over the now increased prospect of a no-deal Brexit on October 31.
Michael Barnier, the EU’s Chief Brexit Negotiator, tempered fears, however, saying that a UK-EU Brexit deal was ‘very difficult but possible’, adding that talks would continue in a manner ‘calm, vigilant, respectful and construction’ ahead of the October deadline.
Meanwhile, Parliament is now set for a showdown on 19 October amid growing fears on Boris Johnson’s stance on the Benn Act, which effectively prevents a disorderly exit at the end of this month.
GBP/JPY Outlook: Could Sterling Rise on Easing No-Deal Brexit Fears?
Japanese Yen traders will be looking ahead to tomorrow’s release of August’s Japanese machinery orders figure, which is expected to ease by -2.5%.
Tomorrow will also see September’s Japanese producer price index which is also expected to decrease. Consequently, we could see JPY continue to fall against the Pound.
Meanwhile, Sterling traders will be looking ahead to tomorrow’s publication of August’s UK manufacturing production figure, which is expected to flatline at 0%.
UK markets will also be paying close attention to the speech by Mark Carney, the Governor of the Bank of England (BoE), tomorrow. Any dovish comments about the British economy, however, could see the GBP/JPY exchange rate lose some of its gains.
Brexit developments will remain in the driving seat for the GBP/JPY exchange rate, however, with any signs of a compromise between the UK and the EU, whether on the current deal or on a possible extension of Article 50, and we could see the Pound benefit on easing no-deal Brexit fears.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
