There are several ways you can transfer money to Japan from the UK. The most obvious method is to use your bank, but this might not be the cheapest way.
A cheaper alternative could be an online money transfer service such as TransferWise , which can help you save on fees and get a more competitive exchange rate.
This article will inform you on the best way to send money to Japan. You will need to consider factors such as exchange rates, hidden fees and speed of transfer when making your decision on one of the foreign exchange services.
What is the best way to send money to Japan from the UK?
There are three main methods:
The advantages of using a money transfer service such as TransferWise include:
Calculating the best money transfer service can be difficult as each provider will offer a different combination of exchange rates and fees. Here are the factors you need to consider.
How do I get the best pound-to-yen exchange rate when I transfer money?
An exchange rate is the rate at which one currency is exchanged for another. Exchange rates depend on how much demand there is for a currency.
The interbank or mid-market rate is the exchange rate that banks and financial institutions use when trading currencies between one another.
Different foreign exchange companies set their own exchange rates, which are pegged to the mid-market rate but will vary. A service such as TransferWise always give you the same rate you would get if you searched for with Google.
When you arrange a money transfer, you also need to factor in fees and charges. Some money transfer firms advertise zero fees or “no commission” but do not necessarily offer the best deal as the exchange rate is poor.
The table below shows the impact that exchange rate and fees can have on the final costs of a money transfer to Japan.
Option 1 does not have a fee. The exchange rate of ¥133.12 to £1 means you would get ¥133,120 for £1,000.
Option 2 has a £4 transfer fee but it offers a better exchange rate of ¥134.94 to £1, and you would get ¥134,520 for £1,000. So option 2 would offer ¥1,400 more, despite option 1 advertising “no fee”.
TransferWise uses the mid-market exchange rate and charges a small upfront fee.
Sending money straight from your bank account to an overseas bank account is easy using online banking. The exact process varies depending on your bank, but you will normally complete the following steps:
Log on to online banking.
Go to your account and then go to the international payments option.
Get a quote for how much your transfer will cost. Prices may vary depending on how quickly you want the money to arrive.
Create a new payee/recipient – you will need to enter an IBAN (International Bank Account Number) or SWIFT/BIC number.
Click to confirm the payment.
Step-by-step guide to transferring money with TransferWise:
Create a free TransferWise account.
Enter how much you want to send in pounds or how much you want the recipient to receive in Japanese yen.
See both the exchange rate and the fee.
Enter the recipient’s bank details.
Once TransferWise gets your payment, it will send the money to your recipient.
How long will it take to send money to Japan?
How long it takes to send money to Japan depends on the money transfer option you choose. Banks will need to transfer the money through several correspondent banks, so bank transfers can take longer.
Cash transfer companies can offer very quick times but might not offer the cheapest or best-value foreign exchange.
Shop around and find the quickest processing time for your specific transaction. TransferWise will show you exactly how much your transfer will cost and how long it will take to arrive.
There are several ways to transfer money from the UK to Japan. Using online banking might be convenient but you might receive a poor exchange rate and also have to pay a large fee.
If you need to get your money to Japan by a specific time, you will need to compare several delivery methods.
A good option is to use TransferWise , which has great customer service.
