The Japanese Yen is still glued to Nasdaq, S&P 500 and Dow Jones composite
The Japanese yen, well known for the anti-risk trading aspects, steers to the 3rd quarter eyeing the broad market sentiment. Based on the following chart, there are majors based Japanese Yen index that is overlaying the Wall Street Index. Essentially, these two are known to have an inverse relationship.
As the banks around the globe maintain the dovish tone for supporting the economic growth prevented by this Covid-19 outbreak, the yen is largely prone as the Nasdaq, S&P 500, and Dow Jones composite discovering the upside momentum.
The fiscal policy is not certain, particularly as the gradual recovery from the coronavirus might minimize the urgency to reintroduce and support more political challenges. Just this week, the House of Representatives passed the $1.5 trillion infrastructure plan. There are high expectations that the package will be passed by the president.
Any delay to the highly anticipated support can reintroduce volatility, and there is a high chance that this might open the door to the sharp yen appreciation. This is as the COVID-19 cases rise to a higher level in some states as others take precautionary measures to halt or reverse the lockdown easing drives. However, the Canadian employment report might further inform world growth expectations.
This has been a great time and the worst time for the USA over the past 2 quarters and it could be the reason why Wall Street analysts are currently facing more challenges.
The S&P 500 SPX and Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA just putting the best performance from 1938 after the bruising challenge that started back in March based on the market data published by Dow Jones. This performance will be stellar in case it isn’t for a few facts like the Dow Booked the worst six months for the 2008 financial calendar year. At the same time, the S&P 500 Notched a bad first half.
Essentially, the returns that were realized this 3rd quarter came from the challenging quarter, which was ushered by the current coronavirus pandemic in the United States and the subsequent worst impact, it has on the country’s economy. As a result, businesses are highly compelled to hibernate as a way of reducing the spread of this lethal infection.
Since it hit the 2,237.40 back in 23rd march, the S&P 500 has raised to 38% to about 3100, as the Dow Jones surged to 38.5%. It is also important to take note of the fact that the Nasdaq composite index rallied at around 46%.
The primary issue is that there are no clear guidelines on where the market will go from now onwards and the traders have focused on rising the year-end outlook of S&P 500 instead of lowering them, as the stock market runs slightly higher past the target and the pandemic cases starts rising again in the U.S.
