Prime Minister Shinzo Abe announced the nomination of known dove Seiji Adachi to the bank’s board on Tuesday, signaling that the Japanese government remains committed to its signature stimulus programme, also known as Abenomics.
Masamichi Adachi, chief economist at UBS in Tokyo suggests: ‘The key message of this nomination is not the selection of Mr Adachi himself but what the Abe administration is thinking about the BOJ.
‘It suggests the Abe administration is comfortable with the current balance: having a minority of reflationists and a majority of neutrals on the BOJ board.’
Adachi will replace another dovish policymaker, Yutaka Harada, at the BOJ once he is confirmed by the Diet, which seems likely given Abe’s control of the Japanese parliament.
Despite aggressively slashing interest rates in recent years inflation in Japan remains stubbornly low.
However, this is unlikely to deter the Japanese government from pushing for more stimulus measures, and could see the PM appoint another policy dove to the BOJ when former Toyota executive Yukitoshi Funo steps down from the bank in June.
Whilst market concerns regarding the outbreak of the coronavirus in China have eased somewhat since the start of the week, the Japanese Yen’s safe-haven status sees the currency continue to benefit from lingering jitters.
Markets are worried about the virus’ impact on China’s economy, as the shutdown of public transport and factories looks to negatively affect the world’s second largest economy, a key wheel of global growth.
However, Japan is not immune to the knock-on effects of the coronavirus, with experts warning it is likely to have disrupted Japans economy as well.
Japanese Economy Minister Yasutoshi Nishimura warns: ‘There are concerns over the impact to the global economy from the spread of infection in China, transportation disruptions, cancellation of group tours from China and an extension in the Lunar Holiday.
‘If the situation takes longer to subside, we’re concerned it could hurt Japanese exports, output and corporate profits via the impact on Chinese consumption and production.’
Health experts in China suggest it could be another 10 days before the virus peaks, with workers in some provinces expected to remain away from work for up to two weeks.
Sharp Slump in Japanese Retail Sales to Weigh on the Yen?
Looking ahead, the Japanese Yen (JPY) may struggle to consolidate its recent gains with the release of Japan’s latest retail sales figures overnight on Thursday.
Economists forecast that a rebound in sales growth in November will have been short lived, predicting that retail sales will have contracted 4.5% last month, and likely denting the appeal of the Yen.
However, the accompanying industrial production figures could help to slightly offset the gloomy retail sales figures as analysts predict factory output will have rebounded from –1% to 0.7% last month, preventing production from contracting through the entire fourth quarter.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
