Largely positive developments in global geopolitics and trade relations kept safe haven currencies like the Japanese Yen (JPY) fairly unappealing last week. With Japanese data too mixed to offer the Yen much in the way of domestic support, Japanese Yen investors continue to watch global risk sentiment as they anticipate next week’s Bank of Japan (BoJ) policy decision.
Ultimately, the risk-on movement driving markets this week left the Japanese Yen weaker in major exchange rates.
Despite rising Bank of England (BoE) interest rate cut bets, GBP/JPY still saw notable gains throughout the week. GBP/JPY opened the week at the level of 143.00 and was trending higher in the region of 134.75 on Friday.
Similarly, despite the US Dollar’s (USD) mixed movements throughout last week, it has benefitted considerably as its safe haven rival the Yen weakened. USD/JPY surged from 109.48 to 110.19 throughout the week.
Japanese Yen (JPY) Exchange Rates Recap: Investors Continue Moves Away from Safe Havens
The Japanese Yen is a safe haven currency, which is appealing in times of market uncertainty or panic. It has benefitted considerably over the past year from US-China trade war concerns, among other things.
With global geopolitics seeming to be in a state of calm over the past week though, safe haven currencies have been tumbling as investors sell them in favour of riskier, higher yielding assets.
Over the past week, a market ‘fear gauge’, the CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) has been near its lowest levels in years.
This has been due to news that US-Iran military tensions never escalated as feared, as well as news that the US and China had formally signed the first phase of a trade deal following a trade war that rattled markets over the past year or so.
With the market outlook significantly calmer, safe haven currencies like the Yen have been slumping. As the Yen has been unable to find support in recently mixed Japanese data, it has been tumbling more easily.
The Japanese Yen saw even steeper losses against its rival the US Dollar (USD). While the US Dollar is also a currency that benefits from safe havens, it has also been the currency of choice for when investors are optimistic about US-China trade news due to the US economy’s involvement in the trade war.
The Bank of Japan (BoJ) is not expected to make any changes to monetary policy any time soon, as Japanese data has been mixed and policymakers have been focused on developments in global growth and trade.
However, the tone the bank takes in its upcoming policy decision this week could cause notable Japanese Yen movement if it surprises investors.
The BoJ will hold its January policy decision on Tuesday and leave monetary policy frozen. If the bank expresses more confidence about Japan’s economic outlook as a result of improving geopolitics and global growth, the Japanese Yen could find more solid support.
On top of Bank of Japan news, upcoming Japanese data could influence the Yen this week if it influences Japan’s economic outlook notably.
Monday will see the publication of Japan’s November industrial production results. Trade balance data will follow on Thursday.
Friday’s Japanese data could be particularly influential if it surprises, with inflation data, PMI projections from Jibun Bank, and Bank of Japan meeting minutes all due for publication.
Of course, being primarily driven by risk sentiment recently means that developments in geopolitics will remain influential to Japanese Yen (JPY) exchange rates as well.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
