Similarly, there has been high levels of growth for the Trinidad and Tobago dollar with sales increasing by 53 per cent year on year in 2019 to date, accelerating to 205 per cent in September.
The Trinidad and Tobago dollar was one of a number of Caribbean currencies to register big year-on-year sales increases last month, suggesting that Caribbean holidays are a popular choice this winter.
Both the Jamaican and Barbados dollar also rose in sales by 37 and 36 per cent, respectively, in September whilst there was an increase of 32 per cent in Dominican peso sales and six per cent growth for the East Caribbean dollar.
One reason for the increase is likely to be that resort prices have been falling, according to the Post Office's long-haul holiday beach barometer, with prices dropping by 32.4 per cent in Antigua, whilst prices are down eight per cent in St Lucia and 8.6 per cent in Tobago.
Nick Boden, Post Office head of travel money, said: 'Holidaymakers are now recognising that it is not just exchange rates that affect how far their holiday budget will stretch.
'Sterling may have weakened against many currencies but only 55 per cent of holidaymakers told us that this is a big issue for them.
'Far more of them – over three-quarters according to our latest research – are worried about the prices they will face in resorts so it is understandable that they are picking destinations where the cost of meals, drinks and other staples is lower.'
The Post Office also says that both euro and US dollar sales have also remained strong.
Britons heading to Costa Rica, Chile and Peru
Latin America is another region that is set to be popular with long haul travellers as three currencies from that area feature in the Post Office's fastest growing currencies for September 2019.
The Costa Rica colon has seen a 41 per cent rise in sales despite having risen 3.4 per cent against sterling since last October.
The Chilean peso also saw an increase of 35 per cent and the Peruvian Nuevo sol rose by 30 per cent, showing strong growth.
Other examples of resorts travellers are heading to cut down on costs include Bali and Vietnam.
Local prices in Kuta in Bali and Hoi An in Vietnam are the lowest out of the 16 destinations surveyed for the Post Office by Travelbag researchers despite their currencies being among ten that have strengthened most against sterling year-on-year.
The Indonesian rupiah is 8.2 per cent stronger than a year ago and the Vietnamese dong has risen 1.9 per cent.
Dubai is another holiday destination where prices have fallen whilst its currency has strengthened against the sterling.
