The Japanese Yen exchange rates trended higher against the majority of its peers over the last week as the currencies perceived safe-haven status created significant demand from investors spooked by the coronavirus outbreak in China.
"The acceleration in the spread of the virus across the globe along with the increase in the number of deaths, continues to alarm financial markets" says Chris Towner, director at risk management firm JCRA.
Markets fear the outbreak and the Chinese government’s attempts to contain it by shutting down public transport and quarantining millions of residents is likely to adversely impact China’s economy in the first quarter of 2020, even possibly leading to a contraction in growth.
As a major engine of global growth its feared a slowdown in China could undo the recent recovery in the global economy.
Sars was estimated to have cost the global economy approximately $30bn, but with China’s greater importance global trade its feared that the Coronavirus outbreak could be even more damaging.
US Federal Reserve President Jerome Powell warned of the impact of the US and other economies.
"China's economy is very important in the global economy now, and when China's economy slows down we do feel that - not as much though as countries that are near China, or that trade more actively with China, like some of the Western European countries."
Experts suggest it could be another week before the virus peaks, further fueling fears that China’s manufacturing sector could be facing a prolonged shutdown.
Whilst the Japanese Yen exchange rates enjoyed some notable support this week amidst the risk-off mood in markets, the upside in the safe-haven currency appeared capped by some lacklustre domestic data.
On Wednesday, Japan’s latest consumer confidence index printed below expectations, with the index holding at 39.1 in January against forecasts it would rise to 40.8.
Japanese consumers pointed to concerns over the domestic economy and slowing global growth for their gloomy outlook at the start of 2020.
Following this was the publication of Japan’s latest retail sales figures overnight on Thursday, which revealed a sharper-than-expected slump in sales growth year to date in December.
Coronavirus Fears to Keep the Yen in Demand?
Looking ahead to next week’s session, we expected the Japanese Yen (JPY) exchange rates to remain well supported so long as concerns over the coronavirus outbreak continue to bolster demand for safe-haven assets.
Also in focus for JPY investors next week will be the publication of Japan’s latest earnings figures , where a potential rebound in wage growth in December may further buoy the appeal of the Yen.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
