The Japanese Yen (JPY) exchange rates edged higher today after November’s Japanese All Industrial Activity Index rose unexpectedly from -4.8% to 0.9%. The report weakened the GBP/JPY exchange rate which is currently trading around ¥143.854.
JPY’s gains, however, were held back after yesterday’s Japanese trade reports showed a trade deficit for the second year in a row, due to weak demand from China.
Tom Learmouth, an Economist at Capital Economics, was downbeat in his outlook for the Japanese economy, commenting:
‘Looking ahead, we think the recovery in exports will be weaker than many expect. That reflects our view that GDP growth in Japan's main trading partners will remain subdued this year.’
Meanwhile, US-China trade uncertainty continues to hold back some of the Japanese Yen’s (JPY) gains today. This follows worries over the longevity of the ‘phase one’ trade agreement, with further obstacles ahead for the two superpowers placing a wedge between market confidence in the staying-power of the agreement.
The JPY/GBP also improved on rising concern over the UK’s stance on Brexit after Chancellor Sajid Javid said that the UK would not be aligned on the EU’s terms.
As a result, the Pound eased against the Japanese currency as markets once again being to price in a possible hard Brexit after the 31st January, when the UK is officially expected to leave the European Union.
Japanese Yen (JPY) traders, meanwhile, will be looking ahead to today’s release of the Bank of Japan’s (BoJ) Monetary Policy Meeting minutes, with any signs of the central bank being downbeat in its assessment this year being JPY-negative.
After the BoJ nudged up its economic outlook this year already, however, we could see the Japanese Yen benefit from further confirmation of the country’s economic growth.
Turo Suehiro, Senior Market Economist at Mizuho Securities, commented:
‘Given that the [Japanese Yen] has stabilized and other major central banks are pausing on policy, there’s no reason for the BOJ to take action for the time being.’
JPY Outlook: Could the Japanese Yen Lose its Gains on the Pound?
Japanese Yen (JPY) investors will be looking ahead to tomorrow’s flash Japanese Jibun Bank Manufacturing PMI, with any signs of improvement in Japan’s industrial sector proving JPY-positive.
This week will also see Japanese markets keep a close eye on China’s economic developments. Any further indication that the world’s second-largest economy could be faltering would have a negative knock-on effect on the Japanese economy and would weaken the JPY exchange rate.
We could see the JPY/GBP exchange rate lose some of its gains tomorrow, however, with the UK Markit Services PMI forecast to improve and boost market appetite for the Pound as the UK’s largest sector improves in January.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
