Global risk appetite was firmer heading into Thursday's European session with none other than President Donald Trump driving a rebound in sentiment after a blistering attack on China's trade practices and humanitarian record at the UN General Assembly earlier in the week put markets back on edge as well as the launch of a formal impeachemnt inquiry into the leader of the world's largest economy.
In typical risk-on fashion, the Japanese Yen was facing selling pressure, on track to see out September as the worst performing Group-of-10 currency with analysts bearish on the safe-haven currency heading into the final quarter of the year.
Q4 has always been a difficult quarter for the Yen with the currency weakening on average by 3.6% against the USD over the final quarter and falling in seven out of the last ten years. Against the Greenback, JPMOrgan Chase & Co forecast further Yen losses with the Dollar-to-Yen exchange rate expected to see out the year at around ¥110, up from its current level of around ¥107.68 .
"Japanese investors are expected to sell the yen as they need to allocate their funds abroad to seek returns,” wrote head of Japan markets research at JPMorgan, Tohru Sasaki, adding "The dollar should test around 109-110 yen in the near term.”
While safe-haven assets were facing pressure, risky assets found a modicum of support into Thursday's session with positive trade comments aiding a recovery in sentiment.
Speaking at the UN General Assembly in New York earlier in the week, President Trump lashed out against China's trade practices and religious rights among other things, dashing budding optimism for progress in US-China trade negotiations. There was also the triggering of a formal impeachment inquiry into the US President over accusations he had sought foreign help to discredit Joe Biden, a runner for the Presidency.
However, market sentiment improved into Thursday's session, spurring a rebound for emerging market currencies and those majors with a high beta to global trade on the back of Trump's comments that the US and CHina were having "good conversations" and that a deal "could happen sooner than you think."
"It’s the Trump pump, and it works,” wote senior market analyst Matt Simpson of Gain Capital, adding "But there’s not really any major moves either, it’s a slight boost to risk," noting that Trump's impeachment could remain a source of uncertainty in the near-term.
Other analysts expect the impeachment inquiry to fall by the wayside moving forward with market focus likely to move on relatively quickly.
"Markets shrug these things off very, very quickly and we move on to the next stuff,” wrote Nick Twidale, co-founder of Xchainge, adding "As it moves on, it’s going to be interesting, but we have to go back to the fundamentals and fundamentals are going to push the dollar higher over time.”
While near-term sentiment bodes well for risk-assets - notwithstanding any fresh political dramas or set backs in US-China trade - the longer term outlook is also relatively favourable as developed markets continue to loosen monetary policy in the face of cooling growth and sluggish inflation.
"We maintain an optimistic outlook for emerging markets going into the next few months as global central bank accommodation overshadows concerns of slower global economic growth,” wrote senior portfolio manager at Pinebridge Investments, Anders Faergemann
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
After graduating with a 1st in psychology (BSc Hons), Elaine specialised in the areas of trader psychology...
