Japanese Yen Technical Price Outlook: DXY Weekly Trade Levels
The Japanese Yen is poised to mark the third consecutive weekly loss against the US Dollar with USD /JPY poised to close up 0.16% on Friday. The rally takes price nearly 2% off the early-May lows with the advance now testing initial resistance objectives heading into the June open. These are the updated targets and invalidation levels that matter on the USD /JPY weekly price chart. Review my latest Strategy Webinar for an in-depth breakdown of this Yen trade setup and more.
Chart Prepared by Michael Boutros , Technical Strategist; USD/JPY on Tradingview
Notes:In last month’s Japanese Yen Weekly Price Outlook we noted to, “look for topside exhaustion while below the yearly open IF price is indeed heading lower with a break below 105.20 needed to fuel the next leg of the broader downtrend.” It’s been nearly five weeks and the same levels remain in view as momentum flatlines jus below 50. Initial resistance now stands at the March high-week reversal close at 107.91 backed by the yearly open at 108.62. Critical resistance steady at the 61.8% retracement of the late-March decline / 2019 open at 109.53/68 – look for a larger reaction there for guidance. Initial support rests with the 50% retracement at 106.45 with a break/ close below 105.20 still needed to mark resumption of the broader downtrend.
For a complete breakdown of Michael’s trading strategy, review his Foundations of Technical Analysis series on Building a Trading Strategy
Bottom line:USD/JPY is trading into lateral heading into the close of the month. From a trading standpoint, look for downside exhaustion ahead of 106.45 IF price is indeed heading higher with a topside breach needed to keep the focus on 108.60. Review my latest Japanese Yen Price Outlook for a closer look at the near-term USD/JPY technical trade levels.
We typically take a contrarian view to crowd sentiment, and the fact traders are net-long suggests USD/JPY prices may continue to fall. Positioning is more net-long than yesterday but less net-long from last week. The combination of current sentiment and recent changes gives us a further mixed USD/JPY trading bias.
