The Pound Japanese (GBP/JPY) exchange rate faced heavy volatility last week, with the pairing ranging from highs of ¥143.462 to lows of ¥141.296 as China’s coronavirus epidemic threatened to weaken the Japanese economy.
Paul Cashin, the International Monetary Fund’s Mission Chief for Japan, commented:
‘The spread of coronavirus poses an emerging downside risk to Japan’s economy, although the economic impact will depend on the extent of the spread of the disease and policy responses.’
Meanwhile, Wednesday saw Japan’s preliminary Machine Tool Orders report for January fall from -33.6 to -35.6%, leaving some Japanese Yen investors jittery on the prospect of a weakening supply chain negatively impacting the economy.
The JPY/GBP eased in spite of Wednesday’s better-than-expected Japanese Producer Price Index report for January, which rose from 0.9% to 1.7%.
Last week saw the Japanese Yen (JPY) bugged by concerns over the coronavirus outbreak, however, with reports of cases in Japan increasing and leaving many traders wary of the usual safe-haven Japanese currency.
The Pound (GBP) performed well against the Japanese Yen (JPY) last week, with Tuesday’s release of the UK’s preliminary growth figure for the final quarter of 2019 beating forecasts and rising by 1.2% year-on-year.
Quarterly growth, however, stagnated at 0% in the fourth quarter, which held back some of the Pound’s gains against its peers.
Seamus Nevin, Chief Economist at the manufacturer’s trade group, Make UK, was downbeat in his analysis, saying:
Meanwhile, Thursday’s cabinet reshuffle from Prime Minister Boris Johnson left many GBP investors confident that March’s budget could be increased, following the resignation of former Chancellor Sajid Javid, who was replaced with Rishi Sunak.
Paul Dales, Chief UK Economist at Capital Economics, was optimistic in his analysis, commenting:
Japanese Yen (JPY) investors will be awaiting Sunday’s release of the preliminary Japanese growth report for the fourth quarter. However, as the figure is expected to fall from 0.4% to -0.9%, we will likely see the GBP/JPY exchange rate fall as Japan’s economy potentially faces a recession this year.
Monday’s Japanese industrial production report for December is also forecast to ease by -3%, likely further damaging market appeal for the Japanese Yen this week.
Sterling traders will be looking ahead to Tuesday’s release of December’s UK ILO Unemployment Rate, which is forecast to remain at 3.8%. As the UK’s unemployment levels continue to remain at record-lows, we could see the GBP/JPY exchange rate edge higher.
UK inflation data will also remain in focus on Wednesday, with an uptick in January’s gauge providing further uplift for the Pound.
Friday’s flash UK Markit Services PMI will also influence the direction of the Pound this week. Any signs of improvement in Britain’s largest sector would prove Pound-positive.
The GBP/JPY exchange rate will likely be directed by China’s coronavirus epidemic. If the virus continues to heighten concern for the Chinese economy, we could see a negative knock-on effect on the Japanese Yen, which remains sensitive to disruptions to the global supply chain.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
