Monday left the Japanese Yen (JPY) under pressure after a disappointing Jibun Bank manufacturing PMI.
Manufacturing activity shrunk for a ninth month in a row, suggesting further strain will be put on the economy.
On Tuesday, the Japanese Yen slipped for the second day in a row against the US Dollar (USD) as risk appetite increased.
Investors were encouraged to move away from safe havens such as JPY after the Chinese government’s attempts to contain the Wuhan coronavirus.
JPY/USD posted its steepest daily slump in close to six months as risk sentiment improved.
Meanwhile, the Yen continued to slide on Wednesday as risk appetite continued to rise on reports of a possible treatment for the coronavirus.
The US Dollar was also able to benefit from a strong January private sector payrolls report, hinting the economy was on a stable growth path in 2020.
Added to this, a disappointing, lower-than-expected Japanese services PMI weighed on the Yen.
Meanwhile, Thursday saw the JPY/USD exchange rate slump for the fourth day in a row as investors continued to grow less fearful about the economic effects of the new coronavirus.
Risk appetite improved after the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) put hundreds of billions of Dollars into the financial system earlier this week to help cushion the blow of any economic effect the virus could have.
Added to this, optimism increased after China’s President Xi Jinping told Saudi Arabia’s King Salman that the country has achieved ‘positive’ results in its prevention and control in fighting the virus.
FX market analyst at Monex Europe in London, Simon Harvey said:
‘We’re seeing credible responses from monetary authorities, in China and it looks like it’s soothing market fears of a more entrenched slowdown in the Chinese economy.’
Meanwhile, Japanese household spending data slumped at a faster pace than expected in the final month of 2019. Lower spending suggests Japanese consumers are having a tough time coping with the sales tax increase.
Further data release at the end of the week showed the Japanese economy struggled to regain momentum. The index of coincident economic indicators (consists of data such as factory output, employment, and retail sales) posted at 94.7 in December.
This matched November’s reading, remaining at the lowest since February 2013, which weighed on the Yen.
Japanese Yen Outlook: Will Risk Appetite Continue to Increase?
Over the course of the week, the Japanese Yen (JPY) could be left under pressure if risk appetite continues to strengthen.
If investors continue to expect the outbreak of the Wuhan coronavirus is unlikely to have a significant impact on global growth, the safe-haven Yen will suffer losses.
Against the Australian Dollar, JPY could edge lower if Westpac’s consumer confidence data reveals the mood amongst Aussie consumers has improved in February.
Meanwhile, the Yen could rise against the New Zealand Dollar (NZD) following the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s (RBNZ) interest rate decision.
While the bank is expected to leave rates on hold, if policymakers are overly dovish about the economy’s outlook, JPY/NZD will rise.
Looking to Wednesday, the Japanese Yen could slump against a handful of currencies following the release of January’s machine tool orders.
If orders continue to slide at an increased pace, the Yen will remain under pressure.
Added to this, weak producer prices could send JPY lower at the end of Wednesday’s session.
Thursday could see the Yen make some gains on the US Dollar if January’s US core inflation rate does not rise as high as expected.
Meanwhile, Friday could see the Japanese Yen Euro (JPY/EUR) exchange rate rise if flash GDP growth data for both the Eurozone and Germany disappoint.
If the second estimate for 2019 Q4 GDP disappoints, showing underwhelming growth in the bloc, the Euro will slide against the Yen.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
