The BoJ meeting on Monday promised an unlimited buying of bonds.
This comes on top of an already unprecedented amount of monetary easing. Yet the Yen remains steady.
As all central banks are easing by huge amounts, currencies are less sensitive to these measures. Focus is still on how individual lockdowns are eased and how well economies can cope.
Markets are off to a positive start to the week as the newsflow has shifted to a more positive tone focused on the decreasing death toll of the coronavirus and the gradual easing of restrictions. The longer-term economic effects of the lockdowns are yet to be fully understood, but for now the easing of the initial panic has led to some ‘risk-on’ moves. The German Dax is higher by 2.5% and the FTSE 1.7%. The FTSE is slightly lagging as a decline is oil is dragging down some of the heavy weight stocks such as BP and Royal Dutch Shell. Currencies also reflect the risk on tone as the US dollar is falling and dollar pairs such as AUDUSD are higher by around 1%.
This week is busy with central bank activity. The Fed and the ECB are both up later, and Monday morning already saw the BoJ make some more tweeks to monetary policy. With so much action in recent weeks there is little expectation for any significant moves by central banks, but there is plenty to keep an eye and the ECB still has a dilemma to address in the form of Italian and periphery yields/debt issuance.
The BoJ were already thought to be ‘all in’ on monetary stimulus before the coronavirus came along. The bank led the way into unchartered waters of financial easing with its bond and ETF buying and the worry was that any more easing would break the financial system. Yet, due to the coronavirus crisis, the bank has been forced to take further steps and has now committed to buy unlimited amount of bonds to keep borrowing costs low. Corporate bonds and commercial debt will be eased by a three-fold rise in buying of up to 20 trillion yen ($186 billion).
“The spread of the coronavirus at home and abroad is inflicting a severe impact on Japan’s economy,” BOJ Governor Kuroda said.
Unsurprisingly, the inflation target of 2% was pushed back again, this time for another 3 years.
“The achievement of the BOJ’s 2% inflation target ... will take time. The outlook for prices is highly uncertain,” he added.
Amazingly, it might not end there. The policy statement goes on to say,
All this easing has done little to dampen the Yen. EURJPY made fresh lows on Monday to 116. USDJPY barely moved and the volatility seen in March has been replaced by range trading 107 and 109. This lack of movement comes from a balancing out of central bank policies as much of the easing from the BoJ has been reciprocated by the Fed, the ECB and others. Even if the BoJ did go on to ease more, the expectation is the same from other central banks assuming the economy does not bounce back magically. ING noted on Monday that it did not expect any action from the ECB in this week’s meeting, but “given the depth of the contraction, low inflation and falling inflation expectations and the risk of a further widening of government yield spreads, we would expect the ECB to step up its PEPP. If old patterns hold, the June meeting with a fresh round of economic projections, would be the right moment to announce such an increase.”
In short, central bank activity may not move currencies very far in the medium-term unless one bank either stops easing or goes much further than others in its measures. This will depend entirely on the effects of the coronavirus and how effectively economies can re-open and recover.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
James Elliott is an entrepreneur and an independent trader. After retiring in his early 30s, James started a...
