Despite highly concerning Japanese data published today, investors were hesitant to sell Japanese Yen (JPY) exchange rates too much. The Japanese currency remained fairly appealing overall, due to lingering market demand for safe haven currencies amid the continuing coronavirus outbreak. Still, if coronavirus jitters lighten further, Japanese data and Bank of Japan (BoJ) speculation could lead to Yen losses.
The latest movement in JPY exchange rates has been mixed, with the currency gaining against weaker currencies but falling against stronger ones.
For example, the Pound (GBP) is being sold from its best levels after a surge last week. This is leaving GBP/JPY slightly weaker this morning and the pair is trending near the level of 143.24 at the time of writing. However, it has sustained most of last week’s impressive gains from 141.45 to 143.23.
However, the US Dollar (USD) has been climbing against the Yen instead. Last week’s mixed safe haven demand meant USD/JPY only edged higher from 109.76 to 109.77 throughout the week, but so far this week the pair has climbed to trend near the level of 109.89.
The Japanese Yen is a safe haven currency, and as a result it has seen strong demand for much of the year so far due to market panic over the coronavirus outbreak.
The virus has been spreading from China since early January and analysts fear it could continue to spread across the globe. Concerns that it could have a big impact on economic growth have led to stronger market demand for safe havens.
However, the coronavirus issue is expected to become a long-term one and will continue to spread at a steady pace. As a result, market safe haven demand has softened slightly in recent weeks.
The Yen is being supported by the remaining safe haven demand, but concerns over Japan’s economic outlook weighed heavily on the currency today.
Today saw the publication of Japan’s Q4 growth rate results, which came in much lower than forecast. The quarterly rate contracted at a steep -1.6% while the annualised figure fell by a concerning -6.3%.
According to Taro Saito, Executive Research Fellow at NLI Research Institute, many economists are now bracing for a potential recession in Japan:
‘There’s a pretty good chance the economy will suffer another contraction in January-March. The virus will mainly hit inbound tourism and exports, but could also weigh on domestic consumption quite a lot.
If this epidemic is not contained by the time of the Tokyo Olympic Games, the damage to the economy will be huge.’
Japanese Yen (JPY) Exchange Rate Forecast: Japanese Data Could be Influential This Week
The Japanese Yen is typically more influenced by safe haven demand than economic data, but with Japanese economic concerns worsening the Yen may be sensitive to data due in the coming days.
Wednesday will see the publication of Japan’s January trade balance results and machinery orders results, with Friday will follow with key inflation rate data and PMI projections.
As the Bank of Japan (BoJ) has indicated that it could introduce fresh monetary stimulus if the coronavirus situation worsens, inflation could be watched closely and could influence BoJ speculation.
Japan’s PMI projections from Jibun will give investors a better idea of how Japan’s economy is holding up this month.
Still, as the Japanese Yen is often driven more by risk-sentiment, developments in risk-off movement and the coronavirus will continue to be influential for Japanese Yen (JPY) exchange rates as well.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
