The strategists concluded it is probably too early to hedge against a rise inflation and higher bond yields as well as wider spreads from sovereign ratings downgrades.
Escalating global tensions, cloud over banks to keep market weak!
The unprecedented monetary and fiscal measures unleashed around the world may lead to weaker long-term growth and currency debasement, supporting gold prices, according to JPMorgan Chase & Co.
The risk of currency debasement may heighten next year, John Normand and Federico Manicardi wrote in the report, and will show in the value of Japanese yen or gold rather than the dollar NSE 0.69 % . The risk of a surge in inflation will remain trivial in 2020 and stay subdued over the next two years, they said.
The reductions in interest rates across Group-of-10 countries in response to the pandemic-induced halt to their economies left most currencies yielding close to zero on a nominal basis, though real interest-rate gaps were higher in Japan, the euro zone and Switzerland, according to the analysis.
If the US continues to suck in capital and fiscal deficits overstate the risks to external financing, the payback via G-10 currencies will be concentrated in those with above average real-rate advantages to the US, such as the yen and Swiss franc, the strategists wrote.
The strategists concluded it is probably too early to hedge against a rise inflation and higher bond yields as well as wider spreads from sovereign ratings downgrades. The focus now should be directed at currency debasement, which they say had a “high likelihood,” given the huge financing burdening carried by the US
“Those who see in the major currencies just different shades of the same long-term liabilities should simply remain long the world’s legacy reserve currency – gold,” they wrote.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
