Markets brace for further slide; auto shares, SBI Cards IPO in focus
3 min read . Updated: 02 Mar 2020, 08:34 AM IST Nasrin Sultana
As the rout in world stocks deepened amid fears that the spread of Covid-19 (coronavirus) may impact global economy, Indian equity markets are likely to decline further on Monday. China, the starting point of the outbreak, showed fastest ever contraction in its factory activity, raising concerns of a global recession.
Pandemic fears pushed markets off a precipice last week, wiping more than $5 trillion from global share value as stocks posted their steepest slump in more than a decade.
The sheer scale of losses has prompted financial markets to price in policy responses from the US Federal Reserve to the Bank of Japan and the Reserve Bank of Australia.
In equities, MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan fell 0.3%. Japan's Nikkei opened 1.3% lower at a six month trough. Australia's S&P ASX/200 fell 3% and New Zealand's NZ50 slid 3% into correction territory.
The S&P 500 fell for the seventh straight day on Friday and the benchmark index suffered its biggest weekly drop since the 2008 global financial crisis.
The Dow and the Nasdaq also registered their deepest weekly percentage losses since October 2008. The Nasdaq managed to eke out an 0.01% gain after plunging as much as 3.5% during the session. After falling as much as 4.2% - more than 1,000 points - the Dow ended the day down 1.4%.
Leaders in Europe, the Middle East and the Americas rolled out bans on big gatherings and stricter travel restrictions over the weekend as cases of the new coronavirus spread. The epidemic, which began in China, has killed almost 3,000 people worldwide as authorities race to contain infections in Iran, Italy, South Korea and the United States.
Back home, the government and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) are considering all options, including an interim bailout of Yes Bank Ltd, in case a proposed $2 billion capital infusion into the private lender gets further delayed, according to a Mint report. The possible intervention could include a sale of pooled assets to public sector banks or, as a last resort, sale of a small stake to a state-run bank to pave the way for further capital raising.
India’s top carmakers reported lower sales in February as they adjusted production to prepare for an impending shift to producing vehicles that can meet stringent emission norms even as they battle supply chain challenges due to the coronavirus epidemic.
In the primary markets, initial public offering (IPO) of SBI Cards will open for subscription on Monday. With issue price of ₹750-755, SBI Card aims to raise over ₹10,000 crore through the share sale. The issue will close for subscription on March 5.
Oil prices dropped to their lowest in more than a year and even gold plunged as holders liquidated what they could to cover margin calls on riskier investments.
On Monday, oil extended losses before steadying on expectations OPEC may cut production. Brent crude last traded at $49.72 per barrel and US crude at $44.89 per barrel.
In currencies, investors sought shelter in the Japanese yen, which jumped to a 20-week high on the dollar in tandem with the massive shift in money markets to price US rate cuts.
All of this leaves just about every major asset class on edge. The yen was last up 0.3% at 107.74.
The Aussie huddled near an 11-year low at $0.6551, while the New Zealand dollar slid 0.3% to $6225. The euro was up 0.3% at $1.1054. That left the dollar index steady at 97.957.
Later in the week, central bank meetings in Australia, on Tuesday, and Canada, on Wednesday, will be closely watched.
* Thank you for subscribing to our newsletter.
Click here to read the Mint ePaperLivemint.com is now on Telegram. Join Livemint channel in your Telegram and stay updated
