The Japanese Yen is finding bids on rising concerns over the increase in COVID-19 cases. New US Daily cases have been trending higher and Wednesday this week saw its second highest daily increase at 38,386.
Furthermore, Australia has reported its biggest rise in cases in the most populous state of Victoria. In Germany the Gov’t has re-imposed lockdown measures in the state of North Rhine Westphalia in response to rising COVID-19 case. This resurgence in COVID-19 cases will keep the JPY bid, especially if numbers keep rising from here.
The GBP is under pressure until the UK has arranged a Brexit trade deal. The UK can no longer extend the Brexit deadline and has until the end of October to present an acceptable deal to the EU. Furthermore, with global assets having stalled recently on second wave COVID-19 concerns (particularly in the US, Germany, China and Australia) the GBP’s outlook against the USD now looks weak as the USD has firmed on COVID-19 fears.
Therefore, expect GBJPY sellers on pullbacks.
SwingTrade – We expect this trade to play out between now and the next 4 weeks, However, the trade will remain valid for as long as its underlying factors remain.
Any positive news on a possible UK-EU trade deal will invalid this outlook.
If we see a swift fall in COVID-19 cases that will also invalidate this outlook.
High Risk Investment Warning: Contracts for Difference (‘CFDs’) are complex financial products that are traded on margin. Trading CFDs carries a high degree of risk. It is
possible to lose all your capital. These products may not be suitable for everyone and you should ensure that you understand the risks involved. Seek independent expert advice if necessary and speculate only with funds that you can afford to lose. Please think carefully whether such trading suits you, taking into consideration all the relevant
circumstances as well as your personal resources. We do not recommend clients posting their entire account balance to meet margin requirements. Clients can minimise their
level of exposure by requesting a change in leverage limit. For more information please refer to HYCM’s Risk Disclosure.
