GBP/JPY UPDATE #2: The British Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate traded flat into Tuesday's European session, finding support after Monday's risk-induced slide. At the time of writing, Sterling was last seen trading at ¥134.206 , down 0.11% on the day.
It's a relatively quiet session in terms of data for the Pound-Yen cross with price action likely to be driven by global sentiment as well as any fresh Brexit news-flow as the Supreme Court begins its review of PM Johnson's suspension of Parliament and UK-EU negotiations continue.
While the Iran issue is far from settled, President Trump scaled back his "locked and loaded" rhetoric on Monday, helping to soothe concerns of a fresh military conflict in the middle-east after pointing the finger at Iran for the attacks on Saudi oil facilities. When asked if Iran was behind the attacks, Trump said "it’s certainly looking that way at this moment," before going on to add "I’m somebody that would like not to have war."
Global sentiment was in the driving seat for the cross with risk-off weighing on the Pound while lending the Yen fresh legs. Nevertheless, losses in the cross were limited with the Pound-Yen not far from a post July best despite depreciating on the day.
Brexit hopes helped to limited downside for Sterling with a lunch between PM Johnson and European Commission chief Juncker yielding a commitment to daily Brexit talks as both sides scramble to secure a deal.
Central bank policy is likely to play a key role for the Pound to Yen this week with both the Bank of Japan and Bank of England due. Given declining data, the former could announce fresh stimulus on top of already massive stimulus while investors will also be looking for any comments on the strength of the Yen and if the central bank has any plans to halt the JPY's advance. For the BoE, its likely to be a non-event with policymakers standing pat on rates amidst Brexit uncertainty.
GBP/JPY UPDATE: The UK Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate edged off of a seven-week best on this week's market open with risk-off in the wake of Saudi oil attacks weighing on the trade-sensitive GBP and lifting the safe-haven Yen. At the time of writing, Sterling was last seen trading at ¥134.201 , down 0.63%.
Markets were in risk-off mode on Monday after drone attacks on Saudi Arabia's largest oil facilities shut down 5% of the world's production, sparking the largest ever move in crude prices. While some nations are reserving judgement, the US was quick to link the attacks to Iran while President Trump tweeted that the US is "locked and loaded" to respond.
"We’ve got a beady eye on this and we’re prepared to pile back in to the Japanese yen after last week’s repositioning,” wrote Chris Weston, head of research at brokerage Pepperstone Group, adding that while trade had calmed after the initial reaction, the strikes represented another geopolitical "what if" for markets to consider.
Outwith global risk drivers, both Sterling and the Yen are facing central bank policy this week. For the Bank of Japan, fresh stimulus could be con the cards as developed markets around the globe unleash a new wave of easing to combat the current slowdown. For the Bank of England, policymakers are expected to remain side-lined amid Brexit with the outlook thereon likely to be impacted by news-flow relating to PM Johnson's talks with EU leaders this week.
As a result, this eased fears of a Brexit-induced recession in the near term. It also placed the UK economy on a higher footing at the beginning of the third quarter, further bolstering hopes in the economy.
Suren Thiru, Head of Economics at the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC), said:
‘Although there was a rise in GDP between June and July, the zero growth recorded on the underlying three-month measure points to an economy under pressure from uncertainty over Brexit and weakening global economic conditions.’
Monday also saw the Hillary Benn bill gain Royal Assent, effectively legislating against a no-deal Brexit on October 31 and further boosting hopes of an extension to Article 50, and thus delaying Brexit until January 2020.
The GBP/JPY held on to its gains on Tuesday after July’s UK year-on-year average earnings improved by 4%, hitting an 11-year high. UK unemployment also hit a 45-year low at 3.8 in July.
Nevertheless, some of the Pound’s gains were curbed by Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s silence on the anti-no-deal Brexit bill. Mr Johnson said that he would attempt to negotiate a deal with the European Union, but that he was still prepared to ‘leave without one’.
‘No matter how many devices this Parliament invents to tie my hands, I will strive to get an agreement in the national interest. This government will not delay Brexit any further.’
Wednesday saw Sterling hold on to its gains after Tom Watson, Labour’s Deputy Leader, said that the party should ‘unambiguously and unequivocally’ back remain and push for a second referendum, before a general election.
As a result, this further put pressure on the Conservative Party, as this would effectively mean that the Labour Party could gain back voters from the Liberal Democrats, who have a more direct anti-Brexit message.
The Pound continued to benefit on Thursday, despite Belfast’s High Court’s dismissal of claims that a no-deal Brexit and imposition of a hard border would threaten the Northern Irish peace process. The courts said that these were a matter for politics, not law.
The GBP/JPY exchange rate soared by 0.8% on Friday after House of Commons Speaker John Bercow vowed to present Prime Minister Boris Johnson illegally forcing through a no-deal Brexit in October. As a result, Sterling benefited from diminishing fears of a disorderly exit next month.
The Japanese Yen (JPY) struggled on Monday following the publication of Q2’s Japanese growth figure, which confirmed consensus and eased from 0.4% to 0.3%.
Kazuma Maeda, an Economist at Barclays Securities, commented:
‘Looking ahead, fiscal stimulus and last-minute consumption ahead of the consumption tax increase are likely to support modest growth in the third quarter. But the risks are to the downside. The U.S.-China trade war threatens to dampen exports. Risk-off sentiment could push up the yen – cutting into Japan’s competitiveness and damping inflation.’
Wednesday’s publication of Q3’s Japanese BSI large manufacturing conditions index failed to bolster the JPY/GBP exchange rate, with the figure easing by -0.2.
The Japanese Yen also continued to struggle on Thursday, following the publication of July’s Japanese machinery orders which fell from 13.9% to -6.6%.
Yoshiki Shinke, Chief Economist at Dai-ichi Life Research Institute, commented:
‘There are some signs of weakness among manufacturers. It will be hard for manufacturers to increase business spending thanks to weakness in exports and production.’
However, improving US-China trade tensions did buffer some of the Japanese Yen’s losses last week. This follows US President Donald Trump’s ‘goodwill’ suspension on tariffs on Chinese goods, which saw relations between the world’s two largest economies improve.
The Japanese Yen closed the week down against the stronger Pound, however, despite July’s Japanese industrial figure rising by 0.7%. Geopolitical uncertainties continued to weigh on the trade-reliant Japanese economy, providing downward pressure on the JPY/GBP exchange rate.
Monday will see Japanese markets closed for Respect-for-the-Aged Bank Holiday.
Wednesday, meanwhile, will see the publication of August’s Japanese merchandise trade balance total, which is expected to ease from ¥-250.7 billion to ¥-355.9 billion. As a result, we could see the JPY/GBP exchange rate sink further.
Sterling investors will be awaiting August’s UK inflation figure, which is expected to ease from 2.1% to 1.9%. Wednesday will also see the publication of the UK retail price index, which is also expected to fall.
Japanese Yen traders will be looking ahead to Thursday’s Bank of Japan (BoJ) interest rate decision, which is expected to hold at -0.1%. However, any signs of dovishness in its monetary policy statement could prove JPY-negative.
Thursday will also see the Bank of England’s interest rate decision, which is forecast to remain at 0.75%. However, with Brexit weighing on the UK’s economy, and dovish comments on monetary policy going forward could clip some of the Pound’s gains.
The GBP/JPY exchange rate will remain sensitive to Brexit developments throughout next week. If, however, the Conservative Government shows any compromise with the EU over a Brexit deal, we could see Sterling rise as no-deal fears diminish.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
