GBP/JPY UPDATE #2: The Pound Sterling to Japanese Yen exchange rates dipped into Wednesday's European session, slipping the ¥130.0 handle to trade at ¥129.657, down 0.21% at the time of writing.
The GBP found support in the back of cross-party unity around the Labour-led plan to block no deal - via legislative measures aimed at forcing the government to request a fresh Brexit delay or in lieu of that a vote of no confidence followed by the formation of a caretaker government with the aim of requesting an extension to Brexit.
However, a slide in US bond yields and a rejection of Trump's comments indicating a trade-deal could be struck soon kept safe-haven demand alive with the Yen the key beneficiary given the USD Dollar's reduced appeal.
"The markets have pulled out of the latest round of chaos... But as the U.S. yield curve inversion shows, the markets’ economic views remain dim, and the yen ends up gathering more buyers than sellers." wrote Takuya Kanda of Gataime Research Institute.
For now, data remains on the back seat amid larger drivers with Brexit the overriding factor for Sterling and risk-on, risk-off driving the Yen amid a plethora of risk-factors, including but not limited to the US-China trade war, HK Protests, Argentina, Gulf of Oman geopolitical tension and recession speculation.
UPDATE: The Pound-Yen exchange rate rose on Tuesday, retaking the ¥130 level amid hopes despite shaky market sentiment favouring the safe-haven Yen with markets welcoming developments seen as increasing the barriers to no-deal Brexit.
At the time of writing, Sterling was last seen trading at ¥130.239 versus the JPY, up 0.46% on the day and within striking distance of last week's ¥130.698 best.
The move comes as markets pare their no-deal expectations in response to positive news-flow around a Labour-led plan to block no-deal Brexit. A meeting of cross-party leaders earlier in the session resulted in a unified position with a focus on derailing arch-Brexiteer Boris Johnson's pursuit of no-deal.
Following the meeting, the attendees issued a joint statement which included: "The leaders of the opposition parties held a productive and detailed meeting on stopping a disastrous no-deal exit from the EU," and "The attendees agreed that Boris Johnson has shown himself open to using anti-democratic means to force through no deal.The attendees agreed on the urgency to act together to find practical ways to prevent no deal, including the possibility of passing legislation and a vote of no confidence."
While perhaps less likely to succeed, efforts by the government to find alternative arrangements which would allow for ex PM Theresa May's deal to see another day in parliament was also helping lift the GBP.
"Sterling is advancing across the board as the UK opposition leaders met today to plot to prevent a no deal Brexit," wrote City Index analyst Fiona Cincotta, adding "Whilst Bojo is sticking to his do or die Brexit mantra, he has also expressed a little more optimism that a new deal can still be achieved between the EU and the UK. This comes following last week’s visits to Germany and France where Angela Merkel and French President Macron both said they are willing to listen to alternatives the Irish backstop," and that "Pound traders are interpreting recent developments as a slight easing back from the brink of a no deal Brexit, and so it is advancing."
The British Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate rose modestly on Monday though failed to retake last week’s three-week best with resistance around ¥130 proving difficult to overcome.
At the time of writing, Sterling was last seen trading at ¥129.591, up 0.12% on the day.
With a bank holiday in effect in the UK, already thin trading conditions are even thinner on Monday leaving Sterling exchange rates susceptible to erratic price action. GBP markets thus far into Monday’s European session were however relatively subdued with investors looking for fresh Brexit-related cues.
After just weeks ago stating that the chances of no-deal Brexit were “a million to one against” it appears that PM Johnson has received a dose of reality with the Eurosceptic Tory leader commenting that the odds of striking a deal are now “touch and go” in an interview with the BBC at the G7 summit in France, adding that the outcome “depends on our EU friends and partners".
Under a no-deal scenario, PM Johnson also said that the UK would keep a “very substantial” portion of the £39bn divorce settlement agreed between the EU and PM May.
This comes just days after the Pound rally on the back of renewed hopes that alternative backstop arrangements - to replace those in the EU Withdrawal Agreement - could be found, thus facilitating a withdrawal from the common currency bloc with a last minute deal and staving off the dreaded no-deal outcome.
While markets have welcomed hints of a compromise on the EU deal, with markets pricing in greater than even odds for a November 1st withdrawal date, Nordea analysts remain sceptical that the time remaining will be adequate to finalise a deal.
“The GBP has rallied even though the market still holds an exit by 1st of November as the base case (>50% probability in prediction markets), and most of the rally was fuelled by Merkel’s comments in Hague that a solution can be found before 1st of November,” wrote Nordea analysts Martin Enlund and Andreas Larsen, adding “But is it sensible to bet on an exit by 1st of November and at the same time price in a more benign exit than a no-deal Brexit? We don’t think so.”
With limited data on the agenda this week, the focus is expected to remain on Brexit and in particular the government’s efforts to find alternative backstop arrangements, BoJo’s efforts to suspend parliament in a bid to thwart efforts to block no-deal, as well as opposition lawmaker plans to table a motion of no confidence in early September in a bid to avert no-deal.
The Pound opened the week down against the Yen after striking a three week best last week with escalating trade ware rhetoric over the weekend continuing to drive capital into the safe-haven Yen.
With the threat of September 1st tariffs looming, China took steps to soften the impact of the blow on Friday, announcing retaliatory tariffs on $75 billion worth of US products, a move which was met with a near-immediate decision from the US administration to slap an additional 5% duty on $550 billion of Chinese goods.
“market sentiment has been undoubtedly hit hard as there is an even lower chance of a trade truce in the foreseeable future,” wrote Commerzbank analysts.
Monday however brought with it a slight firming of risk appetite, curtailing the Yen’s advance with reconciliatory language coming from both the US and China. Speaking on the sidelines of the G7 summit on Monday Trump said that he believed China wanted to make a deal after contacting US trade officials overnight to request a return to the negotiating table while Beijing called for “calm” in continued talks.
“He (Xi Jinping) understands, and it’s going to be great for China, it’s going to be great for the U.S., it’s going to be great for the world,” said Trump.
While Trump's comments may have allayed fears for now, the end result remains to be seen. Moreover, some analysts expect Trump to wield the trade-war as a weapon in his efforts to pressure the Fed into cutting rates after Powell failed to meet market easing expectations in his Jackson Hole speech last week.
....My only question is, who is our bigger enemy, Jay Powell or Chairman Xi?
With little in the way of high impact data for either the Yen or British Pound on this week’s agenda, sentiment is likely to remain a key driver for the Pound to Yen exchange rate and with Brexit and the US-China trade-war at the fore, there’s the potential for considerable volatility.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
After graduating with a 1st in psychology (BSc Hons), Elaine specialised in the areas of trader psychology...
