The new week on foreign exchange markets saw the pound to yen exchange rate open firm, quoted 0.15% higher at 141.6246 on Monday December 2.
Due to a combination of uncertainty in UK data, as well as slightly stronger market demand for safe haven currencies, the British Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate was unable to hold its best levels towards the end of last week. Throughout the week, the Pound benefitted from rising hopes that Britain’s 2019 General Election would lead to a Conservative majority that could more easily push relatively soft Brexit plans through Parliament.
After opening last week at the level of 139.40, GBP/JPY spent last week advancing as for the most part, the week’s political and trade news benefitted the Pound and US Dollar (USD) more than the Japanese Yen.
Near the middle of the week, GBP/JPY briefly touched on a 6 month high of 141.82 – the best level for the pair since May.
While GBP/JPY slipped from those highs towards the end of the week, the pair was still on track to gain almost two Yen and trended near the level of 141.30 on Friday.
The Pound was able to easily sustain gains against the Japanese Yen last week, as investors bought the Pound in reaction to polls showing that Britain’s ruling Conservative Party was on track to win a solid majority in next month’s General Election.
While some polls showed that the opposition Labour Party was gaining and narrowing the race, a major seat-by-seat YouGov MRP poll signalled that the Tories were on track to win enough seats to secure a majority.
While the Pound’s gains are limited by ongoing uncertainty that the race could still tighten, this poll ultimately helped the Pound to sustain notable gains by the end of the week.
However, the Japanese Yen’s weakness also played a part in GBP/JPY gains.
For most of the week, investors were hesitant to buy the Japanese Yen as cautious trade sentiment saw the US Dollar (USD) more appealing.
Persisting hopes that US-China trade negotiations could lead to a ‘phase one’ trade deal soon bolstered the US Dollar, which is the Japanese Yen’s biggest rival currency.
Even as US-China trade relations appeared to worsen, hopes that a deal was near still persisted. As a result, the Japanese Yen only saw limited recovery from the rising safe haven demand.
On top of this, the US Dollar benefitted from doused Federal Reserve easing speculation, which also pressured its rival the Yen.
Pound (GBP) Exchange Rate Forecast: Focus on UK Election Polling Likely to Intensify
With under two weeks now until Britain’s 2019 General Election on the 12th of December, the Pound’s movement is likely to become increasingly focused around UK election polling and speculation.
If new polls show that the opposition Labour Party is still gaining on the Conservative Party, the Pound could see fresh weakness as political uncertainty and hung Parliament fears would rise.
On the other hand, fresh polls showing that the Tories had re-extended the lead would instead help the Pound to firm its recent gains.
However, the Pound’s potential for gains is limited amid uncertainty over how exactly Brexit will proceed after the election.
Due to the focus on UK election polls and speculation, the Pound’s reaction to final November PMI stats is likely to be limited.
Japanese Yen (JPY) Exchange Rate Forecast: US-China Trade Tensions to Drive Risk-Sentiment
While Japanese PMI results will be published over the next week, their impact on the Japanese Yen’s movement is likely to be limited compared to the potential impact of trade developments.
As a safe haven currency, the Japanese Yen would see a rise in demand if US-China trade negotiations looked to be on the brink of collapsing, or if the chances of a trade deal see a significant delay.
On the other hand though, with hopes persisting that a trade deal is close, safe currencies like the Yen are only likely to weaken if there are major signs of progress in US-China trade relations.
Overall, the Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate is likely to react to UK politics and US-China trade relations over the coming 5 days.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
