Despite market concerns about Japan’s economic performance, safe haven demand is once again sending the Japanese Yen much higher and the British Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate has plummeted. Yen investors are likely to keep focused on developments regarding the coronavirus Covid-19 and how this influenced market risk-sentiment and safe haven demand, and Brexit jitters could overshadow upcoming UK data for the Pound.
After opening last week at the level of 144.60, GBP/JPY spent the week trending lower and lower as the strengthening Japanese Yen capitalised on a plummeting Pound.
GBP/JPY lost a whopping five Yen throughout the week overall, trending near lows in the region of 139.29 before market closed on Friday. This saw GBP/JPY shed all the strong performance it had seen since the beginning of the year in the space of a single week, hitting lows not seen since October 2019.
For much of the week, poor Japanese ecostats meant that Japanese Yen demand was limited. As a result, the Pound’s broad weakness was a notable part of the reason for GBP/JPY losses.
A combination of domestic factors weighed on the Pound throughout the week.
Speculation has risen that Britain’s new Chancellor Rishi Sunak will not be introducing more government spending at the previously anticipated budget presentation. With spending expectations fading, hopes for a UK economic rebound have also worsened.
Returning Brexit fears hit the Pound particularly hard though. Over the past week, the UK government’s mandate for UK-EU negotiations was published and the government indicated that if it is unhappy with talks it could walk away with no deal.
On top of all this, the Pound has started to see further weakness on the market’s rising coronavirus fears.
Over 15 cases of the virus have been reported in Britain, and analysts including Bank of England (BoE) Governor Carney predict that the situation could worsen and damage Britain’s economy.
Amid fears that the coronavirus is becoming a bigger issue outside of China, markets have been selling riskier currencies en masse and are stampeding to safe havens.
As a result, even though recent Japanese data has been poor, the Japanese Yen benefitted from safe haven demand and was ultimately one of last week’s most appealing major currencies. According to Marc-Andre Fongern, Head of FX Research at Fongern Global Forex:
‘Stocks are collapsing, while for the foreseeable future, abysmally poor economic figures are likely to be the rule rather than the exception. Consequently, the Japanese Yen remains the preferred currency,’
The Pound is likely to remain sensitive to developments in Brexit next week, with UK and EU officials finally beginning anticipated 2020 Brexit negotiations.
The talks are expected to last all year and will decide whether Brexit concludes with or without a deal. If officials maintain a tough stance on negotiations, Brexit concerns could worsen further and the Pound could be in for even deeper losses.
If the coronavirus continues to spread in Britain this could also lead to deeper weakness in the Pound.
Due to concerns over Brexit and the virus, upcoming UK data could take a backseat.
Britain’s final February PMIs will be published in the first half of the week. Manufacturing on Monday, construction on Tuesday and key services stats on Wednesday.
Similarly for the Japanese Yen, even the coming week’s more influential data is likely to take a backseat to potential shifts in market risk-sentiment.
The Japanese Yen remains the market’s safe haven currency of choice, seeing considerable gains as the coronavirus outbreak and market risk-aversion intensifies.
If the spread of Covid-19 continues to worsen across the globe, safe haven demand will surge and the Japanese Yen is more likely to see strong gains across the board.
However, if attempts to prevent spread appear to be working then markets could cool slightly and the Yen could shed some recent gains.
While it is likely to be brushed over, upcoming Japanese consumer confidence and PMI stats could also influence the Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
