Despite mixed market demand for safe haven currencies like the Japanese Yen towards the end of last week, the British Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate ultimately trended lower due to the Pound’s late-week losses. Looking ahead to next week, the Japanese Yen’s movement could influence the pair depending on how US-China trade developments cause shifts in global risk sentiment.
After opening last week at the level of 140.44, GBP/JPY spent last week mixed, fluctuating in a fairly narrow range.
At the beginning of last week GBP/JPY touched on a six month best level of 141.42, before trending lower. Following disappointing UK data on Friday, GBP/JPY touched on a weekly low of 139.69 before markets closed for the week.
While demand for the Japanese Yen has been mixed, the Pound’s weakness ultimately drove the Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate lower at the end of last week.
Markit published its first UK PMI projections, ahead of the typical finalised PMI prints published at the end of each month.
As expected, Britain’s manufacturing sector contracted. The projection came in at 48.3, below the expected 49. The key services projection was even more concerning, coming in with a contraction of 48.6 rather than the expected stagnant figure of 50.0.
According to economists, the data continues to point to Brexit uncertainty damaging Britain’s economy and meant for the worst run of PMI data since the global recession a decade ago.
Chris Williamson, Chief Business Economist at IHS Markit, said:
‘A worsening jobs market has the potential to feed through to weaker consumer spending and slower wage growth, thereby undermining two of the key supports to the economy in recent months. The big question will be just how long can the Bank of England hold its nerve in keeping policy unchanged.’
The data pushed GBP/JPY down at the end of the week, following days of mixed movement. The Japanese Yen has seen mixed movement throughout the week, as the safe haven currency reacts to US-China trade uncertainties.
For much of the week, speculation rose that US-China trade talks could fall through or that a potential deal could still be quite a ways away.
This caused modest safe haven demand and helped the Japanese Yen to hold away from its worst levels despite a lack of strong domestic support.
Pound (GBP) Exchange Rate Forecast: UK Election Polls Remain the Focus
Next week will be a little lighter on key UK data, meaning Pound investors are even more likely to focus largely on UK politics and election speculation.
With just around three weeks until the British public head to the polls for the December General Election, Pound movement may become even more poll-centric.
Signs that Britain’s ruling Conservative Party could win a majority in the election and push through its relatively soft Brexit plans would help the Pound to sustain gains, while the British currency would weaken if polls show a tight race.
Some UK ecostats will be published throughout the week, including CBI distributive trades data on Monday and consumer confidence data on Friday. However, unless these stats are hugely surprising the Pound is unlikely to be influenced by them much.
Japanese Yen (JPY) Exchange Rate Forecast: US-China Trade Deal Delay Could Push Yen Higher
Some fairly notable Japanese ecostats will be published throughout the next week, including retail sales on Wednesday, unemployment and production stats on Thursday, and consumer confidence figures on Thursday.
If these figures surprise investors they could influence some Japanese Yen movement. However, it’s more likely that the safe haven Japanese Yen will be driven by developments in global growth and trade news.
There is speculation that trade relations between the US and China could worsen again, depending on China’s reaction to news that the US is likely to pass a bill in support of Hong Kong protestors.
If trade relations worsen, investors are more likely to want to buy safe haven assets like the Japanese Yen.
On the other hand, the Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate could rise if the US and China close in on a ‘phase one’ trade deal, as safe haven appeal would weaken.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
