A major slump in the UK services PMI was not enough to keep the Pound Sterling to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate under pressure on Thursday.
Although the index collapsed to a record-low of just 12.3 the Pound was able to hold onto its ground against many of the majors.
While the UK service sector still accounts for more than three quarters of economic activity investors were quick to recover from the initial shock of the data.
Support for the safe-haven Japanese Yen weakened, meanwhile, as a relative stabilisation in oil prices fuelled a fresh bout of market risk appetite.
Following on the heels of a weak set of Japanese manufacturing and services PMIs this encouraged the GBP/JPY exchange rate to make modest gains over the course of the day.
Fresh volatility could be in store for the Japanese Yen on Friday with the release of March’s consumer price index report.
Signs point towards inflationary pressure easing on both the month and the year, leaving the inflation rate far away from the Bank of Japan’s (BoJ) target rate.
While policymakers are unlikely to pay any particular heed to inflation data in the midst of the current Covid-19 crisis a weak reading could still put pressure on the Yen.
As long as the pandemic looks set to knock further momentum out of the struggling Japanese economy JPY exchange rates may struggle to find any major gains.
Given that the Japanese economy was already on a shaky footing before the Covid-19 crisis began any further signs of slowdown could weigh heavily on the Japanese Yen.
However, as the Yen remains one of the prime safe-haven assets any fresh deterioration in global market sentiment could see JPY exchange rates benefit.
On the other hand, the mood towards the Pound could deteriorate further if April’s GfK consumer confidence index weakens as anticipated.
With the index looking set to fall further into negative territory, dipping from -34 to -40 as the impact of the Covid-19 lockdown unfolds, support for the Pound may weaken ahead of the weekend.
As a higher level of consumer anxiety could lead to lower spending and further hamper economic activity in the second quarter a weak showing here may drag the GBP/JPY exchange rate down.
Unless consumers demonstrate greater signs of resilience in the face of the pandemic the Pound may struggle to avoid weakness in the days ahead.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
