After recovering for most of September on soft Brexit speculation and a strong US Dollar (USD), the British Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate has seen two consecutive weeks of sharp losses that have seen it shed most of September’s gains. As investors seek safe haven currencies like the Japanese Yen and the Pound is knocked by Brexit uncertainties, investors had little reason to buy the pair towards the end of last week.
Opening last week at the level of 132.72, GBP/JPY saw a brief rise in demand at the beginning of the week before tumbling lower as the week drew on.
While investors were hesitant to sell GBP/JPY below the week’s low of 131.55, the pair did trend close to those lows towards the end of the week.
Towards the beginning of last week, investors bought the Pound on hopes that the UK government’s new Brexit plan could lead to a new softer Brexit deal.
Sterling briefly held its ground against a strengthening Japanese Yen, due to speculation that UK Parliament was cautiously optimistic towards the new deal.
However, the Pound’s support ran out towards the end of the week, amid reports suggesting that EU officials, particularly from Ireland, were not impressed by the proposals.
The crux of the proposal was an alternative to the controversial Irish backstop plan, which UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson believes is unacceptable in the UK-EU withdrawal deal.
Amid doubt that a new plan could be agreed, no-deal Brexit jitters rose once again and the Pound weakened. This made it easier for a resilient Japanese Yen to gain on it.
The Japanese Yen, on the other hand, has been benefitting from market uncertainty this week.
The Japanese Yen is a safe haven currency that often benefits in times of global tensions or uncertainties. US-China trade tensions persist, keeping safe haven demand high.
On top of this, US data has worsened. As a result, Federal Reserve interest rate cut bets have risen, leaving the Yen a more appealing safe haven than its rival the US Dollar (USD) as the Bank of Japan (BoJ) has thus far avoided a more dovish tone.
Pound (GBP) Exchange Rate Forecast: Brexit Uncertainties Could Keep a Lid on Sterling
Some notable UK ecostats will be published towards the end of next week.
With most of the week quiet save for some productivity data and a speech from Bank of England (BoE) Governor Carney on Tuesday, a slew of UK data will be published on Thursday.
This will include Britain’s August trade balance, growth rate, and industrial and manufacturing production stats.
Still, unless the data is surprising enough to influence Britain’s cloudy economic outlook, Brexit developments are likely to remain the focus for Pound investors next week.
With mere weeks now until the current 31st of October Brexit deadline, and doubts that the UK government’s Brexit plan will lead to a new deal, the pressure is on for whether or not Brexit will see another delay.
If UK Parliament ramps up attempts to prevent a no-deal Brexit, Sterling could climb. If no-deal Brexit fears worsen though the Pound may be in for further losses against the safe Yen.
Japanese Yen (JPY) Exchange Rate Forecast: Market Sentiment and Bank Bets in Focus
The safe haven Japanese Yen will likely remain an appealing investment for markets, so long as US-China trade tensions persist and the US Dollar remains weak.
With the Bank of Japan (BoJ) still avoiding a more dovish tone for now, this leaves the Yen especially appealing as dovish Federal Reserve bets rise.
Upcoming Japanese data, including household spending on Tuesday, and machinery orders on Thursday, could cause some limited Yen movement.
However, the biggest Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate movement next week is likely to come from Brexit, trade relations, Federal Reserve speculation, or other news that could impact safe haven demand.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
