GBP/JPY UPDATE #3: The UK Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate extended losses overnight in the wake of a Bank of Japan hold on interest rates with Sterling last seen trading at levels last seen in November 2016, at ¥132.146, down 0.58%.
While Sterling pressure is nothing new in the context of the continued Brexit saga, losses have accelerated since Boris Johnson took his post as the new British Prime Minister with the prolific Eurosceptic's appointment and subsequent communications from top government officials indicating increased preparations for no-deal Brexit and lowered hopes of renegotiating a benign withdrawal with EU officials.
Looking to the Yen, the JPY was little changed following th as expected hold on interest rates from the Bank of Japan (BoJ). Central bank forward guidance was left unchanged - also as expected - while the summary made note of growing risks to the economy with both growth and infation forecast trimmed and hints suggesting further stimulus could be on the cards later in the year.
With face-to-face US-China trade talks set to resume in Shanghai, the risk-factor could back in to play as negotiations get underway with signs of progress likely to spur risk-on which could limit Yen gains but with Sterling as weak as it is and losses expected to extend, further losses in the cross could be on the cards.
GBP/JPY UPDATE #2: Discounting the early January mini 'flash-crash' the UK Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate fell to its weakest levels since November 2016 during Monday's European session with Sterling last seen trading down 1.25% on the day at ¥132.933.
Sterlings losses weren't limited to the Pound-to-Yen cross with th GBP down against all major peers on Monday as investors seek to price for increased no-deal Brexit odds. Spurring the flight to secure shorts were comments from Michael Gove who - writing for the Sunday Times - indicated that given an assumption that EU officials would refuse to renegotiate the Withdrawal Agreement, the government was instead ramping up preparations for a no-deal exit from the bloc at the end of October.
"While we are optimistic about the future, we are realistic about the need to plan for every eventuality. The EU’s leaders have, so far, said they will not change their approach — it’s the unreformed withdrawal agreement, take it or leave it," wrote Gove, adding "We still hope they will change their minds, but we must operate on the assumption that they will not."
In terms of the outlook for the GBP, "With the new government rhetoric on a hard Brexit firming (Michael Gove’s comments that “no deal is now a very real prospect”) and the rising likelihood of early elections, sterling should remain under pressure," wrote ING economists.
Meanwhile for the Yen, markets await Tuesday's Bank of Japan policy releases but with limited scope to lower rates focus is expected to be on guidance and any signs that policymakers could bolster Japan's already massive fiscal stimulus.
"With other central banks turning more dovish, Bank of Japan officials (announcing policy on Tuesday) may feel the pressure to either (a) ease monetary policy or (b) change the forward guidance," wrote ING's Krpata, adding an expectation for the Yen to continue its recent risk-spurred rally for the time being.
GBP/JPY UPDATE: After initially edging higher last week, the UK Pound to Japanese Yen reverted to the downside as the week progressed with re-firming fears around no-deal Brexit weighing on the GBP while upbeat Japanese inflation data and concerns around global trade helped to boost the Yen.
Into Monday's session, Sterling fell to touch a one-week low, putting the mid-July two-year worst within striking distance.
Losses for the GBP are expected to continue as market refocus on Brexit-related politicking and elevated risks around no-deal. While the PM had vowed to pursue a benign withdrawal from the bloc and had stressed that a no-deal outcome was "a million to one against", senior ministers reported over the weekend that they are working on the assumption that the EU will continue to refuse to renegotiate the Withdrawal Agreement, therefore boosting the probability of no-deal.
"We want a good deal with EU partners and friends but that must involve the abolition of the undemocratic backstop,” said Foreign secretary Dominic Raab to the BBC on Monday, adding "What the prime minister has instructed and the cabinet has accepted is a turbo-charging of those preparations.”
With Brexit weighing on the UK economy and the global trend towards easing in full-effect, this week's focus is split between political developments and the monetary policy as we head into Thursday's Bank of England (BoE) releases amidst growing expectations policymakers will move to abandon their long-held tightening bias in favour of a more neutral policy stance.
Meanwhile, following Friday's upbeat Japanese CPI prints, the Yen remained supported given its safe-haven appeal amidst reports of slow progress in US-China trade talks.
While talks between US and Chinese officials are ongoing, Friday saw President Trump say that a deal could be delayed until as late as Noember 2020 should China try to delay in the hopes of being able to negotiate with a Democratic US government post-elections.
Tuesday will see the latest round of policy releases from the Bank of Japan. According to a poll of economists by Bloomberg, 77% of analysts expect the next move from the central bank to be an interest rate cut - despite an already negative key policy rate - up from 62% last month.
The Pound (GBP) struggled against the Japanese Yen (JPY) at the beginning of the week as UK markets remained stalled ahead of the announcement of the new Prime Minister.
Following the appointment of Boris Johnson as the successor to Theresa May on Tuesday, however, the Pound benefited as UK markets absorbed the new political implications.
Brexit doubts quickly set in however as Mr Johnson had previously stated that the UK would leave the European Union on the 31 October – with or without a deal.
Sterling fared fairly well against its competitors by mid-week as political developments provided a challenge to the UK-EU deadlock, providing some hopes of a Brexit breakthrough as the new Government reformed its cabinet.
However, as Boris Johnson sacked over half of Theresa May’s team and replaced it with a majority of Brexiters, this caused some concern to GBP traders.
The GBP/JPY exchange rate began to fall by the end of the week, however, as Brexit uncertainty increased following comments from Brussels which indicated that they would not be willing to renegotiate a withdrawal agreement.
This came after PM Boris Johnson’s open commitment to ditching the Northern Irish backstop.
A spokesperson for Boris Johnson said:
‘The PM has been very clear that he is ready to begin having those discussions, but obviously the key point is the withdrawal agreement is not going to pass parliament, so that is going to mean reopening the withdrawal agreement.’
The Japanese Yen (JPY) opened the week down following comments from the Bank of Japan (BoJ) Governor Haruhiko Kuroda.
‘Uncertainties regarding the global economy have been heightening, and some nervousness has been seen in global financial markets… The Bank needs to pay close attention to the effects of these developments on Japan’s economic activity and prices.’
JPY wasn’t helped by the publication of the Japanese Leading Economic Index figures for May, which fell below forecast, easing from 95.9 to 94.9 – its lowest level since December 2012.
Thursday, meanwhile, saw the publication of the Japanese Bond Investment figures for July.
These improved, rising from ¥949.6 billion to ¥1,027.9 billion.
The JPY/GBP exchange rate improved on Friday, meanwhile, following the printing of the year-on-year Japanese Tokyo CPI excluding fresh food figures for July.
As a result, the Japanese Yen (JPY) began to edge higher against a weakened Sterling.
Looking to the week ahead, JPY traders will be awaiting the printing of the Japanese retail trade figures on Monday.
If these show any signs of improving, we could continue to see the Japanese Yen climb against the Pound.
Tuesday will see the BoJ’s integrate rate decision, which is expected to hold at -0.1%.
Any dovish comments during the monetary policy statement surrounding global economic concerns, however, could see the JPY/GBP exchange rate begin to fall.
Sterling investors will be looking ahead to Thursday’s Bank of England (BoE) interest rate decision, which is forecast to hold at 0.75%.
However, as Brexit is likely to remain in focus, we could see some dovish remarks from the BoE which could see the Pound plummet against many of its competitors.
The GBP/JPY exchange rate is expected to be volatile next week as Brexit uncertainties are due to rise as Parliament closes for its summer recess.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
