The Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate fluctuated between lows of ¥133.92 and highs of ¥139.00 last week, with investors paying close attention to risk-sentiment as JPY rocketed on safe-haven demand.
However, the Japanese Yen (JPY) struggled at the beginning of the week after Sunday’s release of Japan’s GDP figures for the first quarter fell by 0.6%. As a result, this left many JPY investors concerned for Japan’s economic recovery.
‘Japan’s economy braced for its worst post-war slump even as first-quarter GDP contracted less than initially thought, as the coronavirus crisis slams the brakes on global growth and raises pressure on Tokyo to cushion the blow to business and consumers.’
Monday saw the release of Japan’s Eco Watchers Survey for Economic Outlook, which beat forecasts and rose to 36.5.
However, Sterling was held down by dismal UK retail sales figures for May, which the BRC retail sales report showing a minor rise to 7.9%.
Meanwhile, the UK’s Brexit fears all but faded out last week as Britain is now expected to continue UK-EU post-Brexit negotiations until the end of the year. Consequently, this eased fear of a 31st December no-deal.
Nevertheless, the GBP/JPY exchange rate suffered on Friday when the UK’s GDP report for April fell to a record low of -20.4% after the first full month of coronavirus lockdown.
Jonathan Athow, deputy national statistician for economic statistics at the ONS, was downbeat in his assessment.
‘April’s fall in GDP is the biggest the UK has ever seen, more than three times larger than last month and almost 10 times larger than the steepest pre-Covid-19 fall.’
The GBP/JPY exchange rate – at the time of writing – is currently fluctuating around ¥134.518.
The Week Ahead: Could a Dovish Bank of Japan Weaken the Japanese Yen?
Japanese Yen (JPY) investors will be looking ahead to Tuesday’s Bank of Japan’s interest rate decision, which is expected to hold at -0.1%. However, if the BOJ is notably dovish in its rate statement, we could see the Japanese Yen suffer.
Sterling trader meanwhile will be awaiting Tuesday’s release of the UK’s ILO unemployment rate on Tuesday. Any signs of increasing joblessness would prove GBP-negative.
The UK’s average earnings data for April will also be released on Tuesday. Any significant falls in earnings would also prove detrimental to the Pound.
Looking ahead to Wednesday, the UK’s inflation data is expected to continue to rise. As a result, we could see the GBP/JPY exchange rate improve.
However, poor UK retail data on Wednesday could further drag down the GBP/JPY exchange rate.
Thursday will see the Bank of England (BoE) announce its interest rate decision, which is expected to remain at 0.1%. However, if the BoE is dovish in its rate statement, we could see GBP fall.
Japan’s inflation data is also due out on Thursday. However, if this continues to dip, we could see the Japanese Yen shed some of its gains.
Overall, the GBP to JPY exchange rate will likely remain subdued throughout most of the week. However, if risk sentiment continues to improve we could see the Japanese Yen shed some of its gains as a safe-haven currency.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
