The Pound to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate rose by 0.3% today, with the pairing currently trading around ¥143.282 as US-China trade deal hopes weigh on the safe-haven appeal of the Japanese currency today.
This follows reports of a possible ‘eleventh-hour’ trade deal between the two superpowers, according to Kenny Polcari, a Senior Market Strategist at Slatestone Wealth.
‘They’re going to come out and say ‘we’ve got a deal ... we’re working on tweaking, fine-tuning it. But, to show good faith, we’re not going to impose these tariffs.’ And then the markets will rally.’
Meanwhile, concerns over Japanese growth continue to clip the JPY’s gains after analysts warned of weaker growth in the third-quarter.
Marcel Thieliant, Senior Japan Economist at Capital Economics, said:
‘While Japan's economy expanded more rapidly ahead of October's sales tax hike than initially estimated, output is set to shrink in 2020.’
In Japanese economic data, today will see the release of the Japanese Machinery Orders figure for October, which is expected to rise from -2.9% to 0.9%, potentially buoying the JPY/GBP exchange rate.
The Pound (GBP) edged higher against the Japanese Yen (JPY) despite last night’s release of the YouGov MRP poll which indicated that the Conservative’s lead against the Labour Party with a majority of only 28-seats.
‘Our latest and final poll shows that a small Conservative majority is likely, with the Tories taking 22 more seats than in 2017 and Labour losing 31.’
‘But the margins are extremely tight and small swings in a small number of seats, perhaps from tactical voting and a continuation of Labour's recent upward trend, means we can't currently rule out a hung parliament.’
With just one today until the general election, we should expect more volatility from the Pound in the days ahead as concerns rise over the increased likelihood of a hung parliament.
There are no UK economic data releases today, with markets instead focusing on political developments ahead of the general election.
The UK’s general election will remain firmly in focus tomorrow, with any signs of a hung parliament – or a majority win for the Labour Party – likely weakening market confidence in the Pound.
Markets generally prefer a Tory victory due to their promises to resolve Brexit uncertainty by 31st January.
Japanese Yen (JPY) investors will be looking ahead to tomorrow’s Tankan Large All Industry Index for the fourth-quarter, which is expected to improve by 6%.
As a result, we could see the Japanese Yen (JPY) claw back some of its losses against the Pound.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
