The Pound Sterling to Japanese Yen exchange rate began last week trading around ¥140.075, after the UK narrowly avoided recession despite its weakest growth figure in a decade.
Analysts at Reuters commented, "The Bank of England [BoE] said last week that inflation would probably fall to 1.25% early next year due to caps on energy and water prices, but was likely to be back above its 2% target towards the end of its three-year forecast period. The BoE has long said it plans to raise interest rates gradually, assuming Britain avoids a no-deal Brexit shock."
Political developments continued to dominate British headlines, however, with the Conservative Party continuing to lead polls ahead of the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats.
However, speculation around the 12th December election left the Sterling relatively unmoved due to mounting political uncertainty surrounding Brexit.
The GBP/JPY exchange rate closed the week subdued as uncertainty around Brexit and the pre-Christmas general election held back Sterling’s appeal.
The Japanese Yen (JPY) improved on the Pound last week with safe-haven appeal rising as uncertainties over US-China trade negotiations benefited the Japanese currency.
Analysts at the National Australia Bank were sceptical of a ‘Phase One’ US-China trade deal emerging, commented:
‘As much as the US-China trade updates continue to point to a Phase 1 deal looking like a certainty, the contentious issues on whether the US will cancel the planned December tariffs and remove some of the current tariffs in line with China's demands remains an unknown and if the issue is not resolved then a deal could easily collapse.’
Last Wednesday however saw market confidence in the Japanese Yen slip after the Japanese Jibun Bank Services PMI for October slid into contraction territory from 50.3 to 49.7, further dampening hopes for the struggling economy.
The JPY/GBP exchange rate edged higher as safe-haven demand boosted the Japanese Yen.
GBP/JPY Exchange Rate Forecast: Could the Japanese Yen Rise on Improving Japanese Inflation Figures?
Sterling traders will be looking ahead to Monday’s release of November’s UK Rightmove House Price Index. Any signs of improvement could uplift the UK economy and benefit the Pound.
Meanwhile, Japanese Yen investors will be looking ahead to Tuesday’s publication of the Japanese Merchandise Trade Balance Total figure for October, which is expected to rise to ¥301 billion.
Wednesday will see the release of Japan’s Foreign Investment in Japan Stocks figure for November. If these improve we could see the Japanese Yen rise against the Pound.
Pound investors will also be paying close attention to the UK’s inflation report hearings on Wednesday, which will provide some insight into the Bank of England’s monetary policy going forward.
Thursday will also see the release of October’s UK Public Sector Net Borrowing figure, which is expected to come in at £8.7 billion.
Japan’s National CPI figure will remain the focus on Thursday, however, with any signs of improvement for Japanese inflation likely to improve the JPY/GBP exchange rate.
Friday will see Japanese markets closed for Labor Thanksgiving Day, a Bank Holiday in Japan.
UK political developments will continue to remain in focus, with any signs of the Tories consolidating their lead in the polls benefiting the Pound on a return of political stability.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
