GBP/JPY UPDATE #2: Fading post-G20 optimism coupled with dismal UK data saw the UK £ to Japanese Yen exchange rate lower at Monday's close with losses extending into Tuesday. At the time of writing, Sterling was seen trading 0.29% lower at ¥136.647.
With the risk-off rally fading following the decision to resume trade negotiations, markets remain cautious and are looking for actual tangible progress in US-China trade relations which should keep the hunt for safe-haven assets such as the Yen alive.
"Euphoria that the trade negotiations are back on the table has probably waned and again the cautious tone is getting hold of the markets,” wrote ING economist, Prakash Sakpal, adding "We need to see a great deal of negotiation progress on the China-U.S. trade war. And we should also see more regional policy stimulus actually kicking in to prevent any further deterioration in economic activity across the region.”
It's a quiet session data wise with the latest UK construction PMI to only release of note for the cross. With limited potential for Brexit-related breakthroughs as the race to become the next British Prime Minister continues Sterling continues to lack appeal with investors erring away from large directional bets amidst such high levels of uncertainty over the UK's economic future.
GBP/JPY UPDATE: After gaping higher on the back of reduced safe-haven demand, the UK Pound to Japanese Yen exchange rate reverted to the downside following the latest UK manfuacturing sector PMI miss with Sterling last seen trading at ¥136.9.
Markets opened to a distint relief rally in risk-assets while safe-haven demand was dented by the weekend's trade G20 trade developments which saw Trump-Xi talks yield a ceasefire to the current trade war. The leaders of the world's largest economies agreed to forgo additional tariff hikes for now while trade talks resume.
Overnight data out of Japan was disappointing with the Tankan manufacturing index sliding to 7, the latest manfuacturing PMI missing (49.5) to print at 49.3 and consumer confidence bypassing forecasts for a drop to 39.2 to instead register at 38.7.
Markets however attributed higher weight to the latest UK mnaufacturing PMI miss (48.0 versus 49.5 expected) as acitivty in the sector continued to slide amid declining new order inflows and unwinding of Brexit stockpiles.
Risk remains in focus moving forward with markets awaiting actual practical steps towards reopening US-China trade negotiations while limited potential for Brexit developments is expected to keep a lid on Sterling upside.
Confirmation that UK business investment saw a solid rebound on the quarter encouraged the Pound Sterling to Japanese Yen (GBP/JPY) exchange rate to recover some ground ahead of the weekend.
This helped to overshadow the disappointing nature of the GfK consumer confidence index for June, which slumped from -10 to -13 as political anxiety continued to weigh on domestic sentiment.
Even so, the GBP/JPY exchange rate remains vulnerable to selling pressure thanks to Conservative leadership candidate Boris Johnson’s refusal to rule out proroguing Parliament in order to force through a no-deal Brexit.
As long as the risk of the UK crashing out of the EU in October without a deal remains on the table this is likely to limit the upside potential of Pound Sterling.
Investors still see reason to doubt the outlook of the UK economy in the second quarter, meanwhile, as a lack of clarity continues to hang over the country.
As Howard Archer, chief economic advisor at the EY Item Club, noted:
As a result, June’s set of UK PMIs could provoke significant volatility for the GBP/JPY exchange rate if economic activity shows fresh signs of slowing.
However, as forecasts point towards the manufacturing PMI rebounding from 49.4 to 52.0 on the month this may offer the Pound a solid boost against its rivals.
A sharp improvement in Japan’s monthly industrial production failed to shore up the Japanese Yen on Friday, coming under pressure thanks to market hopes of a potential G20 breakthrough.
Monday’s Japanese consumer confidence index may offer JPY exchange rates some encouragement, though, as forecasts point towards a solid uptick on the month.
On the other hand, confidence in the underlying health of the Japanese economy could deteriorate if the finalised manufacturing PMI for June confirms its slide further into contraction territory.
As long as the Japanese economy continues to underperform this could encourage bets that the Bank of Japan (BOJ) will loosen monetary policy again sooner rather than later.
Wednesday’s UK services PMI may encourage the GBP/JPY exchange rate to return to a weaker footing, however.
Rather than picking up on the month investors anticipate a fresh easing in sector activity, pushing the PMI closer to the neutral baseline of 50.
If the service sector appears at risk of slipping into contraction in the near future this could drive the Pound sharply lower across the board.
As the service sector remains the major contributor to the UK gross domestic product any slowdown here would add to speculation that the second quarter growth data could prove underwhelming.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
