News Skill Team , December 2, 2019 3 min read 1000
Japanese yen has hit a six-month low, mainly because investors
upcoming British election race affects the pound.
Having reached its lowest since May, the Japanese yen plunged 0.2
percent to 109.72 per dollar. Post two surveys, it was revealed that the
Party prior to the general elections. Consequently, the sterling GBP=D3 was
down a quarter of a percentage point at $1.2913.
The gains were directed by the kiwi, that put on 0.6 percent
0.3 percent on the greenback NZD=D3 to purchase $0.6444, its strongest in a
As per the Senior Market Strategist at BNZ, Wellington, Jason Wong, “S&P futures are up, there’s a risk-on mood.” Following upbeat official data over the weekend, a private business survey – Caixin survey, showed on December 1, that the factory activity of China has expanded at the quickest pace in almost three years in November.
production at an optimistic state. Also, a report from Axios, citing a source closely associated with the US negotiating
weren’t enough to dent the sentiment.
A senior strategist at National Australia Bank in Sydney, Rodrigo
Catril said, “The market is taking it with a degree of salt, waiting for
clarity.” He added, “We keep on getting these unofficial statements. No-one is
the anti-government protestors in Hong Kong, the Chinese government announced
these have not been leaked as of now.
Speaking of the Australian dollar, the trade-sensitive currency has
already headed for its biggest percentage gain in two weeks, added 0.2 percent
against a basket of currencies. DXY at 98.319.
news on trade, kept the yuan on an even to 7.0301 dollar. Speaking of the
matter, senior market analyst at Gain capital, Singapore said, “These things
tend to move in unison”. He added, “So if we got a positive readout from China,
it’s quite likely we’ll get positive reads from Europe later today, in which
case you’re looking at long euro. You’d only have to come a tick or two higher
above expectations and you’ve got upside, arguably, for the euro.”
The Nikkei Stock Average inclined 251.01 points , or 1.08 percent to 23,544.92. The broader Topix index of all First Section issues on the Tokyo Stock Exchange added 17.22 points or 1 percent at 1,716.58.
As the US-China trade talks continue to indicate confusion, the Japanese yen is probable to witness further changes.
