Stock index futures advanced for a second day after on Friday the much better than expected May U.S. employment numbers were released. Nonfarm payrolls increased 2,509,000 when economists anticipated a decline of 7,725,000.
Today June S&P 500 futures advanced to their highest level since February 26 and NASDAQ futures traded at record highs.
Stock index futures continue to show positive technical action and have been performing well in spite of a variety of geopolitical concerns.
It is starting to look like the U.S. dollar may be bottoming.
Also, the euro currency appears to be making a near term top now that much of the bullish news is out, especially last Thursdays news that the European Central Bank at its regularly scheduled policy meeting almost doubled its asset-buying program. The ECB is adding EUR600 billion ($675 billion) to the EUR750 billion that it announced in March.
The euro is higher despite news that German industrial production fell sharply in April. Total industrial output fell 17.9% in April from March. Economists had forecast a 16.8% decline in April.
The Japanese yen is higher on news that Japan's economy contracted an annualized 2.2% in the January-March quarter, which is better than the 3.4% contraction in a preliminary estimate in May.
U.S. yields surged at the end of last week to their highest level since late March after Friday's better-than-expected jobs report.
The Treasury will auction three-year notes today.
The next Federal Open Market Committee meeting is scheduled for June 9-10. Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell will conduct a virtual news conference Wednesday after the meeting.
Among the main topics for the Feds policymaking group to discuss will be whether to implement so-called yield curve control. This would entail purchasing bonds with the intention of keeping yields at lower levels.
According to financial futures markets there is a 91.4% probability that the FOMC will leave its fed funds rate unchanged at zero to 25 basis points. Also, there is an 8.6% probability of a 25-basis point increase at next weeks meeting.
The yield curve has been steepening recently, which suggests there is a growing belief that there will be recovery in the economy later this year.
or via email at alan.bush@admis.com . Thank you.
Would you like to open an account with us? Go to our interactive New Account application at Open An Account . It is fast, saves on postage and its green.
Futures and options trading involve significant risk of loss and may not be suitable for everyone. Therefore, carefully consider whether such trading is suitable for you in light of your financial condition. The information and comments contained herein is provided by ADMIS and in no way should be construed to be information provided by ADM. The author of this report did not have a financial interest in any of the contracts discussed in this report at the time the report was prepared. The information provided is designed to assist in your analysis and evaluation of the futures and options markets. However, any decisions you may make to buy, sell or hold a futures or options position on such research are entirely your own and not in any way deemed to be endorsed by or attributed to ADMIS. Copyright ADM Investor Services, Inc.
