(Bloomberg) -- U.S. futures rose with European stocks on Thursday as hopes for reassuring jobs data later in Washington added to momentum from positive vaccine developments. The dollar slipped.
Tesla Inc. rose in premarket trading after overtaking Toyota Motor Corp. on Wednesday as the most valuable automaker. Contracts on the S&P 500 Index advanced hours before the June employment report that’s coming a day early because markets will close Friday for the July 4 holiday. Economists expect a rise of just over 3 million jobs and the second consecutive month of gains. The Stoxx Europe 600 Index extended its initial gains on advances in banks and automakers.
Investors who are driving stocks higher know there’s still a host of threats on the horizon, from fresh virus outbreaks in Japan and the U.S. to moves in Congress to sanction China. Minutes of the Federal Reserve’s June meeting revealed that various participants viewed the economy needing support “for some time,” helping support risk appetite on the prospect of continued loose monetary policy.
“The rally for equities could survive even if the U.S. jobs data disappoint, after the Fed’s signal of sustained low rates,” said Stephen Gallo, a foreign-exchange strategist at the Bank of Montreal. “Bad numbers could extend that outlook for cheap money.”
Hong Kong shares outperformed after traders returned from a holiday, despite the recent tensions over China’s new national security law over the city. The Shanghai Composite turned positive for the year to date. Stocks in Australia, China, Japan and South Korea also rose.
Elsewhere, oil futures climbed for a second session, helped by a strong drawdown in crude stockpiles. The decline for the Bloomberg Dollar Index took it to its lowest in over a week, while Treasuries were steady.
These are some of the main moves in markets:
Futures on the S&P 500 Index gained 0.7% as of 07:05 a.m. New York time.The Stoxx Europe 600 Index rose 0.8%.The U.K.’s FTSE 100 Index rose 0.6%.The MSCI Asia Pacific Index was little changed.The MSCI Emerging Market Index advanced 0.6%.
The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index slipped 0.2%.The euro increased 0.3% to $1.1277.The British pound climbed 0.2% to $1.2505.The onshore yuan strengthened 0.1% to 7.068 per dollar.The Japanese yen was little changed at 107.51 per dollar.
For more articles like this, please visit us at bloomberg.com
Subscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
