The AUD is the strongest and the JPY is the weakest as NA traders enter for the day.  US stocks are set to open higher after Peter Navarro walked back earlier comments that deal with CHina was over.  Later, he said that the comments were taken out of context and Trump reiterated that the deal was fully intact.  That has led to the continuation of a risk on them with AUD continuing it's climb and money flowing out of the relative safety of the JPY.
It's an election year. Trump is behind. The stock market is the hope.  That changes the dynamics for the administration.
The ranges and changes are showing ok ranges. The EURUSD is higher and trading near it's session high. The AUDUSD is higher after moving lower on the Navarro comments, only to rebound back to the upside. The NZDUSD has also recovered after a similar move lower, but less modestly.  The JPY pairs are higher after they too fell on the comments, and rebounded on the retraction.
WTI crude oil futures are trading up $0.83 or 2.04% of $41.56. The August contract is trading up $0.84 or 2.06% $41.69
In the premarket for the US stocks, the futures are rising
In the US debt market the yields are trading higher. The 2-10 year spread is a couple basis points higher.
In the European debt market, yields are also higher.
All the biggest trading floors in the world have screens locked on ForexLive™. We provide real-time forex news and analysis at the highest level while making it accessible for less-experienced traders.
Founded in 2008, ForexLive.com is the premier forex trading news site offering interesting commentary, opinion and analysis for true FX trading professionals. Get the latest breaking foreign exchange trade news and current updates from active traders daily. ForexLive.com blog posts feature leading edge technical analysis charting tips, forex analysis, and currency pair trading tutorials. Find out how to take advantage of swings in global foreign exchange markets and see our real-time forex news analysis and reactions to central bank news, economic indicators and world events.
HIGH RISK WARNING: Foreign exchange trading carries a high level of risk that may not be suitable for all investors. Leverage creates additional risk and loss exposure. Before you decide to trade foreign exchange, carefully consider your investment objectives, experience level, and risk tolerance. You could lose some or all of your initial investment; do not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. Educate yourself on the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial or tax advisor if you have any questions.
ADVISORY WARNING: FOREXLIVE™ provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and FOREXLIVE™ specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Forex dealer. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. FOREXLIVE™ expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
