U.S dollar drops against major currencies, tension rises between America and China
The American dollar was down on Monday afternoon in London’s trading session giving up little of its gains from Friday’s trading session.
The U.S. Dollar Index that tracks the American dollar against a basket of other major currencies (like the Japanese yen, British pound sterling, Swedish Krona, Euro) dropped 0.10% to trade at 100.203 at the time this report was written.
What it means: Nigerians hoping to meet a foreign exchange payment obligation, transactions via the dollar to countries like Europe, Japan, would have the need to pay more dollars to fulfil such transactions.
READ ALSO: Where next for oil prices?
America and Chinese tensions got worse over the weekend after White House trade advisor Peter Navarro suggested in a “This Week” interview that Beijing sent “hundreds of thousands of Chinese on aircraft to Milan, New York and around the world” to spread the virus after hiding it from the world for two months.
In addition, the American dollar got more sad news as America’s Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell disclosed in a separate interview that America’s economy could shrink up to 30% in the Q2 2020 but will avoid a second Great Depression in the long term.
“At the fore of market participants’ minds is that we are seeing those (China) tensions just ratcheting higher, so there has been supporting for the U.S. dollar on the back of that,” Commonwealth Bank of Australia FX analyst Kim Mundy told CNBC.
“Also comments last week from Fed officials around the risks to the U.S. economy being skewed to the downside risks around the second wave of infection, I think that will also continue to underpin the U.S. dollar this week.”
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
Your email address will not be published.
Gold futures were slightly down 0.02% to trade at $1,779 at 9:03 am Nigerian time.
Gold futures dropped from its record highs on Thursday morning at London’s trading session as global investors retreated from the safe-haven asset as their appetite for riskier financial assets surge.
Gold futures were slightly down 0.02% to trade at $1,779 at 9:03 am Nigerian time, after losing more than 1% yesterday at America’s trading session.
Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp in a note to Nairametrics spoke about the macros, affecting Gold as an asset. He said:
“Gold price got hammered lower after the vaccine headlines but have since stabilized and are ticking gingerly higher. A vaccine would be significant.
“However, I do not think it’s immediately or radically changing many house views on gold, which are mostly predicated on the long and bumpy road to economic recovery.
“But the next couple of weeks may tell us much about how the rest of the pandemic develops.
“Gold is still very well bid as the US remains mired amid crises, a health crisis, and a political crisis. The intense polarization of US political life and the outbreak of racial friction is making the implementation of a consistent and wide-sweeping health care policy difficult.
“Sure, a vaccine would be the ultimate salvation, but by current indications and in the absence of one, it will take longer for the US to fight off the virus than other developed economies.
Although the precious metal possesses some upside, with the present market volatility on-going, coupled with the resurgence of COVID-19 cases around the world prompting the World Health Organization to issue a stern warning yesterday, that reinstatement of lockdown measures could be required in some geopolitical zones
As audited accounts start to trickle in, companies will propose dividend payments to their shareholders as recommended by their respective boards of directors. It is also important to track these announcements to know who is eligible to collect the dividend, when it will be approved and when it will be paid. Dividend payment also affects share prices.
This page will be updated from time to time.
Date Announced – The date the company announced dividends evidenced by a corporate action published on the website of the NSE.
Qualification date – Shareholders who own shares as of this date will receive dividends. If you buy shares and want to receive dividends make sure it is at least three days before this date. Shares get transferred to you on the basis of the T+3 rule (the date you bought plus 3 working days).
Payment date – This is when the dividend will be paid to you, either via post (dividend warrants) or direct credit to your bank accounts (e-dividend).
Closure of Register – Only shareholders who own shares listed in their register before this date will be paid dividends.
You can also scroll sideways to view the rest of the columns if using a mobile phone.
U.S dollar pull back some gains, investors’ appetite for risk strengthens
Global investors and currency traders are predicting futuristic gains for the greenback.
The U.S dollar pulled back some of its gains recorded previously on Thursday morning as global investors retreated from the safe-haven currency.
The U.S. Dollar Index that monitors the American dollar against a group of other major currencies lost 0.11% to 97.040 at 5.49 am Nigerian time with an appetite for risk increases, as Global stocks continued to rally leading currency traders and investors retreating from the U.S dollar
Quick fact; The U.S. Dollar Index that tracks the American dollar against a basket of other major currencies (like the Japanese yen, British pound sterling, Swedish Krona, Euro), Individuals hoping to meet foreign exchange payment obligations, via dollar transactions to countries like Europe, and Japan, would need to pay more dollars to fulfill such transactions.
READ ALSO: Gold price up as COVID-19 cases rise, U.S-China tensions heighten
Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp in a note to Nairametrics, wrote about the present market volatility in the currency market. He said;
“If you are handling the currency hot seat these days, you likely feel tethered to the end of a very reactive Yo-Yo string as currency moves in one session are faded in the next.
“Currencies have started the second half of the year, where they left off in the first and outside of the “risk-on risk-off” see-saw currency appetite struggled to find any meaningful catalysts.
“With G-10 central banks at zero or below, in the absence of any significant monetary policy transmission that leaves currency traders chasing or instead guessing which countries activity data will outperform the others, which is getting enveloped around the dichotomy between current buoyant conditions and subdued future expectations striking both in consumer sentiment and in financial-market indicators.”
However, some global investors and currency traders are predicting futuristic gains for the greenback with the resurgence of the COVID-19 cases globally. There were over 10.6 million cases as of July 2, according to Johns Hopkins University data.
“If we see further spikes in coronavirus cases, I would expect both the dollar and the yen to strengthen against other currencies,” Tohru Sasaki, head of Japan market research at J.P. Morgan, told Reuters.
