Despite surging expectations that Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) members will either cut or lay the groundwork for interest rate cuts at next week's Federal Reserve monetary policy review, the US Dollar looked set to see out a bullish week up against a majority of peer currencies.
Data helped to boost the Greenback towards a solid Friday finish with the latest retail sales figures reflecting accelerating consumer spending into Q2 thus far. Moreover, while the retail sales release can yield a significant market impact under normal circumstances, with current focus heavily on the Fed, the upbeat releases could temper expectations in relation to the extend of Fed cuts anticipated.
"The fact that consumer confidence has only been higher on four occasions in the past 18 years suggests that spending should be pretty resilient even if we get some further negative news on US-China-Europe trade relations," wrote chief international economist, James Knightley, of ING, adding "So while the Federal Reserve does seem to be shifting towards rate cuts, market expectations of 100bp of easing look too aggressive to us. We look for 50bp of easing in 2H19."
ING economists weren't alone in viewing current pricing as overdone in regards to the expected cutting cycle with a number citing the recent rally in the Dollar as a result of markets reigning in expectations for a seriously dovish Fed.
Furthermore, despite the recent narrowing, interest rate differentials are still relatively wide, lending support to the Greenback while investors seeking alternative to the USD are likely to struggle in the current climate.
"...there needs to be a compelling story in overseas economies to attract funds away from the US. Given the nature of the current headwinds – global trade – those attractive stories overseas simply don’t exist," wrote ING global head of strategy, Chris Turner.
Alongside a lack of peer-currency appeal, the US Dollar is also better geared to absorb trade tensions than other DMs.
JPMorgan analysts wrote on Fridat that the Dollar "as benefited to date from negative globalization news as the domestic side of the U.S. economy has looked sufficiently robust to deal with trade-related headwinds,” adding "Other countries look less resilient in the face of trade tensions due to higher exposure to global import demand, dependence on manufacturing exports, and underdeveloped domestic demand."
With markets bracing for rate cuts but uncertainty around the magnitude thereof, investors will have to wait for commentary from the Fed to gain a clear outlook on the expected rates path.
Nevertheless, the drop in US interest rates has undermined the Dollar with a number of analysts expecting the commencement of the Fed's cutting cycle to act as a catalyst for a major turn in the Greenback.
Coupled with looming Fed rate cuts, markets are also dealing with risks around global trade, keeping sentiment muted and safe-haven assets bid. Given the Japanese Yen's safe-haven appeal, a number of forecasters see the US Dollar to Japanese Yen exchange rate leading the charge lower as the bearish USD narrative gains momentum.
Since the tail end of April, coinciding with the breakdown in US-China trade negotiations, the Dollar-to-Yen exchange rate has largely been on the back-foot with the JPY dining out on its safe-haven status. The Dollar's depreciation appears to have levelled off into June thus far with the cross trading between a floor in the mid-to-high ¥107s and an upper bound around ¥108.8.
At the time of writing, the US$ was last seen trading at ¥108.381, on track for marginally (0.2%) positive week overall.
Despite recent losses in the cross, the latest forecast from Danske Bank see myriad factors continuing to push the Dollar-to-Yen rate lower.
"We expect global sentiment to remain the key driver in the cross as risk-off, commodity sell-off and falling US rates run together and amplify each other to take USD/JPY lower," wrote senior analyst Lars Merklin.
Overall, under current market conditions the US Dollar to Japanese Yen exchange rate is forecast to slide to ¥107 by the three-month mark, however any further deterioration within the above factors could see the cross fall as low as ¥106.
Given the forecast is reliant on the persistence of a risk-averse market undertone, upside risks to the forecast stem from improvements in risk sentiment.
"Drivers set to take JPY back above 110 include an inflation-driving Fed cut,tariffs on Japan, additional BoJ easing (currently unlikely) and/or improving global macro," added Merklin.
With rate cuts all but certainly coming into effect over the coming months, ING economists look to next week's Fed for clues as to whether this is likely to be a major easing cycle or more akin to precautionary rate cuts.
"important to consider here is whether this is the start of a major Fed easing cycle, typified by reflationary bullish steepening of the US yield curve and a weaker dollar – or whether the 2H19 Fed easing we forecast is more like the quick insurance rate cuts that the Fed made in late 1998, which effectively prolonged the US expansion and the dollar bull trend into 2001?," wrote ING's Turner with the former expected to yield greater USD depreciation compared to the latter.
While uncertain over the magnitude of Fed rate cuts ahead, historically markets have tended to underestimate the extent of easing cycles leaving risks skewed to more rather than less rate cuts ahead.
While we're likely to get clues thereon from the Fed next week, a meaningful easing cycle is expected to bode well for the Japanese Yen and Swiss Franc.
"if this is the start of a significant dollar bear trend, we would expect it primarily to be played out against the defensive currencies of JPY and CHF," wrote Turner, adding "his is premised on the view that the trade war continues to escalate and the associated secular stagnation fears. We are thus revising down our year-end USD/JPY forecasts closer to 100 and would expect the JPY to strengthen on the FX cross rates."
In the camp not expecting a rate cut from the Fed next week, Nordea analysts anticipate policymakers to use the June policy review to give clear signals of cuts ahead with the dot plot expected to see revisions supporting this outlook.
"We don’t think the FOMC members share the markets’ recession fears. Nevertheless, they will highlight that downside risks to growth have increased since the May meeting due to the trade war escalation," wrote economist Anders Svendsen.
While the Japanese Yen has proved resilient to deteriorating global trade prospects and remained bid in the current risk-off environment, Nordea analysts were notably less bullish on the JPY despite the expected continuation of trade-related headwinds.
"Other currencies which usually fare well during a trade downturn (which we consider very likely over the next 6-9 months) include the JPY, EUR and CHF," wrote Andreas Larsen, adding "Of these we think the JPY should be avoided because of Japan’s vicinity to China and South Korea – and because USD/JPY usually rises around the first cut from the Fed."
In light of the expected rally post-first Fed cut, Nordea's updated FX forecasts see the Dollar-to-Yen pushing higher over H2 2019 before the bearish Dollar narrative begins to weigh with the exchange rate expected to return to current levels by the twelve-month mark.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
After graduating with a 1st in psychology (BSc Hons), Elaine specialised in the areas of trader psychology...
