Danske Bank: US Dollar at risk from US shale-oil credit crunch, US dollar/Japanese yen set for retreat to 106.0
According to Danske Bank, weakness in the US oil sector is likely to put downward pressure on US dollar/Japanese yen.
The dollar has been on the defensive this week with a dip to 10-day lows for the currency index and the yen has been resilient despite gains in global equity markets. US dollar/Japanese yen dipped to re-test April 1st lows just below 107.00 before a recovery to 107.45 amid a wider US bounce.
Oil prices rallied sharply last week amid expectations that OPEC+ would cut crude production targets. There was an eventual deal to cut production by 9.7mn bpd for May and June with cuts of 8.0mn bpd over the remainder of 2020.
Oil prices have, however, failed to sustain the bounce and selling pressure has increased again on Wednesday with WTI sliding to fresh 17-year lows around $19.50 p/b with Brent trading below $29.0 p/b.
In its latest report, Danske Bank considers the currency-market implications of a slide in oil prices.
Oil demand has been undermined very sharply by the coronavirus crisis with a huge dip in demand across all sectors, especially with a very substantial decline in travel and transport usage.
US crude inventories increased by a record 15.0mn barrels last week with a further sharp increase expected this week. US gasoline demand has fallen close to 50%.
In Danske Bank’s view, global oil demand is likely to be 25mn bpd lower during the second quarter of 2020 and there will, therefore, be a huge global over-supply.
The dynamics of the US economy have clearly shifted substantially over the past few years due to the boom in US shale. When the US was a substantial net importer of crude, lower oil prices tended to support the US currency, but the reverse is now true even though lower prices will cut the cost of fuel prices.
There are also important concerns over financial stresses within the shale industry with the cost of production well above crude prices at current levels. Although breakeven costs have declined, most producers need prices around $40 p/b to cover production costs.
Tensions have increased sharply within the industry, especially with domestic refiners cutting demand for crude from shale producers.
Texas oil regulators have also threatened to impose caps on state output, although no decision has been made after a fractious meeting on Tuesday.
‘In fact, the US oil industry is itself a key source of credit risk for USD at present: long touted a possible trigger of the next financial crisis, the debt-ridden US shale industry is facing a credit crunch amid the corona-led oil demand crash.’
Loan write-offs in the shale sector would also undermine wider financial-sector confidence and could trigger a chain reaction within the banking sector.
Weakness in oil prices is likely to be associated with a generally risk-off global trend. In this environment, the Euro is liable to be vulnerable and unable to gain strong support.
In contrast, the yen is likely to gain an element of defensive support, especially if there is a sharp decline in global equity markets.
‘In sum, oil looks set to remain a liability for USD for now’ and Danske Bank is forecasting a US dollar/Japanese yen retreat to the 106.0 area.
According Commerzbank, “Initial support is the 106.92 1st April low. A slide back below 106.27, the 50% retracement, is required to alleviate immediate upside pressure for focus to revert back to 104.46, the August low.”
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Tim is an economist and has been involved in financial markets for over 20 years as an analyst. He...
