(Bloomberg) — U.S. stock-index futures retreated alongside European shares on Monday as investors weighed the latest moves around the globe to relax restrictions for the coronavirus. The dollar strengthened and WTI crude oil jumped.
Contracts on the S&P 500 Index gave up an earlier gain, with airlines including United Airlines Holdings Inc. dropping in pre-market trading after the carrier canceled a bond sale on Friday. AMC Entertainment Holdings Inc. leapt after reports suggested Amazon.com Inc. may have takeover interest. Mining shares led declines in the Stoxx Europe 600 Index. Equities in Japan outperformed and the yen sank amid growing optimism over the country restarting parts of its economy. Korean shares dipped.
The dollar climbed versus most of its major peers, headed for its best advance in more than three weeks. Treasuries were steady. WTI crude oil spiked as Saudi Arabia announced it will cut extra oil output in June.
Investors are starting the week more wary, as President Donald Trump tries convincing Americans it’s safe to return to work and social life while he combats a coronavirus scare that’s moved closer to his own office. The U.K. will soon outline plans to ease its lockdown, which looks set to hurt airlines. Meanwhile in South Korea, a country praised for its measures to counter the pandemic, there’s a flare-up in cases tied to nightclubs in Seoul. The complex outlook is sparking questions about stock valuations after last week’s rally.
“Much of the eventual improved growth and virus news is already priced into markets,” said Bob Baur, chief global economist at Principal Global Investors LLC. “Because so much future growth and uptrend potential is priced in, we expect a period of relapse and consolidation through June.”
Elsewhere, Bitcoin tumbled after rising above $10,000 on Friday.
Here are some key events coming up:
Earnings continue to roll in from companies including Tencent, Allianz, and Petrobras.Regional Federal Reserve presidents James Bullard, Loretta Mester and Patrick Harker are due to speak at events on Tuesday.OPEC gives its monthly oil market report on Wednesday.U.S. weekly jobless claims data is due Thursday.China on Friday releases industrial production and retail sales data for April.
These are the main moves in markets:
Futures on the S&P 500 Index declined 1% as of 8:19 a.m. New York time.Nasdaq 100 Index futures fell 0.7%.The Stoxx Europe 600 Index fell 0.9%.The MSCI Asia Pacific Index gained 0.6%.
The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index advanced 0.5%.The euro declined 0.1% to $1.0825.The British pound sank 0.7% to $1.2319.The Japanese yen weakened 0.6% to 107.29 per dollar.
West Texas Intermediate crude climbed 3% to $25.49 a barrel.Gold was little changed at $1,703.10 an ounce.LME copper fell 0.3% to $5,257 per metric ton.
