Last week, the front-end of the US overnight index swap (OIS) curve, as represented by the spread between the one- and two-year forward points, inverted (turned negative). To put it another way, the one-year rate rose above the two-year rate, pushing the spread below zero.
"The spread had improved rapidly and turned significantly positive after the dramatic policy response to the virus crisis last March, it has been slipping over the past couple of months and turned negative last week. It printed -3bp negative on Monday, June 29th," said JPMorgan (JPM)'s quantitative analyst Nicholas Panigirtzoglou, according to ZeroHedge's Tyler Durden.
An inverted curve represents a liquidity crunch. "Rate markets are signaling the need for further monetary and/or fiscal policy stimulus across developed economies.  If the Fed turns a deaf ear to this latest extortion attempt by the market and additional stimulus is not delivered, then the inversion at the front end could worsen, "eventually becoming a more problematic signal for equity and risky markets going forward," according to JP Morgan.
Put simply, stocks will likely come under pressure in absence of additional monetary or fiscal stimulus., in which case, anti-risk assets like the Japanese yen would shine.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
