The near term recovery on Dollar/Yen remains on track after a fourth bull candle in the past five sessions completed yesterday with a close above the breakout at 107.60. This morning there is a test of the recovery trend of the past week, as the market has slipped back to what is now support around 107.60. How this level is treated will be a gauge for the near term outlook. If the bulls can build on this support around 107.60 today, then the prospect of further recovery gains will grow. An improvement in momentum indicators is on track, but once more, RSI needs to hold above 50 and Stochastics continue to rise for the recovery to continue. The hourly chart suggests that this early slip back is counter to a recovery, as hourly RSI holds above 40 and MACD lines unwind to neutral. We noted yesterday that there is a support band 107.45/107.60 which is a buy zone. We still see this to be the case, but our conviction falters under 107.45. For now, we still favour a retest of initial resistance of the overnight high at 108.15.
Hantec Markets' various market reports and commentary are issued by Hantec Markets Limited, who is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the UK, No. 502635. The reports are prepared and distributed for information purposes only.
Trading in Foreign Exchange (FX), Bullion and Contracts for Differences (CFDs) is not be suitable for all investors due to the high risk nature of these products. Forex, Bullion and CFDs are leveraged products that can result in losses greater than your initial deposit. The value of an FX, Bullion or CFD position may be affected by a variety of factors, including but not limited to, price volatility, market volume, foreign exchange rates and liquidity. You may lose your entire initial stake and you may be required to make additional payments. Please ensure you fully understand the risks involved, seeking independent advice if necessary prior to entering into such transactions. Before deciding to enter into FX, Bullion and/or CFD trading, you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. You should only invest in FX, Bullion and/or CFD trading with funds you are prepared to lose entirely. Therefore, only your excess funds should be placed at risk and anyone who does not have such excess funds should completely refrain from engaging in FX and/or CFD trading. Do not rely on past performance figures. If you are in any doubt, please seek further independent advice.
The reports do not constitute personal investment advice, nor do they take into account the individual financial circumstances or objectives of the clients who receive it. All information and research produced by Hantec Markets is intended to be general in nature; it does not constitute a recommendation or offer for the purchase or sale of any financial instrument, nor should it be construed as such. All of the views or suggestions within the reports are those solely and exclusively of the authors, and accurately reflect their personal views about any and all of the subject instruments and are presented to the best of the authors' knowledge. Any person relying on these reports to undertake trading does so entirely at his/her own risk and Hantec Markets does not accept any liability.
