If there is no any positive dynamics in the US-China trade war so far, it's hard to predict any long-lasting USD/JPY upside movement. In general, there are more chances for further falling rather than soon recovery. The USD/JPY pair has been declining since hitting its 2019 high of 112 in April.
According to the USD/JPY expectations by the FXStreet Poll, analysts have reduced their short-term and long-term targets, but haven't changed the medium objective.
The burning trade tensions between the US and China, as well as between South Korea and Japan, continue to boost the demand for the anti-risk Japanese yen. Looking forward, the USD/JPY currency pair will depend on fresh Trump's comments and the US key economic data.
Today, the yen continues proving its safe-haven status for several reasons. Japan has current account surpluses, which provide yen with a strong foundation. It occurs, when exports exceed imports, providing support for the demand for yen in the long run. The Japanese yen is also well-traded, i.e. it's a liquid currency, which is considered as a reserve currency for the Asian countries.
The USD/JPY forex pair is nicknamed 'The Ninja', after a popular superheroic character, created in Japan. The US dollar vs Japanese yen coupling assesses the value of the two superpowers' currencies against each other, establishing how many yen you need to buy one US dollar.
To better understand what affects the USD/JPY rate you should consider some key factors.
The USD/JPY rate fluctuates depending on import and export prices. Japan has always relied on export, so the Japanese government and the BOJ (Bank of Japan) has already intervened in the currency markets several times – keeping the interest rates low – to make their goods more attractive on the international arena.
The US Federal Reserve decisions regarding the interest rate also influence the dollar-yen pair price movements.
Why USD/JPY is so attractive to Forex traders?
The American dollar is the #1 traded currency in the world. The Japanese yen is the #3.
The USD/JPY currency pair is considered is classified as one of the majors on the FX market. The pair often has a low bid-ask spread and high liquidity. Its extreme volatility attracts numerous investors and traders, who try to catch up with exciting opportunities to try and benefit from the rising and falling USD/JPY market.
Today, the downward momentum has slowed down a bit and shown signs of consolidation. Even though the support level has managed to survive a few tests and some fake breakthroughs, no it's still early to talk about a market turn. Only a retracement up to 108.50 and a break of this level may signalise a potential market’s U-turn.
With contracts for difference, it does not matter whether your view of the USD/JPY forecast is positive or negative. You can always try to profit from the future price fluctuations, regardless of their direction. Follow the latest forex news and track the USD/JPY live rates with Capital.com.
