The USD/JPY is attempting a weekend rally amid concerns of a second wave of Covid-19 infections. Meanwhile, the USD/SGD turned lower on Friday.
Kelvin Ong | Financial writer, Singapore | Publication date : 2020-06-12T12:52:23+0100
Will the USD/JPY be able to sustain Friday's rally?
The USD/JPY forex pair is attempting a weekend rally.
The US dollar on Friday 12 June 2020 gained 0.7% against the Japanese yen on Friday 12 June 2020 – breaking a six-day losing streak, amid concerns over a second wave of Covid-19 infections in the US.
As at 10:45 GMT on Friday, the USD/JPY continues to remain lifted at ¥107.450.
This week, the greenback dropped as much as 2.7% against the safe-haven yen, as markets moved into profit-taking and correction mode.
Despite the sustained rally and a slight reversal of overtly bearish sentiments in the last 12 hours, IG Asia market strategist Pan Jingyi noted that the bias presently remains largely to the downside for the fiat currency duo, ‘with the expected yield differentials and the yen playing its safe haven role with the market risks on hand’.
You can buy long or sell short on the USD/JPY and other major forex pairs depending on where you think prices will go. Start today by opening an IG account .
Meanwhile, the reverse is true for the USD/SGD minor pair.
The USD fell 0.5% against the Singapore dollar during Friday’s daylight hours, indicating that new pandemic fears might be outweighing any confidence that investors have in the safe-haven greenback.
This was a contrast from the earlier part of the session, when the pair had moved higher alongside USD/Asians, underpinned by the return of some sense of cautiousness to the markets, according to Pan.
As at 18:15 SGT on Friday, the USD continues to edge lower against the SGD, trading at S$1.38867.
Despite the latest downtrend and the ongoing amalgamation of US-centric concerns, Pan posits that Asian currencies remain the riskier assets moving into the weekend. The USD/SGD is also expected to stay volatile for the time being, with market events still a key driver of trading sentiments.
Are you feeling bullish or bearish on USD/JPY , USD/SGD and other currency pairs? Either way you can buy (long) or sell (short) the asset using derivatives like CFDs offered on IG's world-class trading platform in a few easy steps:
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Trade the largest and most volatile financial market in the world.
Speculate from a range of platforms, including on mobile
