USD/JPY ’s outlook remains tilted to the negative side, while the pair remains focused on the 106.70 region in the near-term, suggested FX Strategists at UOB Group.
24-hour view: “Our expectation for a stronger rebound did not materialize as USD traded in a quiet manner between 106.98 and 107.57 before ending the day little changed at 107.31 (-0.03%). The current movement is viewed as an on-going consolidation phase. In other words, USD could continue to trade sideways for now, likely between 107.00 and 107.70.”
Next 103 weeks: “Last Thursday (11 Jun, spot at 107.05), we held the view that the outlook for USD ‘is mildly negative’. We indicated that USD has to ‘close below 106.70 before a sustained decline can be expected’. While USD subsequently dropped to 106.56, it did not close below 106.70. Despite the strong rebound last Friday, the risk for further USD weakness is still intact. Only a move above 108.00 (no change in ‘strong resistance’ level) would indicate the current mild downward pressure has eased. In other words, we continue to hold the same view from last Thursday.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
