SmallCapPower | May 22, 2020: Most resource stocks took a beating from the COVID-19 related stock market selloff back in March but, long term, consumers will always require natural resources. That being said, today we have drilled down and discovered two Canadian resource stocks that have seen insiders step in and buy company shares, a sign of confidence in their business’ prospects.
*Returns are based on closing stock prices as of May 21, 2020
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Hudbay Minerals is a diversified mining company producing primarily copper concentrate (containing copper, gold and silver) and zinc metal. Directly and through its subsidiaries, Hudbay owns three polymetallic mines, four ore concentrators and a zinc production facility in northern Manitoba and Saskatchewan (Canada) and Cusco (Peru), and copper projects in Arizona and Nevada (United States). Canadian private equity firm Waterton Global Resource Management purchased nearly 1.25 million Hudbay shares between May 4 and May 15, 2020.
Canacol Energy is an exploration and production company with operations focused in Colombia. The Company is Colombia’s largest independent natural gas producer, with approximately 80% of its gas production sold under take-or-pay contracts denominated in U.S. dollars. During 2019, Canacol reported a 24% increase in total natural gas revenue to US$212.4 million, while adjusted funds from operations for the year rose 19% to US$124.9 million. And, Canacol Energy generated record Q1 2020 EBITDAX (Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and exploration expenses) that increased 48% year over year to US$58.9 million. The Company boasts a strong balance sheet, with growing cash flow and little debt repayable before 2025. CNE stock currently yields about 5.4%. Between April 15 and April 28, 2020, insider investor Fourth Sail Capital purchased a little more than 500,000 CNE shares on the open market. Fourth Sail Capital then bought an additional 1.5 million or so shares between April 29 and May 15, 2020.
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
