Best Base Metals Stocks for Coronavirus Volatility?
SmallCapPower | March 13, 2020: The copper price, which is often used as a gauge of world economic activity, is down ~14% since January. Zinc, an industrial material used in galvanizing vehicles and steel rebar, is down ~18% over the same time period. Both these metals are used in construction and industrial manufacturing. Experts agree that prices of both metals should stabilize once coronavirus passes, as consumers will always need products that contain copper and zinc. Today we’ve found four base metals stocks that could benefit most from the eventually rebound in commodities prices.
*Share prices as at March 11, 2020, data obtained from S&P Capital IQ
Leave this field empty if you're human:
First Quantum is a Canada-based mining company focused primarily on exploration for copper, nickel, gold, and zinc ores. The Company operates seven mines, including the Ravensthorpe nickel mine in Australia; and mines in Zambia, Mauritania, Turkey, Finland, and Spain. First Quantum announced F2020 production guidance of 830,000 to 880,000 tonnes of copper and 280,000 to 300,000 oz/Au. In its Q4F19 results, First Quantum disclosed that it maintains a weighted copper hedge position to manage downside commodity-price risk.
Lundin Mining is a diversified Canadian base metals mining company with operations in Brazil, Chile, Portugal, Sweden and the United States of America, producing primarily copper, zinc, gold and nickel. The Company’s flagship locations include the Eagle mine located in the United States, the Neves-Corvo mine in Portugal, and the Zinkgruvan mine in Sweden. In February, Lundin Mining provided 2020 production guidance, expecting to produce between 272,000 to 296,000 tonnes of copper at costs between $1.15 to $1.80/lb, below the current price of ~$2.50/lb.
Taseko Mines is a precious and base metals producer focused on British Columbia and Arizona. The Company’s projects include gold, copper, and niobium. The Company’s flagship asset is the open-pit Gibraltar Mine, which is a copper-molybdenum mine located in south-central British Columbia. Taseko also owns the Aley niobium and Harmony gold projects located in BC, and the Florence copper project located in Arizona.
Trevali Mining is a Canada-based, zinc-focused mining and exploration company with operations throughout the world. It explores primarily for zinc, lead, silver, and copper deposits. The Company has interests in four producing mines, which include the Santander, Perkoa, Rosh Pinah, and Caribou, which are located in Peru, Burkina Faso, Namibia and Canada, respectively.
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
