For traders News and features Analysis Best commodities to invest in: top 4 picks for spring 2020
The coronavirus continues to wreak havoc in the commodity markets, with oil prices plummeting and short-term demand forecasts slashed for most metals. For a smart investor, this opens up a lot of buying opportunities. Read on for our list of the four best commodities to invest in spring 2020.
For investors with a horizon of six months and longer, copper looks very interesting right now. Copper is mainly used for wiring and making motors, but also in construction (roofing, for example). China accounts for half of all copper consumption in the world. The largest producers are Chile, Peru and China.
Like all other commodities associated with Chinese economy, copper suffered from the coronavirus scare. The dip is very clear on the graph:
However, in spite of the current crisis, the fundamentals for copper in 2020 are still positive:
There's an ongoing deficit of copper in the market – in late 2019, it reached 330,000 tons. At many existing sites, lower-grade ore is now extracted. At the same time, building new copper mines is extremely costly, and very few new sites are opened each year.
Copper plays a key role in the transition to sustainable energy. Since it’s a great conductor and doesn't corrode much, it’s the perfect metal for wind power generators and photovoltaic cells. As the production of clean energy grows, so will the demand for copper.
According to a recent Reuters poll, analysts expect an average price of $6,214 a ton in 2020, as opposed to the current $5,725 – an increase of 8.5 per cent. If you are willing to wait until 2021, your gain could be even higher.
In spite of the panic in the market, oil seems to be firmly in the buy zone at $51 as of February 7. The price has dropped 9.1 per cent since January 7.  Analysts remain bearish in the short term because of the coronavirus virus – but bullish in the mid- and long term.
It's clear that in the next few months Chinese demand for oil will be severely affected by the virus. But China isn't the whole world. Barclays forecasts that the global demand for oil will rise by 1.4 million barrels per day (in 2019 it grew by 500,000 bpd). Most of the additional demand will come from India and Latin America.
A few more positive factors can boost oil prices:
Tariff reductions between the US and China. The Phase 1 trade agreement has been signed, but we'll have to wait for the virus to be contained until we see the full effect.
OPEC production cuts, which can be prolonged at the next meeting in March.
Tensions in the Middle East. Libya's oil production has collapsed due to a blockade of export terminals by the forces of the rebel general Haftar.
Fitch Solutions Macro Research adjusted its 2020 price forecast from $65 to $62. However, this figure takes into account the current low prices, with higher values expected later in the year. Fitch’s forecast for 2021 and beyond remains unchanged.
Just a few months ago, few analysts would have picked steel as an attractive choice for those who want to invest in commodities in spring 2020. But things change – and in this case, several factors came together.
Last year saw a very sluggish steel market, plagued by the tariff war and low demand from European automakers.
Now, the steel market seems to be recovering: on February 6, ArcelorMittal published a much-improved demand outlook for 2020. The world's largest steel company expects the demand to grow by 1-2 per cent.
Of course, the coronavirus is on everyone's mind: how will it affect steel consumption? According to a commodity market overview by ArcelorMittal , the demand in China will grow slower than forecasted earlier:  at the rate of 1 per cent instead of 3.2 per cent. But the effect will be temporary. At the same time, the virus won't affect demand in other parts of the world.
The price for steel rebar futures on the LME is now quite low at $407, as opposed to the December peak of $456.
Still, if the question on your mind is, ‘What are the best commodities to invest in this spring to make a quick profit?’ - then steel is not the best choice. Any investment in steel made at this point will have to be a mid-term to long-term investment. It can take most of the year for prices to recover, so don't expect instant gains.
2019 was the best year for gold since 2011, with the precious metal gaining almost 10 per cent. Can it go any higher – or have the bulls exhausted their momentum?
It seems like gold has entered a growth zone where even record stock market performance can't stop it – at least for now. Here’s why it can continue to be one of the best-performing commodities in 2020:
Unlike other commodities, gold actually benefits from the coronavirus crisis. As the uncertainty in other markets grows, investors are turning to gold as a safe haven asset.
Interest rates remain very weak or negative (e.g. in the eurozone and Japan).
Geopolitical uncertainty isn't likely to abate – especially in the Middle East.
Risk of a stock market crash. Experts are divided on the subject of the stock market bubble. Some, like the famous economist Anatole Kaletsky, predict that political issues can soon trigger a crash among large corporations like Apple and Tesla. Others – like Goldman and Sachs – are sure that the biggest stocks aren't in any present danger.
What does this mean for investors? According to a recent high-profile survey by LBMA, gold prices are likely to keep rising in the first half of 2020. But in the second half, the price might start drifting lower as tensions over the virus and tariffs release. This means that gold is still a good buy – but only if you can keep track of the larger macroeconomic situation.
Is now a good time to invest in commodities? The current market situation might seem too unstable and uncertain for such investments. However, there are always buying opportunities – as long as you can look beyond the short-term implications of the coronavirus.
In spring 2020, risk-averse investors might look to metals like copper, nickel, palladium and platinum for good gains later this year. Those who are willing to risk it should take a better look at oil instead. In any case, if the SARS example has anything to teach us, it's this: after a great storm, the market eventually rebounds.
