The DRC is Africa’s top copper producer and the world’s fourth largest , with output reaching 1.3 million tonnes in 2019.
Robert Friedland-led Ivanhoe Mines (TSX: IVN ,OTCQX:IVPAF) operates the Kipushi zinc project in Haut-Katanga and the Kamoa-Kakula copper project in Lualaba, a joint venture in which China’s Zijin Mining (OTC Pink: ZIJMF ,HKEX:2899) owns a majority stake.
MMG (ASX: MMG ,HKEX:1208) operates the Kinsevere copper mine in Haut Katanga, which produced 68,000 tonnes of copper cathode in 2019, and privately owned Chemaf has confirmed the shutdown of its mines in the area — Etoile, one of the largest cobalt mines in the world, and Mufunta. The company also has other two projects, Luisha and Mutoshi.
Indigo Ellis, head of Africa research at global risk consultancy Verisk Maplecroft, told Reuters she expects the lockdown to weigh heavily on copper output.
“The greatest risk to copper output from DRC is the potential for smelter or logistics-related bottlenecks, preventing mines from shipping concentrates,” Ellis said.
The DRC also produces almost 60 percent of the world’s cobalt, and the two provinces experiencing disruptions account for nearly all of the country’s output.
Lualaba province, which has not yet imposed a lockdown for mining companies, is home of top cobalt producer Glencore’s (LSE: GLEN ) Kamoto Copper Company. Reuters reported on Monday that the company has repatriated 26 foreign workers in response to the pandemic.
China Molybdenum’s (OTC Pink: CMCLF ,HKEX:3993) Tenke Fungurume mine is also located in Lualaba province, as is Eurasian Resources Group’s Metalkol Roan Tailings Reclamation copper-cobalt project.
Don’t forget to follow us @INN_Resource for real-time updates!
Securities Disclosure: I, Priscila Barrera, hold no direct investment interest in any company mentioned in this article.
Have you read our new 2020 copper outlook report?
Get the latest information about companies associated with Cobalt Investing Delivered directly to your inbox.
