A Fool since 2011, Neha has a keen interest in materials, industrials, and mining sectors. Her favorite pastime: Digging into 10Qs and 10Ks to pull out important information about a company and its operations that an investor may otherwise not know. Other days, you may find her decoding the big moves in stocks that catch her eye. Check back at Fool.com for her articles, or follow her on Twitter. Follow @nehamschamaria
The London Metal Exchange (LME), one of the world's largest metals and commodity exchanges, is the latest to get infected by the coronavirus pandemic: LME has shut down its trading ring for the first time since World War II and moved to digital trading. That's one reason why copper prices have tumbled double digits to lows not seen since 2016 and copper stocks have swung wildly in recent weeks.
Some are worried about a copper price meltdown as fears of a recession , coupled with concerns about the efficacy of LME online trading, loom large. Others believe the latest coronavirus stimulus in the U.S. could spur consumption and reverse the fortunes for copper stocks.
It might, however, be too early to get excited about copper stocks.
This is the first time that the LME will go fully digital, a move it had to make after a trader on the floor tested positive for coronavirus. During World War II, the full exchange was shut down for several years in the absence of an electronic trading alternative. The LME uses the traditional open-outcry trading floor, or The Ring, where traders sit in a circle and shout out buy and sell orders for metals to set global benchmark prices for base metals like copper, aluminum, lead, and zinc.
Copper is an essential metal , the prices of which are tracked closely to gauge the health of the global economy given the metal's versatility: It's used in almost everything -- infrastructure, construction, power transmission, electronics, and automotive. More recently, copper's integral usage in electric vehicles has spurred global investments worth billions of dollars in the red metal in recent years.
Copper stocks are looking ahead at tough times. Image source: Getty Images.
Perceptions have turned around swiftly, though: Until late last year, industry experts anticipated a strong 2020 for copper miners on hopes of an easing trade war and recovery in demand from China. China alone accounts for more than 50% of global copper demand. Some even predicted a copper deficit for 2020. Views have now reversed to a potential surplus that could run into a million metric tons.
With the coronavirus pandemic bringing much of the global manufacturing sector, especially key copper-consuming industries like automotive, to a grinding halt, a demand-and-supply imbalance in the copper market is inevitable. I'd consider any recovery in copper prices now a dead-cat bounce. Although coronavirus lockdowns have curtailed copper production, miners will require a real pickup in demand to resume full production and, more importantly, invest capital on developing and new projects. It's anyone's guess when that'll happen.
The world's largest copper mining company, Codelco, based in Chile, recently said the precipitous drop in copper prices could put some of its key developing projects "at risk." Chile is the world's top copper-producing country.
Closer home, here are the latest COVID-19 updates from some of the key copper producers, including:
