Copper heads into the second half of the year rising as the August 2020 Copper futures (HGQ20) shows a strong upward trend in prices, with the August contract up 24% since its April 1 close of 2.185. However, a second coronavirus wave could stall the run, Kevin Cassidy from Charles Schwab informs.
“With parts of the globe re-emerging from various degrees of lockdowns, copper inventories have been steadily declining the past few weeks.  While these are positive developments, the lingering fear of a second wave of the virus and the potential of lockdowns returning may cause a slowdown in both the mining and manufacturing of copper, which may lead to an increase of price volatility in the coming weeks.”
“Copper is currently trading above all of the major moving averages and is currently testing short-term resistance in the 2.71-2.72 range. If the market is able to press through near-term resistance levels, we see longer-term resistance around the 2.80 level which was last seen in late January. Short-term support is found around 2.60 with longer-term support found near the May lows of 2.30.”
“The 14-day RSI has recently moved into overbought territory after having remained above 60 for the entirety of June. While this shows the recent strength of prices during the second quarter, any disruptions to emerging demand may lead to renewed price weakness.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
