Copper hits six months high, Industrial demand spur bullish run
Copper futures on the LME gained about 0.8% at $5,822 per ton in official trading, after touching its highest level since Jan.
Copper prices gained for a fifth straight trading session to its highest since January on Wednesday, supported by global industrial demand for copper metal
Copper futures on the London Metal Exchange (LME) gained about 0.8% at $5,822 per ton in official trading, after touching its highest level since Jan. 24 at $5,862.50.
What you should know about copper? Copper is a malleable metal, a good conductor of electricity, used in making electrical wires.
Copper is also used in the construction sector and the mining industries, taking a technical view, copper broke through the 100- and 200-day moving averages, thereby giving metal traders the green light to increase their purchases in copper contracts.
“Copper is being carried higher by an improved fundamental outlook but also by an improved technical picture,” Saxo Bank analyst, Ole Hansen told Reuters
“The next area of resistance for LME copper lies at $6,050,” Hansen added.
READ MORE: Brent crude closes at $41, hitting a three-month high
The bullish momentum building on copper future shows a positive signal that the worse is over since the COVID-19 pandemic onslaught began early in the year.
“Net positioning on LME copper is on the verge of turning long, with the net short position shrinking from over 40,000 contracts in February to just 895 contracts as of early June,” said BMO analyst, Timothy Wood-Dow.
“Any aggressive buying here would have a positive effect on prices.” Timothy Wood-Dow added.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
Your email address will not be published.
Both International benchmarks for crude gained more than 2% yesterday.
Crude oil prices plummeted on Friday morning as the resurgence of COVID-19 picked up globally, especially in the world’s largest economy and consumer of crude oil (United States), dampened the optimism for strong demand in energy goods.
Brent crude futures lost 0.70% to trade at $42.84 a barrel at 4.30 am Nigerian local time, and the West Texas Intermediate also dropped 0.8%, to trade at $40.31 a barrel.
Quick fact: Both International benchmarks for crude oil gained more than 2% yesterday, triggered by positive macros coming from the U.S Job report and falling U.S. crude inventories. For the week, Brent crude is up 4.3% and WTI is up 5.6%.
Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp, in a note to Nairametrics, explained in detail the lingering concerns about the world’s largest consumer of crude oil. He said:
“The demand concerns continue to linger amid a rise in gasoline stockpiles as the number of confirmed coronavirus cases in the US climbed to an all-time high of more than 50,000 on Thursday.
“And as significantly, the infection curve rose in 40 out of 50 states in a reversal that has mostly spared only the Northeast. Indeed, faltering re-opening of US States as Covid-19 cases rise remains the primary thorn in the oil bulls’ side.
READ MORE: Nigeria’s external reserve drop by $261 million in 15 days, oil firms to sell forex to CBN
“But worrisome for oil prices are the densely populated southern US states that have been ravaged by the virus and are among the US’s most weighty consumers of gasoline.
“With the latest state government health advisory imploring Sun Belt citizens to restrict movements coupled with the re-imposition of localised lockdowns, there is a detectible level of uncertainty in the oil market heading into what is traditionally one of the busiest driving weekend of the year, the July 4th celebration weekend.”
However, some oil traders and investors remain optimistic that the price of crude will maintain its bullish momentum in the midterm, as long as certain parameters are kept in place.
“The market has become increasingly confident that easing restrictions on travel and business would boost demand for crude oil, but the pandemic’s progress threatens to derail this recovery,” ANZ Research said in a note.
“The recovery in gasoline demand will plateau until the U.S. economy improves,” it concluded.
