SINGAPORE, June 24 - Copper prices rose on Wednesday as increasing cases of the novel coronavirus in South America added to rising supply risks of...
FINDING a breezy summer dress to throw on should be easy, right? But while the shops and online stores are filled with hordes of frocks,...
Staff at quarantine hotels in Melbourne fuelled coronavirus outbreaks across the city by breaking strict health and safety protocols, DNA tracing has proved. Since March 29,...
By Panu Wongcha-um and Panarat Thepgumpanat BANGKOK, June 24 - Political activists from several groups across Thailand staged peaceful protests around the country on Wednesday...
VICTORIA Beckham today revealed that she was getting excited for her and David's 21st wedding anniversary by trying on outfits. The fashion designer, 46, also...
By Brinkwire on July 4, 2020
SINGAPORE, June 24 – Copper prices rose on Wednesday as increasing cases of the novel coronavirus in South America added to rising supply risks of the red metal in its biggest producing region.
Three-month copper on the London Metal Exchange (LME) rose 0.2% to $5,919 a tonne by 0211 GMT, while the most-traded copper contract on the Shanghai Futures Exchange (ShFE) advanced 0.5% to 47,870 yuan ($6,777.00) a tonne.
Miner BHP Group Ltd announced stricter health protocols after virus cases at the world’s largest copper mine Escondida reached 150, while the Chilean government imposed lockdowns for the mines-heavy Antofagasta region from Tuesday.
Earlier this week, Chilean state miner Codelco announced stricter safety measures and suspended some construction projects after two workers died from COVID-19.
Better-than-expected European Purchasing Managers’ Indexes and improving U.S. housing and business activity data also boosted sentiment.
But gains were capped on fears or a second wave after cases surged in the United States and South America.
* OTHER PRICES: LME zinc rose 0.3% to $2,045.50 a tonne and lead advanced 0.5% to $1,755 a tonne. In Shanghai, aluminium fell 0.4% to 13,610 yuan a tonne and zinc dropped 1% to 16,750 yuan a tonne.
* For the top stories in metals and other news, click or
* Asian stocks were expected to come under pressure, as a spike in new coronavirus infections weighed on sentiment, although U.S. assurances the China trade deal was intact and upbeat economic data provided some reasons for optimism.
($1 = 7.0636 yuan) (Reporting by Mai Nguyen; Additional reporting by Tom Daly in Beijing; Editing by Krishna Chandra Eluri)
