VANCOUVER, British Columbia, March  31, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Ero Copper Corp. (TSX: ERO) (“Ero” or the “Company”) wishes to provide an update on the current status of its operations in Brazil and an overview of the response measures undertaken by the Company and its subsidiaries in response to COVID-19. The Company has not experienced any disruption to its operations, supply chains or sales channels as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. To date, there are no known cases of COVID-19 at any of the Company’s operations, neighboring communities, or at its corporate offices in São Paulo and Vancouver.
Despite the recent decline in copper prices, the Company remains well positioned and fully funded to continue to execute its strategy. Highlighting this:
Operations have operated at planned production rates and below-budget costs during the first quarter, aided by the depreciation of the Brazilian Real (“BRL”) during the period;
As at December 31, 2019, the Company had US$22.9 million in cash and approximately US$30 million in available credit lines. These lines were fully drawn at the end of the first quarter of 2020, bolstering cash on hand as a precautionary measure; and,
The Company is currently maintaining full-year production, capital and operating cost guidance for 2020; however, the situation related to the COVID-19 pandemic remains dynamic and the Company will provide further updates if required.
Additionally, as part of its ongoing corporate strategy and unrelated to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has amended its existing US$150 million credit Facilities (as further defined below). Benefits of the amendment include the reduction in the Company’s overall cost of borrowing and deferral of scheduled principal payments for two years, now commencing March 2022.
Commenting on the corporate update, David Strang, President and CEO, stated, “We, as an industry, are operating in unprecedented and challenging times. While the Company remains well positioned and fully funded at the prevailing copper price and foreign exchange rate, we recognize the continued uncertainty with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic and have several contingency plans in place to continue to manage our business under a variety of scenarios.
We have taken extraordinary measures to mitigate the possible impacts of COVID-19 on our workforce, the Company and our operations. Some of the measures that have been implemented since late February include:
eliminated all non-essential travel to and from our mining operations;
weekly engagement with all suppliers and active stockpiling of key consumables to protect against any supply chain disruptions;
reduced human interaction throughout the organization as much as possible by closing administrative offices and moving to a work-from-home format, increasing social distancing by limiting the number of employees travelling on provided buses between our mining communities and our mines, limiting the number of employees in the cafeteria at any given time, cancelling all group meetings, eliminating line-out meetings and encouraging work-from-home and video/telephone conferencing where feasible;
established COVID-19 committees with senior leadership and local health administrators for the regions in which we operate;
ordered 3,000 COVID-19 testing kits for our operations and will be donating a portion of these test kits, as well as other personal protective equipment, to our local municipalities to facilitate rapid testing throughout our communities if required; and,
implemented wellness education, health screenings and self-isolation protocols along with enhanced sanitization throughout our operations.
Our priority continues to be focused on the health and well being of our employees, their families living in Pilar and Nova Xavantina, contractors and local communities. This is a dynamic situation and we continue to monitor and adapt our mitigation measures as the situation develops.
The successful amendment of our existing credit facilities concludes a process that commenced in 2019 as part of our ongoing corporate strategy. The extension of maturity dates and decreased borrowing costs of the Company reflect the underlying strength of our business and provides increased flexibility to continue to invest in growing our operations, maximizing the near-term return on invested capital for our shareholders and stakeholders alike.”
The Company has amended its existing US$80 million senior secured amortizing non-revolving credit facility (the “Term Facility”) and its US$70 million senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) (collectively the “Facilities”) previously entered into with The Bank of Nova Scotia (“Scotiabank”) and Bank of Montreal (“BMO”). Benefits of the amendment include a 25 to 50 basis point reduction in the Company’s cost of borrowing, depending on consolidated leverage ratio, and the deferral of scheduled principal payments for two years, now commencing March 2022.
The Term Facility (now US$75 million) features a 4-year term with principal payments beginning two years after closing (March 31, 2022) and with equal quarterly installments thereafter, while the Revolving Credit Facility (now US$75 million) is payable in a bullet at maturity, four years from closing (March 31, 2024). The Facilities will bear interest on a sliding scale at a rate of LIBOR plus 2.50% to 4.25% depending on the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio at the time. Commitment fees for any undrawn portion of the Revolving Credit Facility will also be on a sliding scale between 0.63% to 1.06%.
The Facilities include standard and customary terms and conditions with respect to fees, representations, warranties, and financial covenants that remain unchanged from prior amendments. Scotiabank is Joint Lead Arranger, Sole Bookrunner and Administrative Agent and BMO is Joint Lead Arranger and Syndication Agent.
Ero, headquartered in Vancouver, B.C., is focused on copper production growth from the Vale do Curaçá Property, located in Bahia, Brazil. The Company’s primary asset is a 99.6% interest in the Brazilian copper mining company, Mineração Caraíba S.A. (“MCSA”), 100% owner of the Vale do Curaçá Property with over 40 years of operating history in the region. The Company currently mines copper ore from the Pilar and Vermelhos underground mines. In addition to the Vale do Curaçá Property, MCSA owns 100% of the Boa Esperanҫa development project, an IOCG-type copper project located in Pará, Brazil and the Company, directly and indirectly, owns 97.6% of the NX Gold Mine, an operating gold and silver mine located in Mato Grosso, Brazil. Additional information on the Company and its operations, including technical reports on the Vale do Curaçá, Boa Esperanҫa and NX Gold properties, can be found on the Company’s website ( www.erocopper.com ) and on SEDAR ( www.sedar.com ).
