1 Net earnings (loss) attributable to shareholders of the Company has been adjusted to exclude items which are not reflective of underlying performance to arrive at comparative earnings (loss). Comparative earnings (loss), comparative earnings (loss) per share, comparative EBITDA and cash flows per share are not measures recognized under IFRS and do not have a standardized meaning prescribed by IFRS. The Company has disclosed these measures to assist with the understanding of results and to provide further financial information about the results to investors. Refer to the “Regulatory Disclosures” section in the MD&A for the quarter ended March 31, 2020 for further information.
2 Production is presented on a copper contained basis and is presented prior to processing through the Kansanshi smelter.
3AISC, C1 and C3 costs per pound are not recognized under IFRS. Refer to the “Regulatory Disclosures” section in the MD&A for the quarter ended March 31, 2020 for further information. C1, C3 and AISC costs exclude third-party concentrate purchased at Kansanshi.
4 Copper sales exclude the sale of copper anode produced from third-party concentrate purchased at Kansanshi. Sales of copper anode attributable to third-party concentrate purchases were nil for the three months ended March 31, 2020 (1,182 tonnes for the three months ended March 31, 2019).
5Excludes refinery-backed gold credits purchased and delivered under precious metal streaming arrangement.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic. The virus has brought unprecedented challenges to communities, industries and the global economy. First Quantum’s priority is the health and safety of its employees and communities. Efforts by countries to control and mitigate the spread of the virus include travel restrictions, temporary border restrictions, and closure of non-essential business operations. The Company is managing the necessary country-by-country restrictions in order to assist in the protection of those most vulnerable. At its mine sites, preparations are in place for control, isolation and quarantine as necessary.
On April 6, 2020, Ministry of Health of the Republic of Panama (“MINSA”) ordered the temporary suspension of labour activities at the Cobre Panama operation, as a sanitary control measure due to COVID-19. The Company decided to place the Cobre Panama operation onto preservation and safe maintenance from April 7, 2020 until MINSA are satisfied that the quarantine conditions are appropriate. The heightened quarantine conditions require that mining and processing operations be halted. The port and power plant have continued operations in order to supply essential electrical power into the Panama national grid, and to sustain the preservation and safe maintenance activities. Temporary costs are estimated at between $4 and $6 million per week assuming the suspension of labour contracts and other variable and fixed costs.
In light of the preservation and safe maintenance period, production guidance for Cobre Panama for 2020 has been reduced to 210,000 to 235,000 kt of copper and 90,000 to 100,000 koz of gold. Production guidance for production at all other operations remains unchanged from previously disclosed.
Cobre Panama updated copper and gold guidance range is dependent upon receiving approval from MINSA to end the preservation and safe maintenance shutdown and to commence the restart of operations before or by the end of May. Normal production levels would be expected to return in late June 2020 to early July 2020. A delay to this timeline would have an impact on the guidance range.
Mining operations at Las Cruces were shut down on March 30, 2020 following an order by the Spanish government, which designated mining as a non-essential operation. The plant continued to process the surface ore stockpile, sufficient for an expected two months of production at current levels. Las Cruces resumed operations on April 13, 2020, following the end of the government imposed shutdown on non-essential services on April 9, 2020. Production guidance for Las Cruces is unchanged.
With the closure of the South African and Zimbabwean borders, the export of the Company’s Zambian production is currently being managed through alternate routes.  To date, there has not been any significant disruption to sales, supply chains and product shipments at the Company’s other operations, however, its exploration programs have been affected by international and local travel restrictions associated with COVID-19.
With the slowdown of global economic activity, commodity prices have weakened. The copper LME price fell to a low of $2.08 per lb in late March before recovering somewhat in April to $2.32 per lb on supply disruptions and expectations of stronger demand. The Company’s copper hedge program, which utilizes both unmargined copper forward sales and unmargined zero cost collar sales contracts, mitigates some of the price volatility in the near term. The Company also has nickel hedges in place for a large proportion of its Ravensthorpe forecast 2020 production at prices significantly above current LME prices. Gold market prices have increased from $1,520/oz at the end of 2019 to $1,720/oz during April 2020.
Under the assumption of an extended period of health protocols, travel restrictions and depressed commodity prices, the Company’s main overall priority is the active management of all capital spending and operating costs while maintaining a high level of safety and productivity. Within this context, capital expenditure guidance for 2020 has been reduced by $175 million, reflecting the deferral of some initiatives and AISC guidance for 2020 has been reduced by $0.05 per lb.
Production guidance has been reduced for copper by 75,000 tonnes to 755,000 – 805,000 tonnes and gold by 30,000 ounces to 250,000 – 270,000 ounces as a result of a reduction in production expectations at Cobre Panama following its response to COVID-19. Production guidance at all other operations remains unchanged from expectations previously disclosed. For cash costs, AISC guidance range has been reduced by $0.05 per lb and the upper end of the guidance range for C1 costs has been reduced by $0.05 per lb. Capital expenditure guidance has been reduced by $175 million.
Guidance is based on a number of assumptions and estimates as of March 31, 2020, including among other things, assumptions about metal prices and anticipated costs and expenditures. Guidance involves estimates of known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause the actual results to be materially different. (Please see the Company’s release dated January 9, 2020 and the Management Discussion and Analysis for the period ending March 31, 2019 for additional detail.)
