Gold has outperformed the FTSE 100 index by nearly 50% over the last year, hitting a seven-year high of around $1,700 per ounce. With the global economy facing recession, I can understand why people are buying gold stocks . But the actions of a top gold miner make me think that FTSE 100 shares offer better value at the moment.
Where’s the smart money going?
Barrick Gold boss Mark Bristow is one of the world’s top gold mining execs. He’s better known to UK investors as the man who founded Randgold Resources and turned it into a FTSE 100 stock.
Mr Bristow is now on the acquisition trail. However, he’s not buying gold. He’s looking for copper mines
In an article in the FT this week, Mr Bristow said that “the gold price is up and the copper price is down”. He sees opportunities to buy copper mines now and benefit from expected long-term demand growth.
Mr Bristow’s strategy reminds me of Warren Buffett’s advice that we should “be greedy when others are fearful”. Investors are greedily buying gold at the moment, while avoiding copper. To me, this suggests that it’s probably a good time to buy copper, but a bad time to buy gold.
The price of copper has fallen by about 10% so far this year, due to fears that we could be heading into a global economic downturn.
That’s a risk. But I think the long-term picture is much stronger. Copper is required in all electrical equipment. Motors and generators such as those found in electric cars and wind turbines use a lot of copper. If we’re to make the shift to renewable energy, we’re going to use a lot more copper.
I’ve been looking for FTSE 100 shares that provide good exposure to copper. There are a few to choose from, all of which I’d be happy to own. Here are my top picks.
Copper mines often produce gold as well. If you want to focus on copper while keeping some exposure to gold, then one FTSE 100 share I’d consider is Antofagasta. This £8bn family-controlled firm operates in Chile, where it produced 770,000 tonnes of copper and 289,000 ounces of gold last year.
The company’s mines enjoy fairly low costs and the group generated an operating margin of 28% last year. Although 2020 is expected to be a difficult year, analysts expect profits to recover in 2021. Debt levels are kept low and although the forecast dividend yield for 2020 is only 2%, this is expected to increase to 3.3% in 2021.
I can see some attraction in owning Antofagasta, but the firm’s lack of diversification does carry some risks.
All three of the big FTSE 100 mining stocks — BHP, Rio Tinto and Anglo American — offer some exposure to copper. But based on recent results, BHP makes more money from this industrial metal than its rivals.
In 2019, I estimate that more than 20% of BHP’s operating profit came from copper, compared to around 10% for Rio Tinto and 14% for Anglo American.
At the time of writing, BHP trades on around 10 times forecast earnings and offers a 2020/21 yield of 6.6%. I reckon this FTSE 100 share looks cheap and could be a great long-term buy.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Roland Head owns shares of BHP. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
