Generation Mining Limited (CSE:GENM) (“Gen Mining” or the “Company”) is pleased to announce the discovery of a large, high velocity seismic anomaly that extends at depth from the Sally Deposit. The anomaly continues into the Archean footwall which constitutes a previously unexplored area for platinum group elements (“PGE”) and copper mineralization. The velocity anomaly when projected to surface coincides with a reversely polarized magnetic trend which is used as an exploration tool to identify prospective lithologies.
Gen Mining staked 215 new claim blocks in August 2019 (previously announced on August 21st, 2019). 76 of the new claim blocks are situated north of the Sally Deposit and the Boyer zone. This area has multiple reversely polarized magnetic trends which are typically indicative of the Eastern Gabbro series rocks which host PGE and copper mineralization. The high density seismic target identified in the Archean footwall north of Sally is the first of these magnetic anomalies to be modeled at depth and targeted for additional exploration work.
The anomaly has a narrow neck extending down from the direction of the Sally Deposit which opens at depth into a flat lying intrusion. The depth to the top of the anomaly is approximately 850 m and the underside of the flat lying intrusion is at depth of about 1,500 m. The main body of the intrusion is 500 m wide, 400 m thick and almost 2,000 m in length.
Mafic and ultramafic lithologies which host PGE-Cu mineralization on the Marathon Property are dense relative to the Archean footwall and are resolved by seismic velocity. Seismic wave velocities are controlled by the density of the medium it passes through. Consequently, high seismic velocities are a proxy for dense and, in this instance, PGE-Cu prospective lithologies.
The anomaly has a similar shape, strike length and direction to that of pyroxenites, a type of dense ultramafic lithology, mapped at surface. These pyroxenites in turn host mineralized apatitic pyroxenites which have returned assay results from three fist sized surface grab samples (previously announced on July 25th, 2019) and a near surface 0.25 m interval of massive sulphide from a drillhole (at a depth of 12.35 m) completed in 2017 (SL-17-58). Assay results from the aforementioned surface grab samples and shallow drill hole core are tabulated immediately below.
