The Hightower Report Wednesday July 01, 2020 13:18
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
OUTSIDE MARKET DEVELOPMENTS: Global equity markets  overnight showed divergent action, with Russian and Australian markets higher  and the rest of the world’s markets trading more than 1.5% lower. Economic  developments included a decision by the Royal Bank of New Zealand to hold rates  steady, a softer than expected Japanese Coincident Index for April,  better-than-expected Japanese Leading Economic Index results for April and a  disappointing French business climate in manufacturing reading for June. The  markets were also presented with a better than expected German IFO business  climate and expectations readings for June and a ZEW survey of Swiss  expectations for the month of June that jumped to 48.7 from 31.3 previously.  The North American session will start out with a weekly reading on mortgage  applications, followed by the April FHFA home price index, which is forecast to  have a modest uptick from March's 0.1% reading. Chicago Fed President Evans and  St. Louis Fed President Bullard will speak during afternoon US trading hours.
The  gold market has followed through with an upside breakout and is approaching  levels not seen for eight years. The market seems to be catching inflows from a  number of different themes this morning, with weakness in equities providing  fresh buying interest. Obviously the emerging number-one story for gold is the  escalation of infections in 12 different US states, with some markets  attempting to factor in a growing potential for a lockdown in the troubled areas.  Gold prices in India also continued to rise overnight, despite suggestions that  demand was soft because of the troubled economy and weak currency. However,  gold ETFs added 114,527 ounces to their holdings yesterday, bringing net  purchases on the year up to 19.2 million ounces. Seeing the US began to discuss  details on yet another $1 trillion stimulus package adds to the allure of hard  assets like gold, especially after one member of Congress admitted that there  has been some monetization of US debt. The President's Chief Economic Advisor  indicated that the Administration would be on board with direct checks to  citizens and/or bonus payments for those who return to work. However, it was  also projected that the next stimulus package might not be finished until  August! Yet another driving force for the bull camp is the strengthening chart  pattern in gold, with prices this morning forging a definitive upside breakout  that has given the metal front-page status in the financial markets. Using  classic technical measuring tools from the 3-month consolidation zone  establishes a target of $1,900 if the 2020 highs are taken out on a closing  basis. Silver charts are decidedly less impressive than gold, with the new high  for the move overnight leaving prices well below the highs seen only three  weeks ago and them significantly below this year's highs. Furthermore, silver  ETFs liquidated 523,015 ounces of holdings yesterday, lowering the net  purchases this year to 253.7 million ounces. While we expect silver to be dragged  higher by gold, it is clear that economic anxiety is keeping industrial silver  demand hopes suspect.
While  September palladium spent the majority of Tuesday in the upper quadrant of the  Monday range and it has broken out to the upside this morning, the fundamentals  are mixed to mostly negative. China's version of their quarterly Beige Book  showed their economy contracted, and the US infection situation is likely to  result in lockdown talk very soon. Yet another potential undermining force for palladium  came from Boston Fed President Rosengren's comments regarding his concern about  the recovery because of "unsafe re-openings." While not a major  impact on palladium, Chinese markets will enter the Dragon Boat Festival and  that could limit positive demand news flow from Asia in the coming sessions.  Downtrend channel resistance in September palladium today squeezes down on top  of yesterday's trade at $1,969.80, and a failure to hold above $1,876.50 could  target a swift move down to $1,740. While the platinum market has displayed  better chart action than platinum over the past three trading sessions, it  remains within a 40 day downtrend pattern and doesn't appear to be getting much  lift from positive gold action or demand-oriented headlines. However, given the  convergence of prices over the past 40 days, traders might utilize a breakout  system with a buy signal generated from a trade above $850 and a sell signal  with a trade below $821.
MARKET  IDEAS: It is extremely difficult to take control away from the bull camp  in the gold market, as the trade appears to be capable of spinning bearish  headlines to suit the bullish argument. Obviously bullish chart action, recent  declines in the dollar, talk of another large US stimulus package, and  expanding uncertainty from US infection counts offer a number of bullish  themes. In short, it appears that gold is poised for a consistent trade above  $1,800 with measuring tools from the April through June consolidation pattern  targeting a follow-through rally to $1,900. Silver seems to be lacking the  upside sensitivity that gold is displaying, and we suspect that fear of  infections getting out of control again have thickened overhead resistance at  $18.19 with additional resistance seen at a quasi-double high up at $18.40.
The copper market is  showing some corrective action this morning, as the global economic outlook is  being called into question. However both LME and Shanghai copper stocks  (Shanghai stocks were released early due to the Dragon Boat Festival) both  notched notable declines overnight, and therefore supply news this morning is  offsetting a portion of the negative demand news. It should also be noted that  Shanghai Exchange stocks have declined for six straight weeks, with this week's  decline being 9.1%! In the last 120 trading sessions, LME copper stocks have  seen only 16 daily inflows against 104 daily outflows. While some German  economic readings overnight provided some positive views from the economic  front, we suspect non-Chinese demand will be questioned over the coming  sessions. The latest on the US/China trade talk front pointed to better  relations on Tuesday, but the copper trade will continue to watch that  situation closely as the talks have not tracked in a straight line. The trade  should be cushioned by yesterday's sweep of positive global PMI data, favorable  US housing figures, and talk of another $1 trillion US stimulus package.
MARKET IDEAS: While it is difficult to take control away from the  bull camp (with the past six trading sessions presenting uniformly higher highs  and higher lows), the economic outlook this morning has deteriorated, and a  measure of long profit taking is expected. But unless US equities dive sharply  (by more than 2%), copper might be able to respect close-in support at $2.5950.  Uptrend channel support today in July copper is seen down at $2.5850.
