How Much Are Carube Copper Corp. (CVE:CUC) Insiders Spending On Buying Shares?
We often see insiders buying up shares in companies that perform well over the long term. On the other hand, we'd be remiss not to mention that insider sales have been known to precede tough periods for a business. So before you buy or sell Carube Copper Corp. ( CVE:CUC ), you may well want to know whether insiders have been buying or selling.
Most investors know that it is quite permissible for company leaders, such as directors of the board, to buy and sell stock in the company. However, such insiders must disclose their trading activities, and not trade on inside information.
We would never suggest that investors should base their decisions solely on what the directors of a company have been doing. But it is perfectly logical to keep tabs on what insiders are doing. For example, a Columbia University study found that 'insiders are more likely to engage in open market purchases of their own company’s stock when the firm is about to reveal new agreements with customers and suppliers'.
Over the last year, we can see that the biggest insider sale was by the Executive Chairman, Antony Manini, for CA$242k worth of shares, at about CA$0.035 per share. That means that even when the share price was below the current price of CA$0.055, an insider wanted to cash in some shares. As a general rule we consider it to be discouraging when insiders are selling below the current price, because it suggests they were happy with a lower valuation. However, while insider selling is sometimes discouraging, it's only a weak signal. We note that the biggest single sale was 58% of Antony Manini's holding. Antony Manini was the only individual insider to sell over the last year. Notably Antony Manini was also the biggest buyer, having purchased CA$385k worth of shares.
Over the last year, we can see that insiders have bought 7.58m shares worth CA$385k. But they sold 6910385 shares for CA$242k. In total, Carube Copper insiders bought more than they sold over the last year. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
There are plenty of other companies that have insiders buying up shares. You probably do not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
Have Carube Copper Insiders Traded Recently?
We've only seen a tiny insider purchase valued at CA$250, in the last three months. Looking at the net result, we don't think these recent trades shed much light on how insiders, as a group, are feeling about the company's prospects.
Does Carube Copper Boast High Insider Ownership?
For a common shareholder, it is worth checking how many shares are held by company insiders. I reckon it's a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. Our data indicates that Carube Copper insiders own about CA$1.4m worth of shares (which is 7.7% of the company). We do generally prefer see higher levels of insider ownership.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Carube Copper Insiders?
Insider purchases may have been minimal, in the last three months, but there was no selling at all. Overall the buying isn't worth writing home about. On a brighter note, the transactions over the last year are encouraging. While we have no worries about the insider transactions, we'd be more comfortable if they owned more Carube Copper stock. In addition to knowing about insider transactions going on, it's beneficial to identify the risks facing Carube Copper. Case in point: We've spotted 4 warning signs for Carube Copper you should be aware of, and 1 of these shouldn't be ignored.
If you would prefer to check out another company -- one with potentially superior financials -- then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
