How Does Hindustan Copper’s (NSE:HINDCOPPER) P/E Compare To Its Industry, After Its Big Share Price Gain?
Simply Wall St November 4, 2019
It’s really great to see that even after a strong run, Hindustan Copper ( NSE:HINDCOPPER ) shares have been powering on, with a gain of 33% in the last thirty days. But shareholders may not all be feeling jubilant, since the share price is still down 15% in the last year.
Assuming no other changes, a sharply higher share price makes a stock less attractive to potential buyers. In the long term, share prices tend to follow earnings per share, but in the short term prices bounce around in response to short term factors (which are not always obvious). So some would prefer to hold off buying when there is a lot of optimism towards a stock. Perhaps the simplest way to get a read on investors’ expectations of a business is to look at its Price to Earnings Ratio (PE Ratio). Investors have optimistic expectations of companies with higher P/E ratios, compared to companies with lower P/E ratios.
How Does Hindustan Copper’s P/E Ratio Compare To Its Peers?
We can tell from its P/E ratio of 30.68 that there is some investor optimism about Hindustan Copper. You can see in the image below that the average P/E (8.5) for companies in the metals and mining industry is a lot lower than Hindustan Copper’s P/E.
NSEI:HINDCOPPER Price Estimation Relative to Market, November 4th 2019
That means that the market expects Hindustan Copper will outperform other companies in its industry.
Earnings growth rates have a big influence on P/E ratios. When earnings grow, the ‘E’ increases, over time. And in that case, the P/E ratio itself will drop rather quickly. A lower P/E should indicate the stock is cheap relative to others — and that may attract buyers.
Notably, Hindustan Copper grew EPS by a whopping 25% in the last year. And it has improved its earnings per share by 85% per year over the last three years. So we’d generally expect it to have a relatively high P/E ratio. But earnings per share are down 14% per year over the last five years. The market might expect further growth, but it isn’t guaranteed. So further research is always essential. I often monitor director buying and selling .
The ‘Price’ in P/E reflects the market capitalization of the company. That means it doesn’t take debt or cash into account. In theory, a company can lower its future P/E ratio by using cash or debt to invest in growth.
Such spending might be good or bad, overall, but the key point here is that you need to look at debt to understand the P/E ratio in context.
So What Does Hindustan Copper’s Balance Sheet Tell Us?
Hindustan Copper’s net debt equates to 26% of its market capitalization. While that’s enough to warrant consideration, it doesn’t really concern us.
Hindustan Copper’s P/E is 30.7 which is above average (13.4) in its market. While the company does use modest debt, its recent earnings growth is very good. So on this analysis it seems reasonable that its P/E ratio is above average. What is very clear is that the market has become significantly more optimistic about Hindustan Copper over the last month, with the P/E ratio rising from 23.1 back then to 30.7 today. For those who prefer to invest with the flow of momentum, that might mean it’s time to put the stock on a watchlist, or research it. But the contrarian may see it as a missed opportunity.
Investors have an opportunity when market expectations about a stock are wrong. As value investor Benjamin Graham famously said, ‘In the short run, the market is a voting machine but in the long run, it is a weighing machine. Although we don’t have analyst forecasts you might want to assess this data-rich visualization of earnings, revenue and cash flow.
You might be able to find a better buy than Hindustan Copper. If you want a selection of possible winners, check out this free list of interesting companies that trade on a P/E below 20 (but have proven they can grow earnings).
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
