Home » Features & market analysis » Is February the Best Month to Buy Copper?
Is February the Best Month to Buy Copper?
The price of copper is at a low point just now, due to economic sluggishness
Why Is Copper a Valuable Metal?
versatile metal that is used for many different things. It is a soft and malleable
it is used to improve the infrastructure of cities. Therefore, the value of
copper is seen as being a good indicator of economic growth. As a country develops
it will typically increase its demand for copper as more projects get underway.
highly useful but the price of this commodity isn’t particularly high. This is
because it isn’t especially scarce. In fact, it is estimated by some sources
that the planet will never run out of copper. It is recyclable and completely
sustainable. So even if there is no more to be mined at some point, we can
still get hold of if from elsewhere.
in the mines where it is obtained. These issues lead to volatility in the
2019 – but they often suffer from strikes that halt production.
When Should You Invest in Copper?
Buying copper is generally considered to be a good investment when you think that the global economy on the way up. The fact that it is used in so many industries means that an economic boom almost certainly leads to copper becoming more sought-after and more valuable.
way of diversifying a portfolio too. This is a commodity that is related to economic
growth but that doesn’t have a direct link to many other types of investment.
writing, copper is priced at about $2.60. This is low when compared to
to the economic slowdown and, latterly, the coronavirus.
this metal reached over $4 .50 in 2010, which was its highest-ever price and
followed on from a price crash. While it is fairly volatile, the price has
always remained between $2 and $4 for about the last decade.
The following factors make us think that copper’s value could be due to rise.
This final point is very important. Investors tend to turn gold in times of economic uncertainty. Meanwhile, copper falls when growth is slow. So, the current ratio shows that we have gone through some troubled times.
If you believe that the global economy outlook is positive then copper is a smart investment. In that case, right now is a good moment to buy this commodity.
