Is Madhav Copper’s (NSE:MCL) 237% Share Price Increase Well Justified?
Simply Wall St November 19, 2019
The most you can lose on any stock (assuming you don’t use leverage) is 100% of your money. But when you pick a company that is really flourishing, you can make more than 100%. Take, for example Madhav Copper Limited ( NSE:MCL ). Its share price is already up an impressive 237% in the last twelve months. It’s also up 16% in about a month. We’ll need to follow Madhav Copper for a while to get a better sense of its share price trend, since it hasn’t been listed for particularly long.
While the efficient markets hypothesis continues to be taught by some, it has been proven that markets are over-reactive dynamic systems, and investors are not always rational. One imperfect but simple way to consider how the market perception of a company has shifted is to compare the change in the earnings per share (EPS) with the share price movement.
Madhav Copper was able to grow EPS by 54% in the last twelve months. The share price gain of 237% certainly outpaced the EPS growth. This indicates that the market is now more optimistic about the stock. This favorable sentiment is reflected in its (fairly optimistic) P/E ratio of 81.54.
You can see below how EPS has changed over time.
NSEI:MCL Past and Future Earnings, November 19th 2019
It’s probably worth noting that the CEO is paid less than the median at similar sized companies. It’s always worth keeping an eye on CEO pay, but a more important question is whether the company will grow earnings throughout the years. Dive deeper into the earnings by checking this interactive graph of Madhav Copper’s earnings, revenue and cash flow .
Madhav Copper boasts a total shareholder return of 237% for the last year. The more recent returns haven’t been as impressive as the longer term returns, coming in at just 2.6%. It seems likely the market is waiting on fundamental developments with the business before pushing the share price higher (or lower). Is Madhav Copper cheap compared to other companies? These 3 valuation measures might help you decide.
Of course Madhav Copper may not be the best stock to buy. So you may wish to see this free collection of growth stocks.
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on IN exchanges.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
