Assumption of a V-shaped recovery may get scaled back: Amandeep Chopra
What a week it has been! Every day we thought we would probably see some stemming of the fall on Wall Street, but we continue to see further weakness. So what are you making of the situation as it is right now?
Effectively FD markets have been fairly complacent. The fall in bond yields have been really doing the heavy lifting. People seem to be getting more concerned, as this virus is spreading globally now. I guess they are waiting for central banks and governments to start stepping up more aggressively. The reality is, when you see things that have been happening in China and if you see anything like that replicated globally, there will be a hit on global growth. Companies are saying they can continue, they are not issuing guidance, some of the airlines companies have pulled back guidance: “It is a problem we are in and we will get through it.” But I think you cannot under-estimate the impact in the short term.
How are you calming your clients, and if at all, would you be looking to buy in this market, and if yes, what?
The reality is, nobody knows how this is going to pan out. We can look at previous pandemics and this is obviously not a pandemic yet. We just do not know. The world is clearly a lot more interconnected than it was during the prior incidence that we have had. China is obviously a lot larger and that inter-connectiveness will obviously create an issue, if this starts to spread wider. Undoubtedly, there are risks. I come back to the prior point: we have been in a very long bull market and it was not that we were touching all-time highs. So markets were crying for a bit of a selloff.
Bond prices have moved. There has been a massive shift in bond prices in the US, which have been supportive of equities. But how much lower can the bond prices go. I think a lot of factors point to continuing risks in the short term, until we get more clarity about this disease getting controlled or how much more it is going to spread.
For the time being, I would say if you are in the market, just stay in the market. Otherwise, we will have fantastic buying opportunity if markets head a bit lower. It comes back to basics. If you got stocks that you like, or you have been looking out for some time, when you come back to valuation comfort points, you are not going to find the bottom. But if you find the stock where you think you are getting a good risk-reward, you should start positioning accordingly.
Would you chance your arm in metals stocks? Would you chance your arm in anything that has got to do with China, because that is where the Amazon or, in Indian terminology, the Big Bazaar sale is?
Absolutely. I think it comes back you. I have been looking at copper stocks for last few weeks. Copper as a material is one that is pretty much in all scenarios. In the electric vehicles space, there will be increased usage. Since there are select areas which are still very interesting. Clearly the stocks have come down substantially. I think some of these areas will began to flash real value, whether the bottom is in place or not is anybody’s guess. But the point is, once you see value, you potentially could start looking at stuff.
All of us are saying it will go once winters go away, because coronavirus has got a connection with cold wet air. Assuming things normalise in a month from now or two months from now, when do you think the markets will start anticipating a recovery and start recovering?
Yes, I think there is a lot of hope built in and this virus will recede when the weather warms up. Clearly, central bank and government actions are going to be critical and that will probably indicate a potential turnaround from a market perspective. But in the short term, volatility will reign. Every day news flow will cause the markets to whipsaw and this could last a little bit longer. But my view would certainly be that this will be a buying opportunity. It is just a matter of when, not if.
