Stockhead readers just can’t get enough of gold at the moment – hardly surprising given the precious metal smashed through the $US1800/oz mark this week. That’s over $2600/oz in Aussie dollars!
In this week’s Money Talks, we hear from Roger Breuer, investment analyst at Arlington Group Asset Management.
He’s a “big believer that gold will stay higher for longer”. And just like Le Page, it’s the WA goldies that are on his radar.
From the many hundreds of listed small cap explorers, just a handful will become long-term success stories. But pick the right one as an investor and the gains can be enormous.
In the latest Zero to Hero feature, Reuben Adams runs us through the success of West African Resources (ASX:WAF) .
In June 2010, 30-something geologist Richard Hyde and his young team listed greenfields explorer West African Resources, raising $6.5m in an IPO.
In 2020, this freshly minted +200,000oz per annum gold miner has a market cap of +$800m and growing.
This week, Peter Strachan discusses the booming North Pilbara Gold Belt with economic geologist Nigel Maund.
Maund has over four decades of experience in the mining sector and boasts an impressive CV that covers a wide range of commodities and deposit types as well as several geographic and political regimes.
While retail spending figures slumped in April, some ASX small caps fared better than others because of their focus and location.
Overall the retail sector made a modest 3 per cent gain but there is a big divergence between the winners and the losers.
The winners are the ones that focus on high-demand markets that have not been decimated by COVID-19.
Investors appear to be rotating back into defensive healthcare stocks on rising fears of a second wave of COVID-19 infections, and as everything else looks expensive.
The last time investors flew to health stocks, much of the rest of the market was in trouble and large numbers of life sciences companies were also looking shaky, such as any that relied on elective surgery or conducting blood tests, because patients were too scared to have their regular tests done.
But this time pathology stocks are looking much more positive.
This week the gold price smashed through the $US1,800 barrier, its highest finish since 2011, thanks to the ongoing uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
So Bevis Yeo decided to do a quick poll of a bunch of analysts to see where they reckon gold can get to by the end of the year.
10. A dismal decade: We need more copper discoveries, right now
Of the 224 significant copper deposits discovered globally over the past 30 years, only 16 have been found in the past decade — and just one since 2015.
Those 16 deposits contain a paltry 8 per cent, or 81.3 million tonnes, of all copper contained in discoveries since 1990, according to S&P data.
