Having added over 1 percent to its value this session, gold is expected to hold above US$1,750 on steady increases to total global coronavirus tallies.
Similarly, Rick Rule of Sprott (TSX: SII ,NYSE:SII) pointed to quantitative easing, low interest rates and rising government debt and deficit levels as motivators for the gold price. The well-known investor also noted that precious metals are the place to be now, but that could change in the long term.
Watch the full interview with Rule above.
“I think the message to investors and speculators … is precious metals now, but get ready for — two years from now, three years from now, four years from now — a stupendous rally in industrial commodities,” Rule told INN .
At 11:35 a.m. EDT on Friday, an ounce of gold was valued at US$1,774.90.
Silver also spent the period in the green, on track for a fourth week of gains. The white metal broke the US$18 per ounce threshold on Tuesday (June 30). Rising to US$18.40, silver has now achieved pre-COVID-19 lockdown price territory.
After dipping below US$18 briefly on Thursday (July 2), silver is progressing towards a month of steady gains. An ounce of silver was trading for US$18.04 at 11:36 a.m. EDT on Friday.
Platinum also performed positively this session following a month of declines. On Wednesday, the catalyst metal climbed as high as US$822 per ounce, its highest value since May 21.
During a CPM Group webinar this week, Jeffrey Christian forecast a platinum price range of US$855 to US$875 for the remainder of the year.
Give me my free report!
“Our expectation is that the price will continue to trade in this range for awhile,” he said. “We do see scope for higher platinum prices in the future, but frankly it could be a couple of years from now before we see that.” As of Friday at 11:40 a.m. EDT, platinum was priced at US$798 an ounce.
Palladium was also in the green on Friday morning (July 3), after trending lower for most of June. Prices had been slipping since mid-May, falling as low as US$1,799 per ounce.
While platinum is projected to add to its value, CPM Group’s Rohit Savant expects palladium prices to be rangebound in the long term.
Palladium was moving for US$1,864 at 11:40 a.m. EDT on Friday.
In the base metals space, copper pulled ahead this week as industrial demand in China experienced a reinvigoration. Starting the week at US$5,957 per tonne, the red metal had added just over 2 percent to its value by the end of session.
Lower-than-expected job loss data out of the US also helped prop up prices of the industrial metal. Copper was trading for US$6,080 on Friday.
