All amounts herein are in United States Dollars unless otherwise indicated.
YERINGTON, Nev., April  03, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Nevada Copper Corp. (TSX: NCU) (“Nevada Copper” or the “Company’’), further to its press releases on March 27, 2020 and March 30, 2020, is providing an update in respect of the balance sheet strengthening package announced on March 27, 2020 (collectively, the “Refinancing Transactions”). Additional information is set out below with respect to the convertible loan facility entered into with Pala Investments Limited (“Pala”) on March 27, 2020 (the “Convertible Loan”). The Company expects conditional listing approval from the Toronto Stock Exchange (the “TSX”) in respect of the share issuances to Pala described below and to permit the conversion feature in respect of the Convertible Loan to be granted on or about April 6, 2020.
The conversion price of the Convertible Loan has now been fixed at C$0.1575 (the “Conversion Price”). Pala may, at any time, and from time to time, convert all or a portion of the Convertible Loan, including any accrued interest thereon, into common shares of the Company (“Common Shares”) at the Conversion Price. As noted in the prior press releases, the Convertible Loan bears interest at the rate of 14% per annum, quarterly in arrears. The Company has the option to pay such interest in cash if permitted by the Company’s senior credit facilities. In the event the Company elects not to pay such interest in cash, Pala has the option to either: (i) receive the amount of such interest payment through the issuance of Common Shares based on the market price (as such term is defined in the policies of the TSX) of the Common Shares at the time of such interest payment; or (ii) add the amount of such interest payment to the then outstanding principal amount of the Convertible Loan (which shall thereafter accrue interest at the interest rate under the Convertible Loan), in which case such interest will either be repaid on maturity of the Convertible Loan or converted into Common Shares at the Conversion Price. The Convertible Loan is also repayable subject to a make whole amount, whereby Pala will receive the balance of all remaining interest amounts to the end of the full term of the Convertible Loan, upon certain change of control events.
Prior to giving effect to the Refinancing Transactions, Pala currently owns 274,379,447 Common Shares being approximately 36.01% of the issued and outstanding Common Shares. Assuming the issuance of the 31,400,000 Common Shares in respect of fees relating to the repayment of the $30,000,000 unsecured credit facility entered into with Pala on November 29, 2019, as amended, the issuance of 7,500,000 Common Shares in respect of the fee payable in respect of the backstop agreement entered into on March 27, 2020 (the “Backstop”) among the Company, Pala and Triple Flag Mining Finance Bermuda Ltd. and the issuance of the 18,900,000 Common Shares relating to the fees payable to Pala in connection with the provision by Pala of guarantees of certain surety bonds provided to third party contractors to support the ramp-up process relating to the Pumpkin Hollow Underground Mine, the number of Common Shares that may be issued as a result of the Refinancing Transactions to Pala and in total is set out below (including the Common Shares issuable upon the due exercise of the 15,000,000 Common Share purchase warrants issued to Triple Flag Precious Metals Corp. and assuming exercise in full of the Backstop at the Common Share prices set forth below and exercise of the Convertible Loan at the Conversion Price and assuming all interest under the Convertible Loan is capitalized and converted at maturity at the Conversion Price, in each case based on the exchange rates noted below):
