The UK telecoms regulator has today opened a short consultation on their proposal to push back some key decisions regarding the retirement process for Openreach ’s ( BT ) copper lines in favour of fibre optic broadband. In short, Ofcom wants to see a bit more FTTP roll-out take place first (for experience), before they set out a final plan.
At present Openreach are already conducting a number of copper retirement trials in Mildenhall (Suffolk) and Salisbury (Wiltshire) – here , here and here . For example, in Salisbury the process for moving from copper to Fibre-to-the-Premises ( FTTP ) lines begins once 75% of premises in an exchange are able to receive “full fibre” (target for this is 24 months after roll-out starts and copper switch-off might then occur c.3 years after / on top of that).
Under this approach such a process could start with a “no move back” policy for premises connected with FTTP, followed by a “stop-sell” of copper services to new customers and ultimately full withdrawal. One other result of this is that the operator will also stop providing their own voice products after around 2025 (i.e. shifting the responsibility for delivering this and VoIP on to broadband ISPs and wholesale providers).
Since then Openreach have also announced that they intend to accelerate their plans to move away from the old analogue phone (PSTN / WLR) services and on to a new all- IP network, which will see more than 118 UK exchange locations receiving over 75% coverage via their FTTP broadband ISP technology by June 2021 ( here ).
At the same time Ofcom have been busy conducting their Wholesale Fixed Telecoms Market Review 2021-26 (FTMR), which proposes major changes to help boost investment in FTTP broadband and high capacity Ethernet ( leased line ) services for both the residential and business connectivity markets. As part of that it is was also considering proposals for the copper retirement process.
An important aspect of the prior proposals includes a period of regulatory transition after which, when Openreach has completed ultrafast coverage of an exchange area, Ofcom would lift the existing charge control on the anchor copper service. At that point, only the fibre charge control would apply. However, Ofcom notes that there may be “very limited circumstances in which Openreach may not be able to connect some premises in an exchange area with ultrafast services, despite all reasonable efforts.”
