Investing News Network - June 24th, 2020
Pentwater Capital Management, the largest minority shareholder of Turquoise Hill Resources, has written the attached letter to the board of directors.
Pentwater Capital Management LP (“Pentwater”), the largest minority shareholder of Turquoise Hill Resources Ltd. (“Turquoise Hill” or the “Company”) (TSX:TRQ) (NYSE:TRQ), has written the attached letter to the Board of Directors.  The letter outlines yet another example of how the Board has benefited its largest shareholder Rio Tinto by failing to disclose important and necessary financial information to TRQ shareholders.  Several examples of the Board’s dereliction of its duty to provide full and adequate disclosure include:
Turquoise Hill refuses to disclose the amount of the cost overrun for Shaft 2 and the reason for that cost overrun. As the operator of the mine, Rio actually works for TRQ and is TRQ’s contractor.  In July 2018, TRQ reaffirmed that Shaft 2 would be completed by the end of 2018.  Just ten weeks later, TRQ announced that there would be material delays at Shaft 2 that resulted in Shaft 2 not being completed until October 2019. How much of the delay was Rio’s fault?  How much did the delay of Shaft 2 contribute to the cost overruns?  This information is certainly available to the Company since Shaft 2 was completed over 7 months ago. Why won’t you let your shareholders know the truth?
Turquoise Hill refuses to disclose if it was misled by Rio Tinto regarding the budget. On March 14, 2019, Turquoise Hill issued a press release which stated that it expected, “that project cost was expected to remain within the US$5.3 billion budget.”  Exactly four months later on July 15, 2019, Turquoise Hill issued another press release which stated that, “the development capital spend for the project may increase by US$1.2 to US$1.9 billion over the US$5.3 billion previously disclosed.”  Is it TRQ that was incompetent or Rio Tinto or both?  Was there a coverup or failure to disclose information?  Is this why one of TRQ’s board members resigned 5 days prior to the July 15, 2019 press release?  Why won’t you let your shareholders know the truth?
Turquoise Hill refuses to disclose the nature of its alleged $4 billion funding shortfall and provide sufficient explanation as to how that amount was lowered from $4.5 billion after just 60 days. TRQ stated in March 2020 that it had a $4.5 billion funding shortfall and then in May 2020 that it had a $4.0 billion funding shortfall.  However, it appears that the $4.0 billion number includes $1.9 billion of amortization payments and $900 million of power plant expenditures.  Given that the government of Mongolia has stated that it intends to build its own power plant and that typically amortization payments can be extended with the payment of a fee, is the real underfunding amount just $1.2 billion?  You refuse to let your shareholders know the answer.  Why won’t you let your shareholders know the truth?
Turquoise Hill refuses to disclose the proposed fee to be paid to Rio in connection with the potential construction of the power plant. Pentwater became alarmed last year upon learning that Rio Tinto requested “several hundred million dollars of fees for managing and overseeing the construction of the Tavan Tolgoi power plant.”  If true, that is an unacceptable fee and a conflict of interest.  Is this why the government of Mongolia now wants to build the power plant itself?  Why won’t you let your shareholders know the truth?
We are seeking your support at the Company’s upcoming annual and special meeting of shareholders to be held on July 24, 2020 to restore accountability at Turquoise Hill and give minority shareholders back their voice.
We encourage our fellow shareholders to consider the facts and take action against the current culture of entrenchment, value destruction and misconduct at Turquoise Hill. The interests of the Company’s minority shareholders have been disregarded for far too long. Your vote is critical to initiate much-needed change, to restore accountability and to safeguard minority shareholder interests in Turquoise Hill.
Shareholders are urged to vote only the GOLD proxy:
FOR the election of Matthew Halbower to the board of directors of the Company;
WITHHOLD in respect of the election of all of the management nominees to the board of directors of the Company; and
FOR the adoption of the shareholder proposal submitted by Pentwater to amend the Company’s articles to provide minority shareholders of the Company with the exclusive right to nominate and elect three of seven directors to the Board.
Shareholders are urged to read the full text of Pentwater’s proxy circular, related press releases and the June 24, 2020 Letter to the Turquoise Hill Board, which have been filed and made available under Turquoise Hill’s issuer profile at www.sedar.com .
