Company invites individual and institutional investors, as well as advisors and analysts, to attend real-time, interactive presentations on VirtualInvestorConferences.com
LONDON, June 29, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Phoenix Copper Ltd (AIM – PXC, OTCQX – PXCLF), based in London, UK, focused on Idaho, USA, today announced that Ryan McDermott, CEO, and Richard Wilkins, CFO, will present live at VirtualInvestorConferences.com on June 30th.
This will be a live, interactive online event where investors are invited to ask the company questions in real-time. If attendees are not able to join the event live on the day of the conference, an archived webcast will also be made available after the event.
It is recommended that investors pre-register and run the online system check to expedite participation and receive event updates.
Learn more about the event at www.virtualinvestorconferences.com.
Updated Empire Mine oxide open pit NI 43-101 compliant resources announced in May 2020 with significant increases in all metals, gold/copper/silver/zinc
Phoenix Copper Limited is a North American focused, base and precious metal explorer and developer, which has carried out a drilling programme and generated a gold, copper, silver and zinc resource on which it is carrying out a feasibility study to bring the historically producing Empire Mine in Idaho, USA, back into production.  It is also drilling the high-grade silver/lead Red Star discovery, adjacent to the Empire Mine open pit and exploring and evaluating the silver/lead potential around three other past producing mines, as well as exploring the gold potential at the Carlin-type Navarre Creek property, all within the Company's 23 km2 Empire system claims block.  Additionally, the Company has two prospective claims' blocks north of Empire in Idaho.
Virtual Investor Conferences (VIC) is the leading proprietary investor conference series that provides an interactive forum for publicly-traded companies to meet and present directly with investors.
A real-time solution for investor engagement, Virtual Investor Conferences is part of OTC Market Group's suite of investor relations services specifically designed for more efficient Investor Access.  Replicating the look and feel of on-site investor conferences, Virtual Investor Conferences combine leading-edge conferencing and investor communications capabilities with a comprehensive global investor audience network.
