In other news, a man believes woman who frequents apartment building stole his checks, cashed over $1,100.
In other news, a man believes woman who frequents apartment building stole his checks, cashed over $1,100.  
Check out this story on mansfieldnewsjournal.com: https://www.mansfieldnewsjournal.com/story/news/2020/06/26/water-meter-copper-piping-stolen-vacant-house/3262823001/
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Welcome to our new and improved comments, which are for subscribers only.
                                            This is a test to see whether we can improve the experience for you.
                                            You do not need a Facebook profile to participate.
You will need to register before adding a comment.
                                            Typed comments will be lost if you are not logged in.
                                            It's OK to disagree with someone's ideas, but personal attacks, insults, threats, hate speech, advocating violence and other violations can result in a ban.
                                            If you see comments in violation of our community guidelines , please report them.
Staff report Published 12:49 p.m. ET June 26, 2020
500 block of Logan Road -  A 44-year-old man who had cut his wrist Thursday was taken to a hospital by firefighters and rescue personnel.
VOA, 921 N. Main St. - A 34-year-old man at the Volunteers of America halfway house Thursday kicked open a fence and fled the area in  a red vehicle.
Mansfield Avenue - Officers Thursday were contacted regarding someone getting into a vacant house and stealing the water meter and copper piping.
West Second Street - A 62-year-old man Thursday told officers an unknown woman acquired several books of checks from him and he has had several checks cashed and lost over $1,100. The victim said he would ask the neighbors for the name of the woman who frequents the apartment building where he resides as he said he believes she is a suspect.
600 block of Barnard Avenue - A woman told officers Thursday her son who lives with her let her ex-husband in and he took the TV and cash that belonged to her.
300 block of Tremont Street - A 77-year-old man found a cell phone in the street in front of his residence. The cell phone was collected and submitted to the crime lab.
Read or Share this story: https://www.mansfieldnewsjournal.com/story/news/2020/06/26/water-meter-copper-piping-stolen-vacant-house/3262823001/
Share your feedback to help improve our site experience!
