LONDON--( BUSINESS WIRE )--The copper alloy wire market is poised to grow by USD 16.43 billion during 2020-2024 during the forecast period. Request free sample pages
Read the 143-page report with TOC on "Copper Alloy Wire Market Analysis Report by Application (electrical and electronics, construction, automotive, and others) and Geographic Landscape (APAC, Europe, MEA, North America, and South America), and the Segment Forecasts, 2020-2024".
The market is driven by the demand from communication sector. In addition, the increasing number of renewable energy installations are anticipated to boost the growth of the copper alloy wire market.
The increase in the demand for consumer and industrial electronic products is driving the growth of the electrical and electronics industry. In addition, the introduction of technologies such as asymmetrical subscriber line and high digital subscriber line technologies is leading to the growth in the communication industry. Copper alloy wires are extensively being used in the communication and electrical and electronics industry where they are used to manufacture circuits in microprocessors. They exhibit high-efficiency, heat-sink properties, and excellent electrical conductivity. As a result, they are used to manufacture power cables for medium and low voltage applications. They are also used in mobile phones, domestic subscriber lines, connectors, transformers, local area networks, and other major and minor electronic gadgets. Thus, the growth of the communication and electrical and electronics industry is expected to drive market growth during the forecast period.
Buy 1 Technavio report and get the second for 50% off. Buy 2 Technavio reports and get the third for free.
Major Five Copper Alloy Wire Companies:
Alloy Wire International is headquartered in the UK and operates the business under the unified product segment. The company offers a wide range of Nickel-Copper alloy wires which are used in various applications including power resistors and shunts.
Aviva Metals Inc. is headquartered in the US and offers products through the unified product segment. The company offers a wide range of bronze, brass and other copper alloy wires, which are used in the automotive, oil and gas, aerospace, and other industries.
CK SAN-ETSU Co. Ltd. is headquartered in Japan and operates under various business segments, namely Copper, Precision parts, and Piping and plating. The company offers a wide variety of special copper alloy wires including brass, phosphor bronze, red brass, and copper wire.
Deutsche Nickel GmbH is headquartered in Germany and offers products through the following business segments: Material Solutions, Wire, Bar, Ingots, and Billet/ Raw Material for Forging. The company offers different grades of Copper-Nickel alloys, including CuNi44Mn1 (Vernicon, 2.0842), CuNi10 (2.0811), and others.
Diehl Stiftung & Co. KG is headquartered in Germany and offers products through the following business segments: Metal, Controls, Defence, Aviation, and Metering. The company offers high-quality wire made of copper-based alloys, including pre-rolled wire (square) and pre-drawn wire.
Register for a free trial today and gain instant access to 17,000+ market research reports.
Copper Alloy Wire Market Application Outlook (Revenue, USD bn, 2020-2024)
