Read This Before Selling Kodiak Copper Corp. (CVE:KDK) Shares
We often see insiders buying up shares in companies that perform well over the long term. Unfortunately, there are also plenty of examples of share prices declining precipitously after insiders have sold shares. So before you buy or sell Kodiak Copper Corp. ( CVE:KDK ), you may well want to know whether insiders have been buying or selling.
Most investors know that it is quite permissible for company leaders, such as directors of the board, to buy and sell stock in the company. However, most countries require that the company discloses such transactions to the market.
We would never suggest that investors should base their decisions solely on what the directors of a company have been doing. But equally, we would consider it foolish to ignore insider transactions altogether. For example, a Columbia University study found that 'insiders are more likely to engage in open market purchases of their own company’s stock when the firm is about to reveal new agreements with customers and suppliers'.
In the last twelve months, the biggest single purchase by an insider was when CEO, President & Director Claudia Tornquist bought CA$107k worth of shares at a price of CA$0.35 per share. So it's clear an insider wanted to buy, even at a higher price than the current share price (being CA$0.32). It's very possible they regret the purchase, but it's more likely they are bullish about the company. In our view, the price an insider pays for shares is very important. As a general rule, we feel more positive about a stock if insiders have bought shares at above current prices, because that suggests they viewed the stock as good value, even at a higher price.
Over the last year, we can see that insiders have bought 771.92k shares worth CA$261k. But insiders sold 66200 shares worth CA$27k. Overall, Kodiak Copper insiders were net buyers during the last year. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
Kodiak Copper is not the only stock insiders are buying. So take a peek at this free list of growing companies with insider buying.
There was some insider buying at Kodiak Copper over the last quarter. CEO, President & Director Claudia Tornquist purchased CA$48k worth of shares in that period. We like it when there are only buyers, and no sellers. But in this case the amount purchased means the recent transaction may not be very meaningful on its own.
Does Kodiak Copper Boast High Insider Ownership?
Many investors like to check how much of a company is owned by insiders. Usually, the higher the insider ownership, the more likely it is that insiders will be incentivised to build the company for the long term. Our data indicates that Kodiak Copper insiders own about CA$1.3m worth of shares (which is 11% of the company). Overall, this level of ownership isn't that impressive, but it's certainly better than nothing!
What Might The Insider Transactions At Kodiak Copper Tell Us?
We note a that there has been a bit of insider buying recently (but no selling). That said, the purchases were not large. However, our analysis of transactions over the last year is heartening. We'd like to see bigger individual holdings. However, we don't see anything to make us think Kodiak Copper insiders are doubting the company. In addition to knowing about insider transactions going on, it's beneficial to identify the risks facing Kodiak Copper. At Simply Wall St, we've found that Kodiak Copper has 4 warning signs (2 make us uncomfortable!) that deserve your attention before going any further with your analysis.
Of course Kodiak Copper may not be the best stock to buy. So you may wish to see this free collection of high quality companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
