Rio and its subsidiary, Turquoise Hill, and the Mongolian government have reached an agreement that paves the way for the coal-fired plant to be built at Tavan Tolgoi coal fields.
The open pit at the Oyu Tolgoi copper and gold mine in Mongolia.
The deal on the state-funded power plant represents a rewriting of the power source framework agreement signed in 2018.
The new agreement states the parties will work towards completing a power purchase agreement by next March 31.
In addition, the amended agreement sets a proposed timetable for the power plant development. Construction is slated to begin no later than July 1, 2021, with commissioning within four years of that date.
The building of the coal-fired plant is expected to increase the host nation’s long-term influence over the Rio project and is significant given the government's often frosty relationship with the miner.
However, it remains to be seen if the Mongolian government can exert any price leverage over Rio by controlling power supply.
The agreement announced on Monday includes provision for the state-owned utility to supply power at a mutually negotiated and competitive price. The tariff will be determined by the power purchase agreement between the parties.
The Mongolian government owns 34 per cent of Oyu Tolgoi with the remainder owned by Turquoise. Rio owns 50.8 per cent of Turquoise and manages the mining operations.
The existing Oyu Tolgoi mine is powered by coal-fired electricity imported from neighbouring China.
Rio said the Mongolian government and Oyu Tolgoi had committed to extending the deal with China to ensure stable power supply to the mine and underground project until the state-owned plant was capable of supplying “stable, reliable and continuous power”.
The agreement looks set to result in a massive saving for Rio and its partners in Oyu Tolgoi.
They already face costs of $US6.6 billion to $US7.1 billion in developing underground mining operations.
On top of the development cost estimates, Mongolia had told Rio to find a domestic power source by the end of financial year 2023.
In February, Rio flagged that a $US924 million coal-fired power station was the most likely domestic solution. However, it indicated the power station would not be finished before June 2024.
The Mongolia government rejected the Rio proposal and signalled it could build a state-owned plant at a lower price.
Arnaud Soirat, Rio’s copper and diamonds chief executive, said the company looked forward to working with the Mongolian government under the new agreement.
“This agreement provides a potential pathway to securing a domestic power supply for the Oyu Tolgoi mine and underground project for the benefit of all shareholders and the wider community,” he said.
Turquoise Hill chief executive Ulf Quellmann welcomed Mongolia's decision to prioritise building a state-owned power plant.
Mr Quellmann said the amended agreement provided the time needed to solidify a power supply solution and finalise the commercial arrangements in the best interests of all stakeholders.
Brad Thompson writes across business and politics from Western Australia for The Australian Financial Review. Brad is based in our Perth bureau. Connect with Brad on Twitter . Email Brad at bradthompson@afr.com
