Give me my free report!
“Copper I’m very bullish about, I think copper’s got a great outlook,” he said. “I would buy the big copper companies — First Quantum Minerals (TSX: FM ,OTC Pink:FQVLF), Teck Resources (TSX: TECK.A ,TSX:TECK.B,NYSE:TECK), those kinds of companies — and lots of the copper mid-tiers and juniors just across the board, have a diversified portfolio.”
Although Beaty is bullish on gold, silver and copper, he was careful to mention that he isn’t optimistic about all commodities — in fact there are several that he’s not interested in at all.
“I wouldn’t buy everything today. It’s not really 2009 all over, it’s a different kind of a crisis, a different world, and there’s other things that are going on,” he explained.
Here are the markets that Beaty said he is less enthusiastic about right now:
Oil — “I would stay miles away from oil,” he said. “Oil is sick for many, many reasons.” Overall Beaty believes the problem with oil is the “toxic combination” of low demand due to issues like COVID-19, and high supply caused by factors such as new shale oil and shale gas developments.
Uranium — Beaty was somewhat positive on uranium, saying that he likes it. “But it’s not a good commodity today because nuclear reactors are simply too expensive,” he said. He thinks they can’t compete with renewable energy, particularly as utility-scale battery storage systems gain traction.
Thermal coal — “I wouldn’t go near thermal coal,” said Beaty, adding that he sees it as a “dead business” that will fall by the wayside due to climate change requirements.
Metallurgical coal and iron ore — Beaty grouped met coal and iron ore together, saying he’s 50/50 on them: “I think the big years of infrastructure buildout, particularly in China, are over, and the demand for iron ore and met coal thus … is going to be diminished moving forward.”
Zinc , nickel and lead — “I (have a) moderate outlook — any kind of company that has those metals should do okay because they’ve been beat up so much,” said Beaty. “(It’s a) reasonable investment for certain companies.”
Other major names in the mining sector also took part in the Grit Capital event — stay tuned for writeups on what Rick Rule and Eric Sprott had to say during their segments.
Don’t forget to follow us @INN_Resource for real-time updates!
Securities Disclosure: I, Charlotte McLeod, hold no direct investment interest in any company mentioned in this article.
