Southern Copper (SCCO) Hits 52-Week High: What's Driving It?
Southern Copper Corporation SCCO scaled a fresh 52-week high of $42.73, before eventually closing the day at $42.63 on Dec 18. This upside can primarily be attributed to the surge in copper prices, better-than-expected third-quarter results and upbeat outlook for 2019. The stock was also favored by the fact that the Peru government gave a go-ahead to the delayed Tia Maria copper project.
We note that shares of this Phoenix, AZ-based company have gained 43% so far this year, outperforming the industry’s growth of 35.7%. This Zacks Rank #3 (Hold) stock has also outpaced the Basic Material sector and the S&P 500 Index’s rally of 5.9% and 26.1%, respectively. The company also has a long-term earnings growth rate of 11.46%.
Southern Copper’s share price has gained 18.5% since it reported third-quarter 2019 results. The company reported earnings of 50 cents per share, which beat the Zacks Consensus Estimate of 49 cents and was 4% higher than the prior-year quarter. The improved results reflect the benefits from the new Toquepala concentrator that reached full capacity usage in the first-half 2019, lower cash cost and other cost reductions.
For 2019, the company projects total copper production of 991,000 tons, 12% higher than the 883,689 tons generated in 2018. It anticipates producing 25,500 tons of molybdenum, an expected growth of 16%, aided by significant contribution from the molybdenum plant at the new Toquepala concentrator. Zinc production is anticipated to increase 10% year over year to 77,500 tons for the ongoing year, as a result of the partial recovery of production at San Martin mine. Silver production is expected to improve 14% year over year to 19.7 million ounces backed by contributions from the San Martin, Santa Barbara and Toquepala mines.
The company continues to witness the benefits of cost-reduction programs and expansion actions. Southern Copper expects cash cost to average 80 cents per copper pound in 2019, an additional reduction of 8% year over year, strengthening its dominance as a low-cost producer. Southern Copper has the largest copper reserves in the industry and operates high-quality, world-class assets in investment grade countries, such as Mexico and Peru. Backed by its constant commitment to increasing low-cost production and growth investments, the company is well poised to continue delivering enhanced performance.
Southern Copper’s board approved projects in Peru with a total capital budget of $2.8 billion of which $1.6 billion has already been invested.  Including the Michiquillay ($2.5 billion) and Los Chancas ($2.8 billion) projects, its total investment program in Peru runs to $8.1 billion. Peru's government has given the green light to Southern Copper’s much delayed Tia Maria copper project. In August the government had suspended permit for the $1.4 billion project amid violent protest.
Copper prices have been trending higher lately on strong data of imports from China, its biggest customer. Moreover, the metal, which is usually viewed as a gauge of economic health, is likely to gain from the United States and China’s efforts toward a phase one trade deal. Higher copper prices bode well for Southern Copper.
Some better-ranked stocks in the basic materials space are Kirkland Lake Gold Ltd KL, Impala Platinum Holdings Ltd IMPUY and Polymetal International plc AUCOY, each sporting a Zacks Rank #1 (Strong Buy).
You can see the complete list of today’s Zacks #1 Rank stocks here.
Kirkland Lake Gold has an expected earnings growth rate of 97.1% for 2019. The company’s shares have surged 60% so far this year.
Impala Platinum Holdings has projected earnings growth rate of 255.2% for fiscal 2020. The company’s shares have skyrocketed 312% in a year.
Polymetal International has an estimated earnings growth rate of 40.5% for the current year. Its shares have returned 56% in the past year.
Be among the early investors in the new type of device that experts say could impact society as much as the discovery of electricity. Current technology will soon be outdated and replaced by these new devices. In the process, it’s expected to create 22 million jobs and generate $12.3 trillion in activity.
A select few stocks could skyrocket the most as rollout accelerates for this new tech. Early investors could see gains similar to buying Microsoft in the 1990s. Zacks’ just-released special report reveals 8 stocks to watch. The report is only available for a limited time.
Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days. Click to get this free report
