SPEE3D has replaced existing door handles within Australia’s Northern Territory Department of Trade, Business and Innovation with ACTIVAT3D copper (Courtesy SPEE3D)
SPEE3D, headquartered in Melbourne, Australia, demonstrated its ACTIVAT3D copper coating process during a live online presentation. The company recently announced the successful development and testing of ACTIVAT3D copper , a fast and affordable way to additively manufacture anti-microbial copper onto existing metal surfaces.
In addition to the live demonstration, SPEE3D also reports that the Northern Territory Department of Trade, Business and Innovation has become the first organisation to deploy antimicrobial ACTIVAT3D copper throughout their building, to help fight the spread of coronavirus (COVID-19).
SPEE3D states that it was contracted to replace existing door handles within the Northern Territory Department of Trade, Business and Innovation with ACTIVAT3D copper products. With these handles now installed, the company states that the staff of this department, and the community they interact with, are already experiencing the benefits of antimicrobial copper.
Shaun Drabsch, Department of Trade, Business and Innovation CEO, stated, “The Department of Trade, Business and Innovation is thrilled to be the first to have this innovative technology installed in our workplace, ensuring an even safer place for our staff and community to do business here. We thank our landlord for agreeing to the installation of copper handles. It is great to see a local Territory company taking advantage of this very challenging time and drive a new innovative product that can further protect Territorians from COVID-19.”
According to SPEE3D, the lab results have sparked global interest in its technology as governments and private companies look for proactive ways to protect their communities. With this technology now proven and enquiries coming in from around the world, the company states that it is looking to partner the door handle manufacturing industry to deliver ACTIVAT3D copper at scale to where it is needed most.
SPEE3D features in the Spring 2020 issue of Metal AM magazine: ‘Cheaper powders, faster build speeds and no thermal stresses? How AM is going supersonic at SPEE3D’. Read the article in full here .
Dyndrite Corporation, headquartered in Seattle, Washington, USA, has reported a successful first edition of its virtual Digital Manufacturing Inves... »
VBN Components, Uppsala, Sweden, has appointed Johan Bäckström as its new CEO. Bäckström has been working in parallel with Martin Nilsson, the ... »
CECIMO, the European Association of Machine Tool Industries and Related Manufacturing Technologies, reports that the Additive Manufacturing sector ... »
CGTech, Irvine, California, USA, has announced the latest release of its Vericut software, Version 9.1. Vericut CNC machine simulation, verificatio... »
Our latest issue is now available to view online or download in PDF format.
As well as an extensive AM industry news section, this 184-page issue includes articles and reports on:
Cheaper powders, faster build speeds and no thermal stresses? How AM is going supersonic at SPEE3D
Current perspectives on metal AM: Hype, volume manufacturing and the geographies of production
From lightweighting and material efficiency to energy consumption: Where are we on AM’s sustainability journey?
The free to access Metal Additive Manufacturing magazine archive offers unparalleled insight into the world of metal Additive Manufacturing from a commercial and technological perspective through:
All past issues are available to download in PDF format, in either single page format or as double-page “spreads” for viewing on large monitors. All downloads are free of charge. Go to archive...
