Technical Analysis – Copper futures give up some gains; positive picture stands
Copper futures retreated slightly from their freshly plotted four-and-a-half month high of 2.6959. Confirming the bullish sentiment that has mostly controlled the ascent from the 45-month low of 1.9684 are the rising Ichimoku lines. Additionally, the improving 50-day simple moving average (SMA) is endorsing forthcoming advances.
The short-term oscillators are positively tilted in spite of the current weakening in positive momentum. The MACD, deep in the positive region, is waning above its red signal line, while the RSI has dropped under the 70 level but remains above the diagonal line. Moreover, the composed stochastic lines are in overbought territory but have yet to confirm a bearish mode.
A close above the upper surface of the Ichimoku cloud and the fresh high of 2.6959 could repower the hike to see the 2.7554 inside swing low of January 3 ahead of the 2.7919 obstacle. Persistent buyers may stretch the price towards the 2.8323 barrier before revisiting the eight-and-a-half month peak of 2.8819.
Alternatively, extended negative pressures could face initial tough support from the 200-day SMA at the 2.5589 mark, where the red Tenkan-sen line also is located. Next, the critical region underneath until the 2.5014 support – that includes the 2.5274 hurdle – could prove difficult to dive past. However, should the price breach these borders, the 2.4509 trough and the section between the 100- and 50-day SMAs (2.4208 – 2.3821) may provide the next limitations to downside moves.
In brief, the very short-term outlook remains bullish above the 200-day SMA and the 2.4509 trough, with the commodity warranting some caution should negative tensions escalate.
Legal disclaimer: The material does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instruments. XM accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences resulting in it. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently, any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. The research and analysis does not involve any specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it.
It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of research, and as such it is considered to be marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of the publication of our research, we do not seek to take advantage of it before we provide it to our clients. We aim to establish, maintain and operate effective organisational and administrative arrangements with a view to taking all reasonable steps to prevent conflicts of interest from constituting or giving rise to a material risk of damage to the interests of our clients. We operate a policy of independence, which requires our employees to act in our clients’ best interests and to disregard any conflicts of interest in providing our services.
CFDs are leveraged products. CFD trading may not be suitable for everyone and can result in losing all of your invested capital, so please make sure that you fully understand the risks involved.
Legal: This website is operated by XM Global Limited with registered address at No. 5 Cork Street, Belize City, Belize, CA.
Trading Point Holdings Ltd is the holding company of Trading Point of Financial Instruments Limited, XM Global Limited, Trading Point of Financial Instruments UK Limited, Trading Point of Financial Instruments Pty Ltd, and Trading Point MENA Limited.
Trading Point of Financial Instruments UK Limited is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FRN: 705428).
Trading Point MENA Limited is authorised and regulated by the Dubai Financial Services Authority (DFSA) (reference no. F003484).
Risk Warning: Forex and CFD trading involves a significant risk to your invested capital. Please read and ensure you fully understand our Risk Disclosure .
Restricted Regions: XM Global Limited does not provide services for the residents of certain countries, such as the United States of America, Canada, Israel and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
By clicking “Continue”, you agree to the default cookie settings on our website.
XM uses cookies to ensure that we provide you with the best experience while visiting our website. Some of the cookies are needed to provide essential features, such as login sessions, and cannot be disabled. Other cookies help us improve our website’s performance and your experience through personalising content, providing social media features and analysing our traffic. Such cookies may also include third-party cookies, which might track your use of  our website. You may change your cookie settings at any time.
Read more, or change your cookie settings.
Cookies are small data files. When you visit a website, the website sends the cookie to your computer. Your computer stores it in a file located inside your web browser.
Cookies do not transfer viruses or malware to your computer. Because the data in a cookie does not change when it travels back and forth, it has no way to affect how your computer runs, but they act more like logs (i.e. they record user activity and remember stateful information) and they get updated every time you visit a website.
We may obtain information about you by accessing cookies, sent by our website. Different types of cookies keep track of different activities. For example, session cookies are used only when a person is actively navigating a website. Once you leave the website, the session cookie disappears.
We use functional cookies to analyse how visitors use our website, as well as track and improve our website’s performance and function. This allows us to provide a high-quality customer experience by quickly identifying and fixing any issues that may arise. For example, we might use cookies to keep track of which website pages are most popular and which method of linking between website pages is most effective. The latter also helps us to track if you were referred to us by another website and improve our future advertising campaigns.
Another use of cookies is to store your log in sessions, meaning that when you log in to the Members Area to deposit funds, a "session cookie" is set so that the website remembers that you have already logged in. If the website did not set this cookie, you will be asked for your login and password on each new page as you progress through the funding process.
In addition, functional cookies, for example, are used to allow us to remember your preferences and identify you as a user, ensure your information is secure and operate more reliably and efficiently. For example, cookies save you the trouble of typing in your username every time you access our trading platform, and recall your preferences, such as which language you wish to see when you log in.
Here is an overview of some of the functions our cookies provide us with:
This website uses Google Analytics, a web analytics service provided by Google, Inc. ("Google"). Google Analytics uses analytical cookies placed on your computer, to help the website analyze a user's use of the website. The information generated by the cookie about your use of the website (including your IP address) may be transmitted to and stored by Google on their servers. Google may use this information to evaluate your use of the website, to compile reports on website activity and to provide other services related to website activity and internet usage. Google may also transfer this information to third parties, where required to do so by law, or where such third parties process the information on behalf of Google. Google will not associate your IP address with any other data held. By using this website, you give your consent to Google to process data about you in the manner and for the purposes set out above.
Please select which types of cookies you want to be stored on your device.
These cookies are essential for the running of our website. Without these cookies our websites would not function properly. These are saved temporarily as login information and expire once the browser is closed.
The information provided by analytical cookies allows us to analyse patterns of visitor behaviour and we use that information to enhance the overall experience or identify areas of the website which may require maintenance.  The information is anonymous (i.e. it cannot be used to identify you and does not contain personal information such as your name and email address) and it is only used for statistical purposes. Behavioral cookies are similar to analytical and remember that you have visited a website and use that information to provide you with content which is tailored to your interests.
These cookies are used to track visitors across websites. The intention is to display ads that are relevant and engaging for the individual user and thereby more valuable for publishers and third party advertisers.
Preference cookies enable a website to remember information that changes the way the website behaves or looks, like your preferred language or the region that you are in.
We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website. Read more or change your cookie settings.
Risk Warning: Your capital is at risk. Leveraged products may not be suitable for everyone. Please consider our Risk Disclosure .
By clicking the "Enter" button, you agree for your personal data provided via live chat to be processed by XM Global Limited, as per the Company's Privacy Policy , which serves the purpose of you receiving assistance from our Customer Support Department.
If you do not give your consent to the above, you may alternatively contact us via the Members Area or at support@xm.com .
