SAN DIEGO, CA - NOVEMBER 1: Shaun Draughn #20, Terrance Copper #10, and Cyrus Gray #32 of the Kansas City Chiefs head out to the field to play against the San Diego Chargers on November 1, 2012 at Qualcomm Stadium in San Diego, California. (Photo by Donald Miralle/Getty Images)
Terrance Copper recently opened up about the Chiefs surprisingly strong history in the NFL.
Former NFL wide receiver Terrance Copper only played four seasons with the Kansas City Chiefs , but it’s clear that the team’s strong history and sense of tradition in the National Football League made a major impression on him during his time with the team.
In a recent interview on the Sportsgrid Network , Copper spoke about the team’s most r ecent Super Bowl win , Patrick Mahomes and other subjects, but during one segment, he stated that he believed most fans outside of the region might not understand just how deep the team’s roots go into the league—and specifically how much of a hero founding owner Lamar Hunt truly was. To that end, he was excited by the team’s win in Super Bowl LIV but he also stated that the AFC Championship win was also bigger than people might realize.
“A lot of people don’t understand how much history Kansas City has when it comes to the NFL. Lamar Hunt, the owner of Kansas City, was in charge of merging the AFL and the NFL together. In fact the AFC championship trophy is named after Lamar Hunt. So the fact that Kansas City got to bring it back home to where it originated and named after guy who owned the Kansas City Chiefs is huge as well. Of course, the Super Bowl is the biggest, the ultimate goal to get, but also to get that Lamar Hunt Trophy back in Kansas City….
For Copper, the journey to respecting the team’s place in NFL history begins upon arrival tot he team. “Once you get to Kansas City, they talk a lot about the history, the tradition there, so you understand what you’re walking into when you play for the organization,” he said. “It’s just an amazing time right now.”
Copper enjoyed a much longer-than-average career in the NFL with a total of nine seasons in the league. He first surfaced as an undrafted free agent out of East Carolina with the Dallas Cowboys. His special teams prowess earned him an active roster spot by October of the the 2004 seasons and he would go on to play two seasons there. Copper would go on to play three more seasons in New Orleans with the Saints before catching on with the Chiefs.
In four seasons in Kansas City, Copper was a core special teams player and occasional contributor on offense during Scott Pioli’s tenure with the team as general manager. He finished his stint with the team with 38 catches on 58 targets for 418 receiving yards. He was also an occasional kick returner with the team with an average of 14.4 yards/return.
