The genetic testing industry opens up access to personalized medicines for patients. For investors unfamiliar with the term, these medicines focus on prevention and early treatment of diseases rather than reacting to them at a later stage.
Looking at the market growth potential of genetic testing, a report from Acumen Research and Consulting projects that the global industry will be worth around US$18 billion by 2026, representing a compound annual growth rate of 11 percent between 2019 and 2026.
To inform investors of what genetic testing stocks are out there, the Investing News Network has compiled a list of the top genetic testing stocks based on data from InvestSnip’s molecular diagnostic list . The list includes firms that develop, manufacture and market diagnostic and genetic tests and systems.
Companies are listed in order of market cap size, with all numbers and figures current as of June 18, 2020. The companies on this top genetic testing stocks list all have market caps above US$1 billion.
Exact Sciences focuses on molecular diagnostic tests. The company, which acquired Genomic Health towards the end of 2019, has developed a molecular screening technology platform called Coleguard, which detects a range of cancers, including breast cancer and colorectal cancer.
A positive result from Coleguard can mean that colorectal cancer or advanced adenoma is present, which means a diagnostic colonoscopy should be done so that healthcare professionals can detect the disease. Coleguard is geared towards patients over the age of 50 who have an average risk of colorectal cancer.
Like others on this list, Natera is a genetic testing and diagnostics company. A key area of focus for Natera is developing non-invasive ways for analyzing DNA. Over the last 10 years, it has introduced 10 molecular screening tests and runs thousands of genetic tests each month through its laboratory.
Natera’s areas of focus include women’s health via reproductive health, organ transplantation and cancer. Its genetic testing services, which use its cloud-based software platform, are aimed at educating biopharmaceutical company researchers and other healthcare professionals who test and treat pregnant women and genetic laboratories.
