Val-d'Or, Quebec--(Newsfile Corp. - July 3, 2020) - Val-d'Or Mining Corporation (TSXV: VZZ) (the "Company") is pleased to announce that it has completed a non-brokered private placement offering (the "Offering") for gross proceeds of $360,000.
The Company issued 1,500,000 Flow-Through Common Shares (the "FT Shares") under the Offering at a price of $0.24 per FT Share. The FT Shares will be "flow-through shares" as defined in the Income Tax Act (Canada).
Finder's fees in the aggregate amount of $21,700 in cash and finder's warrants to acquire an aggregate 90,416 shares at a per share price of $0.24 until July 3, 2022 (the "Finder's Warrants") were paid to arm's-length's finders who introduced the Company to investors.
The proceeds raised from the Offering will be used by the Company to conduct further exploration work on its properties in the Abitibi Greenstone Belt, Québec. All securities issued under the Offering, including common shares underlying the Finder's Warrants, are subject to a hold period until November 4, 2020, in accordance with applicable securities legislation.
Val-d'Or Mining Corporation is a junior natural resource issuer involved in the process of acquiring and exploring, its mineral property assets, most of which are situated in the Abitibi Greenstone Belt of NE Ontario and NW Quebec. To complement its current property interests, the Company regularly evaluates new opportunities for staking and/or acquisitions. Outside of its principal regional focus in the Abitibi Greenstone Belt, the Company holds several other properties in Northern Québec (Nunavik) covering different geological environments (Ni-Cu-PGE's).
The Company has an expertise in the identification and generation of new projects, and in the early stages of exploration. The mineral interests are broad and range from gold, copper-zinc-silver, nickel-copper-PGE to industrial and energy minerals. After the initial value creation in the 100%-owned, or majority-owned properties, the Company seeks option/joint venture partners with the technical expertise and financial capacity to conduct more advanced exploration projects.
