“When we say that the DOD has backed off of its earlier program to develop rare earths, I think what they realized was a big element of that program to develop rare earths had a Chinese angle to it,” he said.
China produces the lion’s share of the world’s rare earths by far, and America’s dependence on supply from the Asian nation came into focus about a year ago when trade tensions were raging.
King emphasized that while he believes there are people and companies in the US and Canada with the ability to set up a North American rare earths supply chain — including Medallion Resources (TSXV: MDL ,OTCQX:MLLOF), which he described as “the most advanced company with the best ideas” — he’s not sure government decision makers will allocate funds to help them address the problem.
“The answer is absolutely yes, we could do it if there’s political will and they back it up with some money … you will have the industry that you need and you’ll have the security of supply that you absolutely require,” commented King.
Aside from rare earths, King touched on copper, which he is “really hot on” because of its rising uses.
“There’s going to be a lot more copper in cars, there’s going to be a lot more copper in — just in other electrical things as the world builds out. Whether it’s renewable energy , all those sorts of things. And it’s not just a US/Canada thing, it’s a global thing,” he explained. There’s also the potential for copper’s applications to expand due to its antimicrobial properties.
Watch the video above for more from King on rare earths and copper, or click here for part one of the interview, which covers the gold price. You can also click here for part two, which looks at gold stocks.
Don’t forget to follow us @INN_Resource for real-time updates!
Securities Disclosure: I, Charlotte McLeod, hold no direct investment interest in any company mentioned in this article.
Editorial Disclosure: Medallion Resources is a client of the Investing News Network. This article is not paid-for content.
The Investing News Network does not guarantee the accuracy or thoroughness of the information reported in the interviews it conducts. The opinions expressed in these interviews do not reflect the opinions of the Investing News Network and do not constitute investment advice. All readers are encouraged to perform their own due diligence.
Have you read our new 2020 copper outlook report?
Get the latest information about companies associated with Copper Investing Delivered directly to your inbox.
