Simply Wall St November 5, 2019
Just because a business does not make any money, does not mean that the stock will go down. For example, although Amazon.com made losses for many years after listing, if you had bought and held the shares since 1999, you would have made a fortune. But while the successes are well known, investors should not ignore the very many unprofitable companies that simply burn through all their cash and collapse.
So should Bougainville Copper ( ASX:BOC ) shareholders be worried about its cash burn? In this report, we will consider the company’s annual negative free cash flow, henceforth referring to it as the ‘cash burn’. Let’s start with an examination of the business’s cash, relative to its cash burn.
Does Bougainville Copper Have A Long Cash Runway?
A company’s cash runway is calculated by dividing its cash hoard by its cash burn. When Bougainville Copper last reported its balance sheet in June 2019, it had zero debt and cash worth K7.4m. In the last year, its cash burn was K7.4m. That means it had a cash runway of around 12 months as of June 2019. That’s quite a short cash runway, indicating the company must either reduce its annual cash burn or replenish its cash. You can see how its cash balance has changed over time in the image below.
How Is Bougainville Copper’s Cash Burn Changing Over Time?
In the last year, Bougainville Copper did book revenue of K5.5m, but its revenue from operations was less, at just K656k. We don’t think that’s enough operating revenue for us to understand too much from revenue growth rates, since the company is growing off a low base. So we’ll focus on the cash burn, today. Given the length of the cash runway, we’d interpret the 52% reduction in cash burn, in twelve months, as prudent if not necessary for capital preservation. Admittedly, we’re a bit cautious of Bougainville Copper due to its lack of significant operating revenues. We prefer most of the stocks on this list of stocks that analysts expect to grow .
How Easily Can Bougainville Copper Raise Cash?
While we’re comforted by the recent reduction evident from our analysis of Bougainville Copper’s cash burn, it is still worth considering how easily the company could raise more funds, if it wanted to accelerate spending to drive growth. Generally speaking, a listed business can raise new cash through issuing shares or taking on debt. Commonly, a business will sell new shares in itself to raise cash to drive growth. By comparing a company’s annual cash burn to its total market capitalisation, we can estimate roughly how many shares it would have to issue in order to run the company for another year (at the same burn rate).
Since it has a market capitalisation of AU$39m, Bougainville Copper’s K7.4m in cash burn equates to about 8.0% of its market value. Given that is a rather small percentage, it would probably be really easy for the company to fund another year’s growth by issuing some new shares to investors, or even by taking out a loan.
Is Bougainville Copper’s Cash Burn A Worry?
On this analysis of Bougainville Copper’s cash burn, we think its cash burn reduction was reassuring, while its cash runway has us a bit worried. Cash burning companies are always on the riskier side of things, but after considering all of the factors discussed in this short piece, we’re not too worried about its rate of cash burn. While we always like to monitor cash burn for early stage companies, qualitative factors such as the CEO pay can also shed light on the situation. Click here to see free what the Bougainville Copper CEO is paid. .
If you would prefer to check out another company with better fundamentals, then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt or this list of stocks which are all forecast to grow .
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
