The Western Copper and Gold Corporation (WRN) shares are trading at higher $1.12.
To add more color to this target, the company’s high over the last year is $0.95 and the low is $0.31. Over the last 52 weeks, WRN is up 17.89% while the S&P 500 is up 0.70%. The catalyst for this interesting swing was the company’s recent earnings report.
In the last quarter, WRN reported a profit of $3000.0. Western Copper and Gold Corporation also saw revenues decrease to $0.56 million. In addition, WRN has free cash flow of -$0.51 million as of 03-2020 The company’s EBITDA came in at -$0.56 million which compares well with its peers.
Find out when WRN reaches critical levels. Subscribe to OracleDispatch.com Right Now by entering your Email in the box below.
Of course, we must look beyond the financials and question how well those numbers represent the sustainable earnings power of the business. Investors need to know how sustainable this current run. WRN has a short ratio of 2.75 and outstanding shares of 114.66M.
WRN has seen increased volume after this news and investors are putting their support behind the value proposition. Furthermore, 10-day volume stands at 0.12 million and more growth is possible in the weeks ahead. Traders will also note the company’s earnings per share came in at -0.02. Western Copper and Gold Corporation WRN also noted assets of $38.63 million at the end of the last quarter. Investors should also keep an eye on sector updates as WRN has historically followed its peers on positive news.
All told, Western Copper and Gold Corporation WRN has strung together solid data and demonstrated underlying fundamentals. At its current valuation, WRN represents an interesting risk/reward case. Traders should stay tuned to see if this recent report will push the stock to test recent resistance levels.
Western Copper and Gold Corporation WRN is now commanding a market cap of 128.42M and a float of 98.53M. WRN is increasing its credibility in this sector and that could lead to more upside down the line. Sign-up for continuing coverage on shares of WRN stock, as well as other hot stock picks, get our free newsletter today and get our next breakout pick!
Disclosure: we hold no position in WRN, either long or short, and we have not been compensated for this article.
