Let’s have a closer look at the core business prospects. Barrick Gold’s operations include gold and copper mining. FCX’s operations include mining of gold, copper, molybdenum, and cobalt. Despite almost similar products, what’s striking is the revenue mix of these two companies.
Barrick Gold’s revenues are deeply concentrated with gold, with the yellow metal contributing almost 95% of the total revenues in 2019. With the acquisition of Randgold Resources and the Nevada JV (with Newmont
), this contribution is likely to go up to 96% in 2020. In comparison, FCX got only about 10% of its total revenue from gold, which is expected to be about 13% in 2020. A slowdown in economic and industrial activities and expectations of a global recession following the outbreak of coronavirus this year has increased gold’s value as a hedging instrument. Global gold prices have increased from about $1,500/ounce at the beginning of 2020 to almost $1,780/ounce currently due to higher demand. With rising investment in the yellow metal by major central banks and expectations of interest rates heading south, gold prices already saw a sharp rise in 2019. This trend was further boosted by the current Covid-19 crisis.
Freeport-McMoRan’s revenues are mostly concentrated in copper, which made up 62% of FCX’s revenues in 2019. In contrast to gold, the effect of the current crisis has been completely opposite on copper prices, which declined from $2.80/pound at the beginning of 2020 to $2.10/pound in March 2020, before recovering to over $2.50/pound currently, which is still lower than the pre-Covid price. This drop was mainly due to expectations of lower demand from automobile and construction players as the economic activity slows down. Thus, the current crisis has, in fact, helped Barrick Gold due to most of its revenue coming from gold, while FCX seems to have lagged as it is not able to take advantage of the surge in gold prices with all of its gold output coming from Grasberg, which is currently undergoing a transition, while copper revenue is also declining.
If there are no signs of abatement of the coronavirus crisis during Q3 2020, Freeport-McMoRan’s stock could see a sharp drop from its current level. Though Trefis has a fair price estimate of $12 per share for FCX’s stock , our worst-case scenario shows that FCX’s stock could drop to $4 . On the contrary, Barrick Gold’s valuation works out to $25, slightly below its current price.
While Barrick Gold’s stock has performed better than FCX, which S&P 500 component stocks have the best chance of outperforming the benchmark index? Our 5 In the S&P 500 That’ll Beat The Index: TWTR, ISRG, NFLX, NOW, V look promising.
For further insight into the mining space, see how rivals Newmont and Freeport-McMoRan compare with each other.
