[Ed note: Investing in cryptocoins or tokens is highly speculative and the market is largely unregulated. Anyone considering it should be prepared to lose their entire investment.]
Traditional financial assets, such as stocks, are not based on the blockchain, so one might question how Abra would provide such options on its platform.
These investment options are "crypto-collateralized contracts," Barhydt told me. He explained the new offerings will be based on the same technology Abra currently uses for crypto and fiat currency trading.
If you use Abra right now to hold euros, or monero or zcash in the Abra app, what you're actually getting is what we call a crypto-collateralized contract. It basically takes bitcoin and pegs it to the value of whatever asset you want investment exposure to. Whether it's the euro, monero, zcash - with this new announcement Apple shares, it makes no difference. Meaning if you buy $1,000 worth of Apple and you're using bitcoin to actually make the contract, if the price of Apple goes up you end up with more bitcoin, if the price of Apple goes down you end up with less bitcoin."
Abra's new products are therefore not tokenized stocks. "These aren't ERC-style ethereum tokens," Barhydt noted. "There's no tokenization going on here," he added.
Barhydt posited Abra gives customers investment exposure to virtually any type of asset, without directly owning the underlying asset as the customer. Abra's app essentially builds synthetic financial instruments utilizing the mentioned crypto-collateralized contract concept, resulting in customers seeing the same profits or losses as the actual asset itself.
If you're just a consumer using our app, you don't actually see any of this, you just see that, 'Hey I'm investing in Apple shares, or I'm investing in Ripple or I'm investing in Monero,' but behind the scenes, we're creating effectively what we call synthetic assets. Which means we're giving you investment exposure using bitcoin-based smart contracts."
Barhydt pointed out multiple advantages to Abra's non-custodial model versus the traditional custodial process. (Custodial process means holding and protecting assets for customers, such as Coinbase for example. Additionally, stock exchanges or investment companies often hold assets for customers.)
Using Abra's model, customers are in charge of their own assets.
Each one of us [customers and Abra] is holding our collateral ourselves, so the bitcoin that ends up getting put into the investment contract by the consumer is actually residing on their phone. Abra doesn't have it, but both of us signed a contract so that, if the consumer is in the money, they automatically get paid by Abra, and if Abra is in the money we automatically get paid by the consumer, and the consumer can't steal their collateral, and Abra can't steal its collateral."
According to Barhydt's explanation, when users enter into a trade or investment on Abra's platform, gains or losses are accounted for on both sides based on Abra's technology, thus, impacting the collateral (bitcoin, etc.) that the user put into play for the trade. User's, however, still hold their assets (private keys) on their phone themselves. The app's asset backup phrase is also encrypted, subject to a pin code users must enter.
Barhydt mentioned an interesting way of adding security for those private keys as well. He told me he personally owns a separate Android phone with the Abra app on it. He keeps that phone offline except for when he makes trades and transactions. He then stores that phone (where those private keys are held) in a secure location.
Barhydt explained another advantage to Abra's model is the absence of clearing. Abra's model does not involve buying the underlying investment assets for customers. "We're not actually taking possession of equities on behalf of a consumer," Barhydt said. "This all settles on the bitcoin blockchain itself in a global decentralized network, so there's no concept of broker dealing or any kind of swap execution facility underlying this platform. It makes it really clean and legal in 150-plus countries."
Although, if no underlying assets are bought on behalf of the consumer, then how is the consumer ensured the Apple stock investment product they invest in on Abra's platform will yield the same returns or losses as buying the stock itself elsewhere?
The underlying assets are not bought on behalf of the customer. Barhydt explained to me,
Abra is the counterparty to those contracts. We hedge away our counterparty risk using various methods depending upon which asset you're getting investment exposure to. So in the case of stocks, there are instances where Abra may be buying the stock, but we're not buying it on behalf of the consumer, we're buying it on behalf of Abra in order to eliminate any risks on being able to make the consumer whole if they're in the money on those contracts."
If a customer enters into an Apple trade on Abra, for example, he simply is gaining exposure to Apple's price action, receiving gain or loss based on Apple's stock price. On the backend, Abra's system conducts cost-effective investment and trading activities so that Abra has the funds required to pay the consumer, depending on Apple's price activity.
Considering the above-mentioned process, consumers might also wonder what assurances are in place so that customers always receive the proper return on investment.
We eliminate 100% of any investment exposure we have, so think about our existing business, it works effectively the same way. When you invest in XRP [...] it works exactly the same way as the Apple example. In that example, we basically hedge away our risk so that if the price of XRP went up 100x tomorrow, there would be zero risk that the consumers wouldn't be made whole. Now alternatively, when the price of bitcoin was plummetting last year and people were holding XRP, or when people were holding dollars let's say, I had to make them whole on adding bitcoin. The hedge worked perfectly. We didn't lose a penny and all of our consumers were made whole even though the price of crypto fell, like...80-85%. We won't enter into an investment position with a consumer where we can't make them whole under all circumstances."
Abra has a proprietary automated hedging system that runs the whole process on the backend to hedge its positions, making sure the available synthetic asset product prices are effectively backed and paid out accordingly. Barhydt said to me, "We run a trading operation that effectively automates the hedging process that I'm describing based on the underlying assets." Barhydt also noted the hedging process is specific to each asset class.
One caveat, however, is that an element of trust is required by consumers, trusting that Abra's system will effectively hedge appropriately. Although, Abra has a sound track record thus far. "Abra has done this with close to a billion dollars in transaction volume and made every consumer whole on every single transaction in over 100 countries," Barhydt assured me.
Barhydt also circled back to last year's crypto asset price action. "Bitcoin fell 85% last year, and we didn't break a sweat," he noted. Additionally, he told me Abra has insurance policies in place as an additional backup.
Regarding availability, customers can put in orders during all hours of the day but those orders are dependent on open market times. (The Nasdaq , for reference, opens at 9:30 a.m., and closes at 4:00 p.m. Eastern Time.) Barhydt said, "You will be able to enter buy and sell orders 24/7, but they will be subject to market open hours [...] If you enter an order an hour before the market opens, it will be queued and then turned into a spot purchase order at the time the market opens."
Abra's new products will also allow for fractional investing in traditional assets like stocks, according to a statement.
Abra indeed appears to have developed a unique system which may provide opportunities to a large amount of the population. Its encrypted private keys and non-custodial model also provide added security, as opposed to a centralized option.
Its backend proprietary system responsible for asset price pegging, however, still seems questionable. It means customers must trust Abra's technology to hedge properly, enabling Abra to pay out customer gains. Although, as Barhydt pointed out, Abra has a solid track record, even throughout 2018, which was one of crypto's toughest years to date.
Disclaimer: I own shares of CBOE, AUY, AU, CFWFF and TOLWF stock. I also take trade and investing opportunities when available.
I am a full-time writer in the cryptocurrency space. My writing experience includes writing for Crypto Insider, CCN, and CryptoPotato on news and other important
I am a full-time writer in the cryptocurrency space. My writing experience includes writing for Crypto Insider, CCN, and CryptoPotato on news and other important concepts. I am also a part-time crypto trader and find trading fascinating. I know my way around price charts, indicators, hardware wallets, and almost any notable exchange. Additionally, I have a podcast (Crypto: Secrets of the Trade) where I interview successful traders in the space regarding their stories and methods. I hold a small amount of BTC, BCH, ETH, LTC, XMR, ZEC and NEO, as well as various insignificant altcoin positions. I also hold stock positions in CBOE, AU, AUY, MUX, CFWFF and TOLWF. Connect with me on Twitter (@BenjaminPirus).
