By dan saada November 3, 2019 Off
The developers of the Ethereum Classic project have provided the roadmap for the hard fork.  The road map is named Agharta.  The update mainly concentrates on setting the compatibility on the Ethereum Blockchain.
The upgrade will be including the ETH Constantinople features as well.  The fork is set to progress in phases.  The first phase will be started on November 13, 2019, when there will be the launch of Net Morden.  The main net fork will happen on January 15, 2019.  These dates are only tentative and might change according to information from developers.
The current market value of ETC/USD is $556 million.  The token has been changing hands at $4.33.  The token has been trying to break the $5 handle, and it has been trading in ranges.
The Timeline of Ethereum classic has travelled to several events that created the current scenario.  Ethereum Launches took place on July 30, 2015.  Slock.it created the DEO on April 05, 2016.  On April 30, 2016, the Crowdsale for the DAO began.  The security proposal was made on May 26, 2016.  A moratorium was called on May 27, 2016.
TheDAO crowdsale ended on May 27, 2016.   The Recursive call bug was discovered on June 9, 2016, and several events followed, and we are now here at Agharta.
ETC is based on Proof of Work.  It makes use of the Ethash hashing algorithm.  Ethereum classic can be purchased from several cryptocurrency exchanges like BTC Trade UA, CoinBene, Liquid, BTC Markets, CPDAX, C-CEX, Bitfinex, Bitbns, BTC-Alpha, Bittrex, Bit-Z, OKCoin International, C2CX, Coinsuper, Poloniex, CoinExchange, Gatehub, Korbit, Crex24, Coinut, HBUS, Binance, OKEx, QBTC, CoinEx, Koineks, Stocks. Exchange, Cryptomate, ChaoEX, BitForex, Exrates, BigONE, HitBTC, Indodax, Cryptopia, Kucoin, Huobi, EXX, BtcTrade, LiteBit, ZB.COM, Upbit, Coinhub, Coinnest, Coinbase Pro, LBank, Coinroom, CoinEgg, Bithumb, FCoin, ABCC, Bitsane, RightBTC, Coinone, Bibox, CoinTiger, Gate.io, Exmo, Ovis, Instant Bitex, BCEX, YoBit, and Kraken.
In many cases, it is not possible to buy Ethereum Classic by making use of USD directly.  Investors who need to buy Ethereum Classic should, first of all, buy Bitcoin or Ethereum via a cryptocurrency exchange, and then they need to exchange the deals in USD making use of GDAX, Coinbase, and Changelly.
Ethereum Classic has been trading 8.1% higher throughout the week.
