The Bakkt bitcoin futures contracts peaked to a new high, signaling strong institutional interest in BTC, risk exposure, affinity in ‘physically’ acquiring the underlying asset.
During a period of high volatility for bitcoin, the futures market picked up in earnest, breaking the previous record from last week and continuing on a streak of records over the past months. Bakkt now habitually trades above 2,000 BTC per day, about two months after its launch.
Realtime updates: @BakktBot | Sats for server costs: https://t.co/TF6sNUwWpO
— Bakkt Volume Bot (@BakktBot) November 27, 2019
This time, BTC futures trading surged past 3,100 contracts, with the potential to rise further after the launch of options on futures .
The breakout Bakkt volume arrives on a day when bitcoin spot trading was not unusual and reached around $22 billion in the past day. But almost all futures markets remained much livelier, including BitMEX contracts.
Betting on bitcoin futures prices puts a new set of traders at the wheel, and makes BTC whales a bit less influential. Tether (USDT) would also start losing its grip on BTC price discovery, as futures markets follow a different logic. The Bakkt record volume also happened at a time when bitcoin price broke out for a relief rally, easily vaulting $7,500 just hours after breaking down to $6,000. BTC hiked to $7,552.00 as of 18:08 GMT, potentially triggering heightened interest and a rally to a higher valuation.
Bakkt is now seen as capable of setting new peaks each day. The exchange operator will also expand with a product based on the monthly physical-delivery futures, and offer cash-settled products.
The BitMex futures market also reawakened, after recently falling to around $1 billion in daily trading. The market rose to above $3.6 billion in 24 hours. At this point, attempts to short BTC proved a losing proposition once again. BTC quickly shook off the day’s panic after the news of the large-scale Ethereum (ETH) theft from Upbit.
The recent Bakkt activity, however, does not reveal the intentions of traders. Some contracts may never take physical delivery but sell and move onto the next contract.
Will be interesting to follow up on the contracts that were bought recently. Will they be kept to expiry as a mean to acquire physical #BTC or will they be dumped next time the price goes up?
— ecoinometrics (@ecoinometrics) November 27, 2019
Bitcoin futures also offer a glimpse of general sentiment and potential spots of resistance, as gaps form at some prices. At this point, BTC still battles to recover the $10,000 level, and futures markets may be the key.
Bitcoin futures GAP to be filled at $10170…..we shall fill it, the only question is WEN. #bitcoin #BTC pic.twitter.com/953F3EvzB8
— Łitecoin Bag Holder™ (@Litecoin__Lord) November 27, 2019
Bitcoin prices picked up late on Wednesday, with the potential to renew optimism and stage a rapid rally.
What do you think about Bakkt’s record bitcoin futures volumes? Share your thoughts in the comments section below!
Images via Bitcoinist Media Library, Twitter: @BakktBot, @ecoinnometrics, @Litecoin_Lord
