20 years later, Simkin began his online marketing business firm called BusinessNET that provides end-to-end marketing and sales services to established companies worldwide. He also started a business leadership program dubbed Mastermind.
Simkin towards helping people achieve their dreams of becoming a millionaire has highlighted patterns of living in this century that keeps people from becoming Millionaires they aim to achieve. With his experience before becoming a millionaire, he explained ways people could maneuver, live in this time and get to become millionaires and own multi-million dollar investment.
After highlighting several points as to how individuals can live to achieve becoming a millionaire, the steps have been divided into phases as explained by Ben Simkin
Towards becoming a self-made millionaire: Time utilization factor
According to the millionaire, individuals ought to create their own personal intellectual property. This is because jobs now are either remote or onsite and basically offer money for the time spent. However, he advised that individuals should strive to make sure that as they sleep, they are earning through improving intellectual property. He says that time spent working should be diverted to creating an asset that can be upgraded to make profit.
Towards becoming a self-made millionaire: Skill mastering
Using himself as an example, Smikin narrated that when he was building his IT and software firm and other developers focused on Microsoft, he specialized on other technologies where he learnt new skills that were able to make him earn more.
He also hammered on customers’ desire as a path to financial freedom and hunting for information. He recommended a book authored by Jay Abraham “Getting everything you can out of all you’ve got”.
Towards becoming a self-made millionaire: Premium delivery
After managing to get enough customers, Simkin advises that potential business owners deliver services beyond clients’ imagination and advised that they open up to challenges.
