— XRPL Monitor (@XRPL_Monitor) April 23, 2020
The experienced Bitcoin trader Big Chonis Trading describes that Bitcoin is showing a positive development for the sixth week in a row since the low in mid-March of almost $3,800 on the weekly chart. In his opinion, Bitcoin will decouple itself from the stock market and show its own performance development, independent of the price development of the stock market.
Current weekly chart, 6 green in a row … EMA26 resistance., weekend means $BTC on its own, I think this will eventually turn #bitcoin into more of a leader than a follower with equities over time pic.twitter.com/5lnhzbKP9F
— Big Chonis Trading😷 (@BigChonis) April 25, 2020
Crypto-Trader Teddy explains on Twitter that Ethereum has shown a strong recovery since the low in mid-March and has risen by more than 30% since then. Nevertheless, he points out that the newly formed support levels have not yet been tested and that these will have to prove themselves in case of an emergency. Nevertheless he draws a bullish scenario for ETH.
Incredibly strong recovery here, nearly 30% from the local bottom.
However, genuinely concerned about those resistance levels that were never tested as support – rules are rules, gaps eventually always get closed. $ETH pic.twitter.com/M3aMikc8Kq
— Teddy (@TeddyCleps) April 24, 2020
The research and analysis company Arcane Research describes that the FED (Central Bank of America) continues to print money without an upper limit, but for Bitcoin havling is next. The institution sees this event as a good opportunity to attract new investors and thus attract fresh capital to the market:
While FED is printing money, Bitcoin has different plans with an upcoming halving in just three weeks. This will cut the yearly production in half, from 12.5BTC to 6.25BTC per block. This quantitative hardening may attract new investors to bitcoin, as ‘the money printer’ keeps running at full speed.
Experts in the industry are currently in dispute whether the halving is already priced in . It remains to be seen whether the halving will have a positive effect on the Bitcoin price. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and don’t miss any hot news anymore! Do you like our price indices ?
