Home Cryptocurrency Bitfinex launches Tether Gold Futures Trading after it reached $ 21 million...
Important cryptocurrency exchange Bitfinex, the sister exchange of stablecoin company Tether, has rolled out the futures trade for the new gold-covered Tether currency.
From March 6, Bitfinex users can trade futures contracts on Tether Gold (XAU tegen) against Tether (USDT), a well-known and controversial stablecoin linked to the US dollar.
Bitfinex announced the news on Friday and indicated that futures traders will allow traders to buy or sell assets for a certain price and data in the future with leverage up to 100x. The stock exchange also noted that the futures and derivatives trading on Bitfinex is handled by iFinex Financial Technologies, a product division at iFinex, the parent company of both Bitfinex and Tether.
According to the blog post, trading in Tether Gold / Tether futures will only be available to verified users in certain jurisdictions. According to Bitfinex verification rules, account verification is not required to trade or execute transactions with different cryptocurrencies on Bitfinex, while the exchange provides two verification levels for deposits and withdrawals of stable coins such as Tether.
A spokesperson for Bitfinex clarified that the list of jurisdictions that are eligible for trading in Tether Gold / Tether futures is the same as that applied to the general terms of service for derivatives on the Bitfinex website. Specifically, the list states countries such as Cuba, North Korea, Venezuela, Iran, Syria and the attached region of Crimea as prohibited jurisdictions.
The launch of futures contracts that trade for Tether Gold will generate even more exposure to the asset, Bitfinex said in the announcement. Tether Gold exceeded a $ 21 million market capitalization on March 4, making it the world’s largest gold-backed digital asset by overtaking its closest rival PAX Gold (PAXG).
At the time of printing, the fully diluted market capitalization of Tether Gold represents $ 26.8 million, PAX Gold has only about $ 18.7 million in market capitalization, according to data from major crypto-tracker Etherscan.
However, PAX Gold has been launched for Tether Gold for months. Stablecoin operator Paxos launched PAX Gold in September 2019 as the “first crypto asset that can be exchanged for physical gold.” Tether Gold was launched at the end of January 2020 and the trade was immediately rolled out on Bitfinex.
In response to the news, Tether CTO Paolo Ardoino said that Tether Gold really had a great start, predicting that Tether Gold should soon reach a market capitalization of at least $ 100 million. He said:
“I believe that this is nothing compared to the potential of this new asset, especially in the context of increased interest from investors in risk diversification and capital security against political uncertainty. Tether Gold offers diversification in terms of risk and volatility and I expect it will reach a market capitalization of at least $ 100 million. “
Bitfinex and Tether continue to collaborate actively in the cryptocurrency market, despite being confronted with class-action lawsuits that accuse them of manipulating cryptomarkets.
Subscribe to our groups Facebook and Telegram and stay informed.
