Make sure you understand the fees of each exchange before you buy Zcash or deposit another cryptocurrency to trade for Zcash. Trading and transfer fees tend to be competitive among the well-known exchanges, but the combination of account funding fees, including credit card fees, trading fees, and spreads can be costly.
For exchanges that do not support direct purchases of ZEC, theyt, can put your trade into negative territory that may take some time to reach a profit.
Buying Zcash is a fairly straightforward process because ZEC is supported by so many exchanges and a number of wallet choices exist. Electric Coin Company, the creators of Zcash, lists a number of wallet options but only endorses the Zcash desktop wallet.
You’ll need a place to store your Zcash and several popular crypto wallets support ZEC. However, many of these choices may not support the privacy features of Zcash. Wallets that support transparent addresses are more common.
For support of private z-addresses, you can consider Guarda, a third-party mobile wallet for Android, or ZecWallet, the open-source desktop wallet offered by the Zcash Foundation, a non-profit formed to serve users of the Zcash protocol and blockchain. The latter supports Windows, Mac OS and Linux.
Depending on which exchange you choose, there are several ways of funding your account. For exchanges that don’t offer direct USD purchases of Zcash ZEC, you’ll have to deposit an accepted cryptocurrency. Bitcoin (BTC) and Ethereum (ETH) have become the defacto gold and silver of cryptocurrency trading and are generally accepted for deposit on exchanges.
Once your BTC or ETH is in your trading account, you can trade for other coins or tokens like ZEC.
A few exchanges accept direct purchase of ZEC with USD. In these cases, you may have one of several funding options, including wire transfers from your bank, ACH bank transfers, or credit or debit card purchases. Generally speaking, credit or debit card purchases are a costlier option with exchanges charging fees as high as 5% for using a credit card. In some cases, multiple fees can apply.
Wire transfers may cost up to $25 per transfer and may have fees at your bank as well. ACH transfers are usually the least expensive way to fund your account but can delay your trading by a day or two while the transfer is processing.
Some exchanges only allow purchases of ZEC with another cryptocurrency but allow direct purchases of BTC or ETH. If your chosen exchange doesn’t support direct purchases of ZEC with USD you can often purchase BTC or ETH directly and then use your cryptocurrency balance to purchase ZEC on the exchange.
The mechanics of your ZEC trade depend on how you buy ZEC. For direct purchases with USD, you may be able to simply buy ZEC at a fixed price set by the exchange. In other cases, or if you’re trading one cryptocurrency for another, you may have a wider range of options, much like when buying stocks through a broker.
Many of the same types of trades used in stock trading are supported by most exchanges, including limit orders, market orders and stop orders. Because cryptocurrency is often volatile, many traders avoid using market orders and stop-loss orders.
Many investors like to keep an eye on their investments and a number of crypto apps can provide market insights, industry or coin-specific news and other features. If you want to see your portfolio performance in real-time, consider using a crypto portfolio tracker to monitor all your crypto investments in one place.
The uptrend in price for ZEC began in early 2017, although like most cryptocurrencies, the chart spikes sharply in late 2017 and into early 2018 — after which, prices fell much lower. This doesn’t make ZEC unique. Many actively-traded coins and tokens have a similar chart. Since early 2017, the price of ZEC has seen measured gains but in the past 12 months, the price has fallen over 60%. While many cryptocurrency prices trend in groups, ZEC hasn’t enjoyed the same gains seen in BTC in recent months.
An investment in Zcash is a bet on the currency’s acceptance. News that buoys the price, like JPMorgan Chase using Zcash’s zero-knowledge security layer (ZSL), can help create awareness and may help build acceptance.
Anonymity: Zcash uses the familiar tech of Bitcoin and brings the option of anonymity. The vast majority of Zcash transactions use t-addresses, making them transparent (like Bitcoin) but offer e z-addresses to leverage the privacy features of ZEC if combined with a wallet that supports anonymity..
Interchangeable coins: A concern for some traders and investors is that coins can become “tainted” if used for illicit purposes by others. Chances are good that coins used for illegal or questionable transactions are shielded transactions, effectively making all coins equal in value and completely interchangeable.
Fixed supply: The supply of ZEC is fixed at 21 million coins, just over 7 million of which are currently in circulation. If demand for the coin increases, a fixed supply can help boost prices in the future.
ASIC resistance: Bitcoin mining has become more centralized over time due to the increased difficulty of mining, which now requires ASIC mining using expensive and power-hungry specialized equipment. This can prevent independent miners from participating and centralizes mining among fewer miners. Zcash is built to be ASIC resistant and brings a greater level of decentralization.
Few wallets support z-addresses: Zcash is supported by dozens of wallets and can even be used in combination with uber-secure hardware wallets, but most of the wallet options for ZEC do not support privacy-focused z-addresses.
Less favored by privacy-conscious users: Competing privacy-focused cryptocurrencies, like Monero and Dash, enjoy both a larger market capitalization and wider use than Zcash among privacy-conscious users. Both Monero and Dash have a 2-year head start on Zcash which didn’t join the privacy-coin party until 2016. In time, we may see a shift in use and acceptance for ZEC.
Slower transaction speeds: With transaction speeds 4 times faster than Bitcoin and with twice the block capacity, Zcash marks an improvement in speed but a transaction can take minutes to settle, which is still slower than Monero and much slower than Dash, the primary privacy-coin competitors to Zcash.
Relatively low U.S. trading volume: Exit strategy is an important consideration when entering any trade. The majority of trading for ZEC takes place on Chinese-focused exchanges. Lower trading volume on exchanges frequently used by U.S. buyers can make selling larger quantities of ZEC more challenging.
