A current or former Chainalysis employee has gone rogue and conducted an AMA on r/Bitcoin in which he disclosed sensitive information about the company’s blockchain forensics capabilities. The whistleblower then appears to have had a change of heart and deleted all their comments. Thankfully, the internet never forgets. The comments remain archived on Removeddit.com and they provide a fascinating insight into one of the most hated companies in crypto.
As a company that works hand in glove with law enforcement, governments, defense contractors and other three-letter agencies, Chainalysis is secretive about the sauce that makes up its proprietary tech. The company was dismayed, therefore, to discover that an anonymous employee was conducting an ask me anything (AMA) on Reddit on June 24 without their permission. Users of r/Bitcoin proceeded to ask a series of probing questions about Chainalysis’ forensic capabilities, which the anon was only too happy to answer.
Twelve hours later, perhaps after sobering up, or after management tracked down the rogue employee and placed pressure on them, the comments were deleted, but an archived version remains. When asked about the company’s take on BTC mixing tools such as Coinjoin, Wasabi and Samourai Whirlpool, for instance, the anon began: “I personally love it. The company management hates it, of course. Things like that destroy the need for our/their software. It can make the software completely irrelevant.”
Many cryptocurrency users feel that they are powerless to attain a reasonable measure of privacy in the face of such well-funded and well-equipped adversaries. As the Chainalysis anon’s AMA shows, however, forensics tools aren’t nearly as powerful as they’re made out to be, and simple obfuscation measures can thwart them. (Having recently spoken to a Chainalysis employee at a blockchain conference, in which a similar sentiment was expressed, news.Bitcoin.com can attest to this.) When quizzed about the ability of coin mixing and other privacy tools to make Chainalysis obsolete, the anon replied:
Even just privacy coins are more than anyone can handle right now, but throw in anonymization techniques, and forensic tracking utilities are done for. They might still have a niche purpose, but it will be small.
Commenting on Chainalysis’ most hated adversarial tool, the anon ventured that it was probably Wasabi , a privacy-oriented BTC wallet that used Coinjoin. While conceding that bitcoin mixers are “still bad” for forensics firms, the anon asserted that “Wasabi is enemy number one. There is no way to de-anonymize it, and I don’t see how the government can legally take Wasabi down, so it will probably persist. Put it this way, if everyone used Wasabi, Chainalysis would go out of business.”
While observing that “running your own node and electrum server is a great way to not get your IP tracked” by Chainalysis software, he countered that mobile wallets are bad for privacy. As for the five likeliest things to have your bitcoin transaction flagged as suspicious, the answer came: “Being stolen funds (like from a hacking type incident), coming from a dnm, coming from a mixer, coming from terrorist financing, and coming from ransomware payout addresses.”
An Unethical Company or an Innovative Startup Fighting the Bad Guys?
To say that Chainalysis and similar companies are controversial within the bitcoin space would be an understatement. On the one hand, their software can generate useful research reports into on-chain activities, including UTXOs, “hodler waves,” and lost coins. It can also be used to follow the flow of hacked funds from exchanges. But on the other hand, many people believe Chainalysis goes against the spirit of bitcoin, and that its software will be sold to despotic regimes who will use it to surveil and persecute cryptocurrency users, leading to a financial system that is even less inclusive than the one Bitcoin was designed to replace.
When quizzed on the most unethical thing Chainalysis has done, the anon responded: “1. Transparency. 2. Defeating the purpose of a system that was designed for anonymity, thereby reducing the interest and market for crypto. And pushing people into other crypto platforms, away from what we/they are able to track.”
“[Chainalysis] definitely think they are the good guys,” he commented. “They are definitely team government, which doesn’t sit right with me, personally. Self-righteous would be a good way to describe the attitude of some of them … Not a single person in the company has displayed any sort of concern over the ethics of our software except for one person being concerned that law enforcement would use our software and abuse their authority … He left.”
According to the anon, the government agencies using Chainalysis software include HSI, FBI and IRS (they “seem to have the most licenses, or are, at least, the most active in using our software, since their names come up constantly.”) In addition, “ATF, DEA, SEC, Secret Service, CIA (through In Q Tel), and most of the other federal law enforcement agencies are running the software. Only really large police departments are running the software (it isn’t cheap) like NYPD. I know some district attorney offices have software licenses too, but I don’t know which ones. Oh and RCMP uses the software too. And Europol. The national police (NCA) in the UK, as well.”
Other gems from the now deleted AMA include confirmation that Chainalysis runs its own Electrum nodes (at one point it was responsible for 10% of all BTC nodes) and discussion of whether Chainalysis creates dusting attacks for tracking purposes: “It has been discussed a few times, but no one has ever admitted to it. It doesn’t seem like there is much utility in it, because if the address exists on the blockchain, it can already be tracked. And if it doesn’t, a single payment to it will make it appear in the software, so no need for dusting. It wouldn’t improve IP tracking capabilities.”
The anon also explained that Chainalysis keeps its “own database on entities in the crypto space are a known, or believed to be bad actors. Individual people aren’t exactly tracked.” As for cryptocurrency that has passed through a mixer, “Mixed funds are rated as high risk if the mixer is attributed (known about). Same level as dark net markets.” During the AMA, he recommended monero for privacy, but reiterated the need for caution for mobile wallets that don’t incorporate privacy measures.
Final privacy advice from the current or former Chainalysis employee went as follows: “I would say to avoid mobile wallets, look into Wasabi/Coinjoin and similar efforts, run a VPN/tor at all times, remember that everything you check out on the clear net is being logged by someone.” Shortly after typing those words , Reddit user “chainalysis1” deleted their account.
What are your thoughts on Chainalysis? Let us know in the comments section below.
Did you know you can mix your Bitcoin Cash with Cashshuffle? This feature is coming soon to the Bitcoin.com wallet. Read more about Cashshuffle here .
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
The bitcoin ASIC mining rig manufacturer, Ebang International Holdings, was recently listed on Nasdaq last Friday on June 26. Ebang is now the second mining rig manufacturer to have a U.S. initial public offering (IPO) by selling company shares. Since ... read more.
A number of cryptocurrency proponents have been discussing the stablecoin DAI this week, as the DAI allegedly held on the Compound platform is much larger than what is recorded in circulation. At press time, Compound statistics show there’s $523 million ... read more.
A Russian district court has dismissed bitcoin theft as a crime since cryptocurrency is not regulated in Russia and there is no legal status for bitcoin. The accused were found guilty, sentenced to prison, and ordered to return only the ... read more.
The UK is denying Nicolas Maduro access to Venezuela's gold worth about $1 billion, stored at the Bank of England. The UK High Court has ruled that the country does not recognize Maduro as president of Venezuela, blocking him from ... read more.
Arcane Crypto, a Norway-based investment company, said Thursday that it is planning to go public through a reverse takeover by Vertical Ventures, a publicly traded Swedish firm. Vertical Ventures will buy Arcane Crypto for $33 million by issuing over 6.6 ... read more.
According to a number of crypto prediction markets and futures, Trump will still win the election in 123 days, but his chances have lessened a great deal. No matter who wins, however, the large sums of money flowing into these ... read more.
Crypto Use-Cases in Africa on the Rise, According to Luno
Twitter and Square CEO, Jack Dorsey recently said “Africa will define the future (especially the Bitcoin one!)” But was he right? Crypto in Africa on the Rise Sad to be leaving the continent…for now. Africa will define the future (especially ... read more.
The United States tax agency has published a request for information pertaining to privacy-centric cryptocurrencies and technologies that obfuscate crypto transactions. The IRS-CI Cyber Crimes Unit request is also asking for information in relation to “layer two offchain protocol networks, ... read more.
A global bitcoin scam has reportedly leaked personal data of about 250,000 people from more than 20 countries. The majority of the compromised data were of people in the U.K., Australia, South Africa, and the U.S. This bitcoin scam operates ... read more.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has a new president as Germany took over the presidency from China. The intergovernmental organization also highlighted the need for more guidance on cryptocurrencies as many countries have not yet fully implemented its revised ... read more.
More than 2,500 merchants in Austria can accept three types of cryptocurrencies via the payment processor Salamantex. The company explained that the system was tested with a number of select A1 5Gi network shops. Since the Covid-19 outbreak, contactless payments ... read more.
Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome ... read more.
