Bullish as ever, Max Keiser believes that a sky-high Bitcoin price will come this year purely as a result of coronavirus’ impact on the fiat economy.
Bitcoin ( BTC ) will reach $100,000 and Jamie Dimon will be “begging” the United States Federal Reserve for money to buy some.
Those were just two of the predictions from Max Keiser on March 5, as the coronavirus outbreak sees financial markets tumble again.
Speaking on the latest edition of his RT news magazine, The Keiser Report , the well-known Bitcoin proponent said that global panic would have a profound impact on Bitcoin uptake this year.
2020, he explained, was “part two of the global financial crisis” which originally spawned the Bitcoin whitepaper in 2009.
“...Now Bitcoin will experience part two of the global financial crisis — it’s already close to $10,000 a coin,” he told fellow presenter Stacey Herbert.
As Cointelegraph reported , Bitcoin saw losses in line with traditional markets including gold last week but has made gains in recent days.
Referencing a dream which JPMorgan CEO and notorious Bitcoin skeptic Jamie Dimon claimed he had last month, Keiser continued that even he would soon privilege Bitcoin over fiat.
Dimon allegedly dreamt that coronavirus infected attendees of the World Economic Forum in Davos. While the victims “spread” the disease afterward, he appeared happy — possibly sarcastically — that it had killed the world’s most powerful financial figures.
“The only good news from that is that it might have just killed the elite,” CNN quoted him as saying at the time.
Ironically, it was at Davos in 2018 that Dimon denied to Cointelegraph that he disliked Bitcoin.
Keiser meanwhile was wholly unconvinced.
“He’s confusing the coronavirus with the Bitcoin virus; the same thing with Peter Schiff ,” he explained.
“Their minds are being hacked by the Bitcoin virus. Soon Jamie will be a blathering idiot on the ground begging the Fed for money to buy Bitcoin. He’s going to turn into a kind of street urchin. Same with Peter Schiff.”
Gold bug Schiff also continues his criticism of Bitcoin, claiming its price is set for a selloff due to what he considers as insufficient gains this week.
