©Elmin Media . All Rights Reserved.
Cryptocurrency exchange OKEx adds Raiden, Stellar, Monero tokens
Cryptocurrency exchange OKEx on December 28, 2017, announced support for Raiden(RDN), Stellar (XLM), Monero(XMR) on its platform.
— OKEx (@OKEx_) December 28, 2017
According to the official announcement, the deposit of the three tokens went live on December 28, 2017 and spot trading and withdrawal was launched on the following day.
In addition to RDN, XLM, and XMR, OKEx announced support for a number of other tokens last month, including DigiByte (DGB), SwftCoin (SWFTC), Ripio Credit Network (RCN), Populous (PPT), OpenANX (OAX), Request Token (REQ), Enigma (ENG), ICONOMI (ICN), and NEM (XEM), among others.
©Elmin Media . All Rights Reserved. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Service, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy.
Disclaimer: EconoTimes provides references and links to selected blogs and other sources of economic and market information as an educational service to its clients and prospects and does not endorse the opinions or recommendations of the blogs or other sources of information. Clients and prospects are advised to carefully consider the opinions and analysis offered in the blogs or other information sources in the context of the client or prospect's individual analysis and decision making. None of the blogs or other sources of information is to be considered as constituting a track record. Past performance is no guarantee of future results and EconoTimes specifically advises clients and prospects to carefully review all claims and representations made by advisors, bloggers, money managers and system vendors before investing any funds or opening an account with any Brokerage. Any news, opinions, research, data, or other information contained within this website is provided as general market commentary and does not constitute investment or trading advice. EconoTimes expressly disclaims any liability for any lost principal or profits without limitation which may arise directly or indirectly from the use of or reliance on such information. As with all such advisory services, past results are never a guarantee of future results.
stories unfolding in the global economy.
