World-famous whistleblower, Edward Snowden, commented earlier today about Bitcoin's recent price crash via his Twitter account.
Snowden stated that the price crash comes as a result of too much panic and too little reason.
The crash itself saw BTC drop by around 50% in less than 24 hours, as the investors entered a mass sell-off in fear of coronavirus impact on the crypto industry.
Edward Snowden, the famous whistleblower, commented on Twitter about Bitcoin’s recent price crash that took down the entire crypto market. Snowden tweeted earlier today, noting that this is the first time in a while he felt like buying Bitcoin .
drop was the result of too little reason and too much panic.
This is the first time in a while I've felt like buying bitcoin. That drop was too much panic and too little reason.
— Edward Snowden (@Snowden) March 13, 2020
crash that took Bitcoin down from $7,300 to $3,782 in less than 24 hours,
causing the world’s first and largest crypto to lose 50% of its value. The drop
itself comes as a consequence of worldwide fear, caused by the coronavirus
outbreak that has now spread to most countries around the world.
suffered due to the virus’ spreading — the stock market has crashed, the price
of gold has gone down in the last several days, and panic seems to be causing
investors around the world to liquidate any asset they own.
rising chaos by entering a price war within the oil sector, which is currently
predicted the crypto winter of 2018, tweeted yesterday his prediction for the
If I interpret the chart without bias, I would say sub $1,000
— Peter Brandt (@PeterLBrandt) March 12, 2020
Snowden, on the other hand, seems optimistic about the future of crypto . Two years ago, in 2018, he said that digital scarcity is the coins’ fundamental innovation, and in late 2019, he hinted that he himself might turn to Bitcoin to avoid the US’ attempt to restrict his access to profits from his book.
Even the servers that he used for leaking thousands of documents in 2013 were paid via BTC, although he criticized the blockchain for being too public. He also admitted to using Monero in March 2018 and has publicly supported Zcash due to its privacy features.
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
