Chris Vermeulen Monday May 11, 2020 14:49
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
What happens to the global markets when the US  Fed begins to weaken stimulus activity and when the global markets must begin  to function on their own?  Are the global markets capable of sustaining  current price levels without the Fed supporting them?
A recent news article suggests the US Fed has  drastically slashed stimulus activity over the past 5+ days.  From a peak  level of nearly $600 Billion a week to current levels near $83 Billion per week  – a -86% decrease.  How will this reflect in the market's ability to  sustain current price levels in the face of disastrous Q2 expectations? Yup,  markets are falling fast and hard going into the weekend as expected!
Another common tool for skilled traders is the  Buffet Indicator which helps us understand stock market valuation levels and  measures extreme trends by measuring Standard Deviation ranges. Currently, the  Buffet Indicator is near the highest levels ever recorded over the past 60+  years.  Additionally, a “detrended” version of the Buffet Indicator  suggests a broader global recession would require a further devaluation before  a true bottom is likely to complete.
This first Buffet Indicator chart shows the  current market value to GDP and highlights the recent peak as being the highest  level ever recorded.  Notice how this level is much higher than the peak  in 2000.  This indicates that the stock market valuation level is  excessive compared to historical norms.
This Detrended Buffet Indicator suggests the  recent peak may not reflect the same excessive valuation levels as we  experienced in 2000, yet are historically near the upper range of extended  valuation levels.  Notice how price devalues as a process of setting up a  valuation advance throughout time. When prices become overvalued (think of  simple supply/demand theory), demand typically collapses – sending prices  lower. At this time, we have the global Covid-19 virus event disrupting the  demand-side of this equation.  When demand collapses, where do prices go?
Our research team believes the current trend  will eventually end and global stock market prices will collapse again as a  much deeper price low/bottom sets up.  Skilled traders need to understand  that as long a the US Fed was pouring $600 Billion a week into the credit/stock  market, the recovery in price was going to be substantial.  Once that  stimulus ends and the markets are left to function on their own, the aspects of  the demand collapse become more evident.
In a way, the Fed acted as a “demand supplement”  for the US and global markets.  Buying up assets and supporting the credit  markets in an effort to transition us past the crisis event that took place in  late February and March 2020.  How quickly will the global markets  transition back into a declining mode in the continues to stay passive?
Our original targets where price may attempt to  form a deeper bottom near the 2015~2016 price range is still very valid.   Near the peak of the recent selloff, price levels reached these predicted  levels just before the US Fed began the stimulus programs. Now, price levels  are nearly 35%+ above these low price levels.
It seems obvious to our research team that  continued lack of consumer demand and lack of central bank intervention will  likely result in the US stock market moving lower in the near future and  attempting to establish a true price bottom.  We believe that bottom will  likely happen near July or August 2020 and will likely reach levels near, or  below, the 2015~2016 price range but this analysis will change as we progress  forward with new events and analysis.
You can see our predicted price bottom on this  Weekly Smart Cash Index chart.  The lines we've drawn into the future show  where we believe the first attempt at a true price bottom may take place near  July or August 2020.
Remember, this type of price rotation is very  healthy for the US and global markets.  The price must rotate through  these types of trends to eliminate excessive risk/froth and to secure a proper  price equilibrium where valuation levels can begin to appreciate again.   This process is almost cathartic in a sense.  The ability to regain a  “true valuation base/bottom” in price (consider Fibonacci Price Theory )  allows the future appreciation cycle to function more efficiently (having  eliminated excessive risk valuations).
We will get through this and the global economy  will continue to function.  We just have to get through the next 6+ months  and the relative economic disaster of Q2 and Q3 (likely) before we're going to  see any real chance at true price appreciation.
At this point, when the Fed-induced upside trend  breaks – watch out below.
As a technical analyst and trader since 1997, I  have been through a few bull/bear market cycles in stocks and commodities. I  believe I have a good pulse on the market and timing key turning points for  investing and short-term swing traders. 2020 is an incredible year for traders  and investors.  Don’t miss all the incredible trends and trade  setups.
