We feature forex brokers that are fully regulated in the jurisdictions that they operate in. We believe this is the most important aspect of forex trading . Please view the risks associated with forex trading at the bottom of this page. Also access our affiliate disclaimer .
Regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). This is an independent U.S. federal agency established by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of 1974. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission regulates the commodity futures and options markets.
Member of the National Futures Association (NFA #0339826). The NFA is the industry-wide, self-regulatory organization for the U.S. derivatives industry, providing innovative and effective regulatory programs.
Regulated by The Cayman Islands Monetary Authority (CIMA). This is the primary financial services regulator of the Cayman Islands.
Forex trading involves significant risk of loss and is not suitable for all investors.
Authorized & Regulated by The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA #113942). This is an independent regulatory organization, responsible for overseeing the conduct of both retail and wholesale financial service providers in the UK.
City Index is a trading name of GAIN Capital UK Limited.
Company registered in England and Wales, number: 1761813. VAT number: 524837435.
74% of clients lose money. Capital at risk.
Regulated by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC). This is an independent Australian government body that acts as Australia’s corporate regulator. ASIC’s role is to enforce and regulate company and financial services laws to protect Australian consumers, and investors.
All trading involves risk and losses can exceed deposits.
City Index is a trading name of GAIN Capital Australia Pty Ltd.
GAIN Capital Australia Pty Ltd, 100 Harris street, Pyrmont, NSW 2009.
Regulated by the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS). This is Singapore’s central bank and financial regulatory authority. It administers the various statutes pertaining to money, banking, insurance, securities and the financial sector
All trading involves risk and losses can exceed deposits.
City Index is a trading name of GAIN Capital Singapore Pte Ltd. G
GAIN Capital Singapore Pte Ltd 168 Robinson Road, Capital Tower #20-01, Singapore 068912. Tel: 6826 9988. Fax: 6826 9968.
“There is a very high degree of risk involved in trading securities. With respect to margin-based foreign exchange trading, off-exchange derivatives, and cryptocurrencies , there is considerable exposure to risk, including but not limited to, leverage, creditworthiness, limited regulatory protection and market volatility that may substantially affect the price, or liquidity of a currency or related instrument. It should not be assumed that the methods, techniques, or indicators presented in these products will be profitable, or that they will not result in losses.”
Some of the links in this website either through images, text, audio or video are affiliate links. This means if you click on the link and purchase the item, the owner of this website will receive an affiliate commission.
To learn more visit our affiliate disclosure page.
