The recently launched IOTA- and Ethereum based information platform, Aid Squad, has released a new update on how rewards can be paid out.
Further projects are currently being discussed to stop or contain the spread of the coronavirus.
The pandemic information platform recently launched by GeoDB, Aid Squad, helps people around the world to better understand the corona virus, its causes and progression. The special feature of the IOTA – and Ethereum-based platform is that rewards can be collected for the publication of a digital medical record, thus rewarding commitment to the fight against the virus.
Aid Squad is a decentralized, globally available information platform that generates heat maps and other graphics from the health data submitted by users, such as the symptoms that occur or the geographical distribution, in order to better understand this and future pandemics.
Once a personal health record (PHR) has been created and the user has submitted data, rewards for the data provided will be linked to the PHR. The data generated in the rewards process is shared transparently on this website . The transparency portal also allows the collected rewards to be withdrawn and transferred to a wallet.
In addition, the portal provides an overview of current statistics and distributed rewards that have been distributed within the project.
The exact process is described by Aid Squad as follows:
In the reward system, each cause receives a token assignation in proportion to PHR submissions associated with it. The reward system generates incremental snapshots that emit a number of tokens related to the amount of PHRs submitted.
This adjustment, both an increase and decrease, takes the number tokens rewarded in a snapshot and caps the difference to 10%, this is if 100 tokens were rewarded in a snapshot, the next snapshot rewards between 90 and 110 tokens.
The tokens used for this purpose comply with the ERC777 token standard and are based on the Ethereum blockchain. The smart contracts mentioned above are also executed on it to enable the payouts and redemption of the collected points. The platform relies on the IOTA tangle and the Ethereum blockchain .
Voluntary donors can make a contribution to the platform, which will be distributed fairly among all participants, because by sharing their health data they enable the progress and further development of the platform. The great advantage of Aid Squad is the guarantee that no personal data, except information that may be shared, is publicly available. The following video introduces the new transparency portal in more detail.
Recently, Apple and Google announced a partnership to track infected people using an app, Bluetooth and geolocation data to keep them away from the healthy population. Criticism has been levelled particularly in the area of privacy and data protection. The collected data is stored on centralized servers and shared with the government and other institutions without explicitly asking the mobile phone owner.
The app TrackCovidCluster , developed by the IOTA community as part of a hackathon, solves the problem mentioned above. Data of contact persons are stored anonymously on the IOTA tangle. The contact data of a person will only be disclosed in case of a proven infection. Infected persons can use the app and anonymously tell their fellow men whether they have the coronavirus.
Non-infected people can use the app to find out if they are near infected people. As soon as a user becomes newly infected, all persons who have been in contact with the person in the last 14 days are warned. According to the developers, the solution can be used across national borders and is scalable, making the app suitable for mass use. It remeins to be seen whether decentralized solutions are actually used in Europe.
Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and don’t miss any hot news anymore! Do you like our price indices ?
