Celebrating KuCoin’s partnership with Dash and integration of Dash’s InstantSend feature., Kucoin and Dash have launched “Deposit to Win DASH!” The campaign is especially for qualified KuCoin users. The KuCoin users who participate in this campaign have a chance to win different DASH prizes.
#KuCoin has partnered with @Dashpay to launch the “Deposit to Win DASH!” campaign exclusively for qualified KuCoin users!
1⃣ Flash $DASH Deposits: win 0.66 DASH for fastest deposits!
2⃣ Deposit $DASH and win a share of 80 DASH!
— KUCOIN (@kucoincom) May 11, 2020
InstantSend is an innovative feature that boosts instant transactions on the Dash blockchain through transaction locking and masternode consensus. InstantSend enables Dash to perform better than the existing centralized payment platforms. Dash’s InstantSend feature offers the same method but in a decentralized form.
To enhance the user experience and benefits of the new collaboration, the two promotional strategies allow up to 445 selected winners to win a share of Dash. During the time of the activity, the users who don’t meet the requirements for net deposits of Dash competition on the KuCoin exchange platform will straightaway enter to win a share of reward worth 80 Dash.
For further details regarding the flash dash deposits and activity, you can visit,
A couple of months ago KuCoin announced the initiation of trading service for Dash/USDT trading pair on its spot trading desk.
KuCoin is known as “The People’s Exchange”. It is a globally growing cryptocurrency exchange that offers a variety of digital assets and currencies. The platform currently has 5M users across the globe with a trading volume of $320M per day. It was ranked 19 in the list of crypto exchanges based on its liquidity.
Meanwhile, Dash has been showing remarkable market growth in recent years. A few months back the Dash was added to the Binance Futures trading platform and the exchange gradually launched DASH/USDT perpetual contract. Dash has been quite popular amongst investors and traders. This year in January the coin surged by 178% i.e. from being at $41.87 to $116.43. The Dash coin marked its position amongst the top 20 coins.
