Latest cryptocurrency news and prices, 04 September 2019
Bitcoin's price continues on ascent to retest the $11,000 area while several altcoins flash green. Here are your latest cryptocurrency news and prices.
Bitcoin continues to climb upwards, edging closer to retest the $11,000 support while several altcoin markets are showing modest price gains on the day. Here are your latest cryptocurrency news and prices.
OKCoin, a San Francisco-based, fiat-savvy cryptocurrency exchange, recently announced the launch of a voting-driven initiative to donate as much as 1,000 Bitcoin (BTC) to developers of bitcoin, Bitcoin Cash (BCH) and Bitcoin SV (BSV).
As per a press release published on September 3, OKCoin pledged to distribute up to 1,000 BTC for the development of Bitcoin, Bitcoin Cash and Bitcoin SV.
OKCoin is one of the world’s top cryptocurrency exchanges by adjusted volume has dubbed the initiative ‘Let’s Build Bitcoin Together’. The project is calling on cryptocurrency enthusiasts to visit the OKCoin platform and vote for the project they would like to see receive a donation. Following each users vote, OKCoin has pledged to send 0.02 BTC (or the equivalent in BCH or BSV) on the voter’s behalf to the project of their choice.
Yesterday, we saw a decent upward move in bitcoin, Ethereum, ripple and binance coin against the US Dollar. ETH price climbed above the key $172 and $175 resistance levels. Moreover, there was a close above $175 and the 100 hourly simple moving average. However, the price struggled to gain momentum above the $180 and $181 resistance levels. As a result, there was a bearish reaction and the price tested the $175 support area.
Recently, there was a slow and steady rise in XRP price above $0.2550 against the US Dollar. Moreover, the price even settled above the $0.2600 resistance and the 100 hourly simple moving average. However, the bulls seem to be struggling to gain momentum above the $0.2650 resistance area. In the past three sessions, the price made more than two attempts to settle above $0.2650, but it failed.
Bitcoin Cash finally managed to clear the resistance at $300 in Tuesday’s trading session. The price action extended above $305 before charting a weekly high at $306.20 (Fibonacci swing high). The diminishing buying pressure left a gap that is currently explored by the sellers.
BCH/USD is struggling to hold ground above $295 short-term tentative support. The reversal from the recent high failed to find support above $300. Besides, the ascending trendline did little to stop the slide.
Litecoin price is slowly recovering and it is trading above the $68.00 level. However, LTC price must break the $70.00 resistance area to continue higher in the near term. The next major hurdle for the bulls is near the $72.00 and $75.00 levels. On the downside, the key support is at $65.00.
Tether Ltd. is planning to issue two new stablecoins, one pegged to a basket of commodities and another to the Chinese renminbi, according to Zhao Dong, an over-the-counter (OTC) trader in China and a shareholder of Bitfinex.
In 2018, iFinex Inc.—a privately held financial technology company based in the British Virgin Islands that operates Bitfinex and owns Tether Ltd.— handed $850 million over to Crypto Capital Corp., a Panamanian payment processor, in order for them to handle Bitfinex customers-fiat-withdrawals requests. After the agreement was made, the funds were seized by American, Polish and Portuguese authorities.
Binance is having a year to remember with major announcements every few months delivering more and more options to the end-user. Its own cryptocurrency BNB entered a notable uptrend at the beginning of the year with outstanding growth.
For the first four months, Binance Coin saw an increase of around 300%. The parabolic movement didn’t end there, as the cryptocurrency reached an all-time high of $39.68 on June 22nd, giving it a total increase of 566%.
Things went south from there, as BNB lost almost half of its value as it currently trades at around $22. Moreover, this happened despite Binance constantly adding new capabilities for its users, whereas at the beginning of the year the only things which seemingly drove the price up were the Initial Exchange Offerings (IEO) and the hype surrounding them.
Amid all this, it’s hard not to notice that Bitcoin, the leading cryptocurrency, has managed to retain its value and to substantially increase its market dominance.
EOS is ranked at #8 below Binance Coin on coinmarketcap. The price jumped up slightly, at a rate of 0.12% in the course of the past 24-hours. The trading volume recorded is $1.494 billion, whereas the supply has 930,278,985 EOS coins in play. As of this instant, the total market cap of EOS is $3.11 billion. EOS is priced at $3.34 in the market for now.
The dApp Network (LiquidApps) Episode 3 has been published. Reminiscent of Block.One, LiquidApps formulates solutions for the dApp Network which is a protocol within the blockchain. This was brought about so as to enhance scalability. Here are some of the key services offered by LiquidApps:
The second Bitcoin SV (BSV) hackathon took place August 17-19, seeking once again to lift the hardest working and most talented developers of the BSV community. Preliminary judging has now come and gone, and the top three projects have been selected to move on to CoinGeek Seoul conference as finalists.
The theme of this hackathon is the use of Bitcoin. Contestants could build any project they could imagine, but to win, they had to find an inventive way to allow ordinary users to use small amounts of Bitcoin to gain great value.
Monero’s XMR gained 2.35% on Tuesday. Following on from a 2.41% rise on Monday, Monero’s XMR ended the day at $75.26.
A relatively range-bound morning saw Monero’s XMR fall to a late morning intraday low $73.18 before finding support from the broader market.
Holding well above the first major support level at $70.71, Monero’s XMR rallied to an early afternoon intraday high $75.79.
Monero’s XMR came up against the first major resistance level at $75.51 before easing back to $74 levels.
For your daily top cryptocurrency news and price updates, be sure to check in daily at 14:00.
Help support journalists, the guardians of independent journalism, through our student media initiative that gives a voice to students and their generation! Find out more...
