Malicious Monero Miners Made Off with 5% of Coins in Circulation, Over $175 Million
‘Fair’ mining and privacy altcoin, Monero ( XMR ), shed $175 million as a result of malicious miners hijacking what amounts to an eye-popping 5% of XMR in circulation. The findings come by way of a cyber security researcher in Northern California, investigating a noticeable trend uptick in mining thievery generally.
Also read: William Shatner Joins Bitcoin Mining Project, Admits He Doesn’t Quite Get It
In preparation for the company newsletter, Unit 42, Palo Alto Networks researcher Josh Grunzweig blogged, The Rise of the Cryptocurrency Miners. It’s his effort to document a growing trend over the last year, malicious mining. Mr. Grunzweig’s frequent investigations on the subject caused him to dive deeper into the particulars. He came away with two critical findings: 1, malicious mining has indeed grown, and in direct relation to the giant price spikes of 2017; 2, Satoshi Pulse ranked 14th most valuable coin by market capitalization, Monero, has lost over $175 million, 5% of its present circulation, to malicious mining activity.
Breakdown of cryptocurrencies targeted by malicious miners. Palo Alto Networks
Palo Alto Networks is a publicly traded (NYSE: PANW) cyber security company, focusing mostly on proprietary firewall solutions. It boasts almost $2 billion in revenue last year, with a global service reach of 50,000 customers in 150 countries, employing more than 5,000 people around the world.
Mr. Grunzweig “extracted a total of 2,341 Monero wallets from the analyzed sample set,” he explained in the post. “Unlike some other cryptocurrencies, it is impossible to query the Monero blockchain to extract a single wallet’s current balance without the owner’s password. This is by design: a result of how Monero was originally designed. As such, I needed to take a different methodology in order to determine how much money attackers were able to mine.”
“Fortunately,” he mentioned, “in addition to the wallets, I was also able to determine which mining pools were used for various mining efforts. Looking at the top ten mining pools used by this malware, I determined that all but one allows for anonymous viewing of statistics based off of the wallet as an identifier. This anonymous viewing is intentional, as it allows users to anonymously connect and use various mining pools without inputting any personal identifiable information.”
Instances where a new cryptominer sample was discovered over time. Palo Alto Networks
Almost in passing, he refers to one “interesting note,” namely “that the total Monero represented roughly 5% of all Monero in circulation at the time of writing. This of course doesn’t take into account web-based Monero miners, or Monero miners that we do not have visibility into. As such, we can assume that the actual percentage of Monero in circulation that was mined via malicious activity is actually higher.”
He concludes by suggesting the malicious trend has leveled off some due to prices plummeting in recent months, noting it “is clear that such activities have been incredibly profitable for individuals or groups who have mined cryptocurrency using malicious techniques for a long period of time. A total of $175m has been found to be mined historically via the Monero currency, representing roughly 5% of all Monero currently in circulation.” Research revelations came around the same time Japanese police announced they’re investigating suspects employing Coinhive, a mining script used in Monero, focusing on thefts similar to those mentioned above.
What do you think about Monero? Let us know in the comments.
Verify and track bitcoin cash transactions on our BCH Block Explorer , the best of its kind anywhere in the world. Also, keep up with your holdings, BCH and other coins, on our market charts at Satoshi Pulse , another original and free service from Bitcoin.com.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
The bitcoin ASIC mining rig manufacturer, Ebang International Holdings, was recently listed on Nasdaq last Friday on June 26. Ebang is now the second mining rig manufacturer to have a U.S. initial public offering (IPO) by selling company shares. Since ... read more.
A number of cryptocurrency proponents have been discussing the stablecoin DAI this week, as the DAI allegedly held on the Compound platform is much larger than what is recorded in circulation. At press time, Compound statistics show there’s $523 million ... read more.
A Russian district court has dismissed bitcoin theft as a crime since cryptocurrency is not regulated in Russia and there is no legal status for bitcoin. The accused were found guilty, sentenced to prison, and ordered to return only the ... read more.
The UK is denying Nicolas Maduro access to Venezuela's gold worth about $1 billion, stored at the Bank of England. The UK High Court has ruled that the country does not recognize Maduro as president of Venezuela, blocking him from ... read more.
Arcane Crypto, a Norway-based investment company, said Thursday that it is planning to go public through a reverse takeover by Vertical Ventures, a publicly traded Swedish firm. Vertical Ventures will buy Arcane Crypto for $33 million by issuing over 6.6 ... read more.
According to a number of crypto prediction markets and futures, Trump will still win the election in 123 days, but his chances have lessened a great deal. No matter who wins, however, the large sums of money flowing into these ... read more.
Crypto Use-Cases in Africa on the Rise, According to Luno
Twitter and Square CEO, Jack Dorsey recently said “Africa will define the future (especially the Bitcoin one!)” But was he right? Crypto in Africa on the Rise Sad to be leaving the continent…for now. Africa will define the future (especially ... read more.
The United States tax agency has published a request for information pertaining to privacy-centric cryptocurrencies and technologies that obfuscate crypto transactions. The IRS-CI Cyber Crimes Unit request is also asking for information in relation to “layer two offchain protocol networks, ... read more.
A global bitcoin scam has reportedly leaked personal data of about 250,000 people from more than 20 countries. The majority of the compromised data were of people in the U.K., Australia, South Africa, and the U.S. This bitcoin scam operates ... read more.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has a new president as Germany took over the presidency from China. The intergovernmental organization also highlighted the need for more guidance on cryptocurrencies as many countries have not yet fully implemented its revised ... read more.
More than 2,500 merchants in Austria can accept three types of cryptocurrencies via the payment processor Salamantex. The company explained that the system was tested with a number of select A1 5Gi network shops. Since the Covid-19 outbreak, contactless payments ... read more.
Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome ... read more.
