Allen Sykora Monday February 24, 2020 07:44
( Kitco News )  - Large speculators sharply hiked their bullish positioning  in gold futures by 22% during the most recent reporting week for data compiled  by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Analysts attributed this to both ongoing safe-haven  buying due to fears of the coronavirus impacting the global economy, as well as  expectations that the Federal Reserve remains dovish.
Gold prices have been boosted not only by buying from  speculative traders in the futures market, but also by exchange-traded-fund  investors, Commerzbank pointed out in a research note. However, the bank added,  this also means price falls can be expected whenever profit-taking occurs.
During the week-long period to Feb. 18 covered by the  report, Comex April gold rose $33.50 to $1,603.60 an ounce, while March silver  climbed 55.3 cents to $18.15.
Net long or short positioning in CFTC data reflect the  difference between the total number of bullish (long) and bearish (short)  contracts. Traders monitor the data to gauge the general mood of speculators.  However, excessively high or low numbers are viewed by many as signs of  overbought or oversold markets that may be ripe for price corrections.
The CFTC’s  “disaggregated” report showed that money  managers hiked their net-long position to 238,546 futures contracts as of Feb.  18 from 195,671 the week before. This was due to fresh buying, as the number of  total longs soared by 46,787 lots. This overwhelmed the fresh selling (an increase  of 3,912 gross shorts).
“Despite  being a crowded trade, investors continued to pile into long gold positions,” said TD Securities. “Continued uncertainty  associated with contagion has kept the safe-haven bid alive, but it is not the  only factor seeing gold surge...in recent days. Indeed, the recent flattening  of the yield curve appears to be telling the Fed they need to cut rates  further, helping give the yellow metal an additional boost.
“Overall,  the structural bid in gold remains driven by real rate suppression from global  central banks and the general willingness to let inflation overshoot for some  time, should it be achieved.”
In fact, TDS said, the expectations for dovish central  bankers mean any price pullbacks, whenever the coronavirus fears abate, are  likely to be bought.
Money managers also hiked their bullish stance in silver  to 65,952 futures contracts from 54,707 the week before. This was almost  entirely due to fresh buying, as the number of total longs rose by 11,203  contracts. There was also a trace of short covering, in which traders buy to  exit short, or bearish, trades. Gross shorts fell by 42 contracts.
