Michael Pento Monday May 11, 2020 12:54
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
My friend Larry Kudlow always says that Profits are the  mother's milk of stocks. That used to be true when we had a real economy. But sadly,  that is no longer factual because we now have a global equity market that is  totally controlled by central banks.  To  prove this point, let's look at the last few years of earnings. During the year  2018, the EPS growth for the S&P 500 was 20%; yet the S&P 500 Index was  down 7% over that same time-frame.
Conversely, during 2019, the S&P 500 EPS growth was a  dismal 1%; yet the Index surged by nearly 30%. What could possibly account for  such a huge divergence between EPS growth and market performance? We need only to  view Fed actions for the simple answer: it was the degree to which our central  bank was willing to falsify asset prices.
During 2018, the Fed raised the overnight bank lending rate  4x and by a total of 100bps, and at the same time, it increased the amount of  its Quantitative Tightening Program from $10 billion per month to $60 billion  per month. In sharp contrast, Mr. Powell indicated one month before 2019 began  that the Fed would stop raising interest rates; and by early '19 he indicated that  the pace of balance sheet runoff was flexible and its termination was in sight.  The Fed then announced in July of '19 that it would cease the selling of its  assets come August. Most importantly, by the end of the summer, the Fed did a  complete 180-degree pivot--it was once gain cutting interest rates and re-engaged  with Quantitative Easing. The Fed ended up cutting interest rates by 75bps during  2019.
Hence, 2018 was a terrible year for equities despite surging  EPS growth. However, 2019 turned out great for stock investors despite having  virtually zero earnings expansion.
Turning to 2020, the S&P 500 EPS growth rate is  projected by FactSet to decline a whopping 15.8% during Q2, and GDP is tracking  to shrink by around 25-30% at a seasonally adjusted annualized rate. Adding to  the misery, the unemployment rate is projected to reach a depressionary 17%.  Nevertheless, the S&P 500 is down a very ordinary and pedestrian 10% YTD.  How did the Fed pull off this magic trick yet again? Take a look at what its  balance sheet has done so far this year.
Mr. Powell has committed to buying everything at this point  except stocks. This includes junk bonds, issuing primary loans to businesses,  and purchasing corporate bond ETFs. It has so far printed nearly $2.5 trillion in  less than two months just to boost equities back to the thermosphere.
Because of these actions, the stock market is far more  expensive today than it was prior to the start of the Wuhan virus crisis. This  is because the ratio of total market cap to GDP has increased. Simply stated,  the numerator is down just slightly while the denominator has crashed. Equity  market capitalization is reported to be 138% of GDP as of this writing. This is  down from the record high of 150% reached at the start of this year. Nevertheless,  the current ratio is still extremely high, historically speaking. However, that  figure is based on antiquated GDP data. As the new data is reported for Q2,  expect the ratio to soar.
There are now over 30 million newly unemployed Americans who  have lost their jobs in the past six weeks. We have now completely wiped out  the 22.7 million new jobs created since the Great Recession ended in June 2009  plus another near 8 million. The damage to US balance sheets is immense, and  that debt is accretive to the $71 trillion already oppressing growth. Tremendous  psychological injuries have occurred to consumers and corporations, as they are  forced to take on new debt due to a dearth of liquidity. For example, listed US  companies took on an additional over $300 billion in new debt since March  alone. At that pace of corporate debt accumulation—which was already at an  all-time high both nominally and in terms of GDP pre-virus--will surge by  nearly 25% in just one single year. But what else would you expect when the Fed  is promoting more borrowing by providing a huge fat bid for businesses to sell  all the debt they need…and more.
The stock market has already priced in a "V"  shaped recovery in the economy, but the rebound will most likely be of the  insipid variety. The question is will stocks care even if economic growth  doesn't rebound? It is my view that the economy and EPS will certainly not  return to pre-Wuhan virus levels for a very long time.
Therefore, the answer to how stocks react to a sluggish  economy even after the lockdowns are lifted can be found within the confines of  D.C. Will the continued panoply of negative earnings news and economic data  cause the Federal government to announce even more fiscal stimulus programs to  bail out states and municipalities? And, will the Fed continue to monetize all  that debt? I believe the answer to those questions is a resounding yes, but  only after we see another crash in asset prices that results from a negative  reaction to a failed reopening of the global economy. This is the salient risk  during the mid-May through July time-frame. A failed opening can be defined as  one in which consumers don't return to normal activities because of balance  sheet, unemployment, and wealth effect issues. And, the virus makes a comeback in  the context where there is no effective treatment or vaccine yet available.
One sentence from the Fed's meeting of April 29, which produced  an unusually-horrific statement even for the FOMC, "The Committee expects  to maintain this target range (of zero percent interest rates) until it is  confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to  achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals.".  In other words, the Fed will be offering free  money until the 30 million displaced workers find a job, and inflation runs well  above its 2% target on its core PCE favorite metric, which removes all prices  that go up—interpretation; expect ZIRP for another decade.
We continue to hold 20% gold-related investments, 15% invested  in defense, healthcare, and clean energy, and 10% TIPS. Passive Index investing  has become a sure way to lower your standard of living, and therefore, we will  continue to actively trade the portfolio with a continued vigilance on the  cyclical dynamics of growth/recession & inflation/deflation. Is your wealth  manager monitoring these changes? Or are they just telling you to hang on to their  brand of an index fund that is blindly and passively heading towards the  slaughterhouse yet again?
