Stewart Thomson Wednesday April 22, 2020 12:38
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Another  “golden week” is underway, and both the miners and bullion are off to a  great start!
Gold bullion ETF purchases are soaring.  For the SPDR fund (GLD-NYSE), total tonnage  has moved above the key 1000 tonnes marker.
With  the Corona virus, here’s where the rubber meets the road:  No government has accumulated any savings to  deal with this or any other crisis.
That  opens the door to significantly higher gold prices.
Double-click to enlarge this fabulous  GDX chart.
My https://guswinger.com swing traders booked solid partial profits yesterday on our latest GDX power  trade. We are awaiting an imminent  breakout above the key $32 resistance zone.
Double-click to enlarge this buy signal  chart for the Dow.
Long  before the market crashed, I urged subscribers to prepare to buy Dow  18,300. The low was about 18,213.
To  make stock and gold market profits that are retained, investors need to mainly  focus on the big support and resistance zones. On this chart, there is also rough  broadening formation in play and that’s ominous.
Broadening patterns indicate  a market that is… out of control.
The bottom line is that the  US stock market can continue to rally (on Fed money printing), but the  broadening action is likely to dominate, as it has for the past several  years.
More crashes are coming, so  more pain for investors is coming.
Why did so many stock market investors  get caught flat-footed in the latest crash?  Unfortunately, I think most investors were  lost in a somewhat pathetic world of worshipping governments and central banks  as their saviours.
Sadly, most governments have  no savings, and that’s especially true in America, which is an empire that  should know better, but doesn’t.  The US  government never saved money for any crisis.
In good times, the nation’s “Gmen”  waste all the money they print, borrow, and extort from citizens.  So, when a crisis happens, all the government  does is tell grandiose stories about the future, while begging the central bank  to print money for them.
In a nutshell… government is  pathetic.
Also, investors need to  consider the possibility that just as there are gravitational cycles for the  sun, moon, and Earth, there can be virus and war cycles.
American involvement in World  War Two took place in 1941-1945, almost eighty years ago.  Eighty years before that, in 1861-1865, there  was the US civil war.
Instead of good times ahead  for silly government worshippers, a new and deadly period of war in 2021-2025  could be the unpleasant future that awaits the unprepared citizens of America.
The ominous war cycle fits  with the horrific broadening action taking place on the stock market charts.
Next, double-click to enlarge this “work  of art” gold chart.
There are beautiful layers of  inverse head and shouldering action in play, suggesting a glorious $1975 target  price for what I call… the queen of assets, gold bullion!
Double-click  to enlarge this weekly GDXJ chart.  Mining  stock enthusiasts need to stay focused on the big picture; as gold bullion  pushes towards $1975, the virus crisis gets “solved” by money printing.  It potentially becomes an even bigger war  crisis that is “solved” by even bigger money printing.
Glorious price action lies  ahead for the miners.  As one crisis  morphs into another (war or just significant stagflation), there’s a strong  probability that GDXJ takes out the $50 area highs.  From there, I’m predicting an immediate rocket  blast towards major league resistance at my $63 target zone, and then an  assault on the all-time highs near $145!
