Monero price confidently leads recovery in a fundamentally bearish market.
The buyers look forward to breaking above $40 in preparation for the assault at the 100 SMA.
Monero bulls are back with a bang on Saturday posting over 5% in gains on the day. Almost all other cryptocurrencies are in the red led by Ethereum (ETH)’s 5% dip, Bitcoin (BTC)’s 4% loss and Ripple (XRP)’s 4.73% decline. However, Monero is presenting an entirely different picture especially with the trend being strongly bullish and the volatility high.
The hourly chart shows the bulls keen on nurturing a bullish momentum above an ascending trendline. Unfortunately, for the buyers $40 is the immediate resistance while XMR/USD is teetering at $38.79. If the buyers overcome the seller congestion at $40, they must then be prepared to deal with the resistance at the 100 SMA at $45 in the hourly range and the 50 SMA at $54.12.
On the other hand, if a break above $40 fails to materialize, the RSI shows signs of a sideways action taking over in the coming sessions. On the brighter side, if the technicals remain the same, there is a chance that the bulls could hold tight in the driver seat. The MACD confirms the buyers’ position in the market by the slightly visible bullish divergence.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
