Darknet market activity hit new highs in 2019, as shown in a new report from blockchain forensics firm Chainalysis. Despite concerted attempts from law enforcement (LE) to crack down on darknet markets (DNMs), coupled with several exit scams, crypto inflows and outflows surpassed $800 million last year.
“What two businesses have traditionally been recession proof since time immemorial?” asks Tony Soprano in an episode of the American crime drama. “Certain aspects of show business…and our thing,” replies his consigliere Silvio Dante. Today “our thing” – namely, organized crime – increasingly takes place on the web, and the darknet in particular. Monitoring its health falls to software companies armed with the tools to analyze the flow of digital assets in and out of known DNMs.
The Chainalysis Crypto Crime Report 2020 focuses heavily on darknet markets, examining which currencies were transacted, where the coins flowed, and what percentage of crypto activity they constituted. In its wake, the inevitable “We told you so” style editorials appeared – the New York Times leading with “ Bitcoin Has Lost Steam. But Criminals Still Love It .” While the data published by Chainalysis, which acts as an advisor to various government agencies, makes for interesting reading, it sends a warning to bitcoiners, whose privacy is being gradually eroded.
Following a modest decline in 2018, darknet market sales returned to rude health in 2019, rising from 70% to constitute over $790 million worth of cryptocurrencies. The darknet market share of all cryptocurrency received doubled from 0.04% in 2018 to 0.08% in 2019.
While giddy reports from mainstream media would have readers believing that cryptocurrencies (especially bitcoin) are used largely for illicit purposes, it’s vital to remember that less than 1% of crypto usage revolves around darknet marketplaces – a hunting ground for “scoundrels” according to the New York Times.
So where did the crypto spent on darknet markets come from – and where did vendors send their ill-gotten gains? According to the report, the overwhelming majority of funds used to purchase goods on DNMs came from exchanges: 38.6% from P2P exchanges, 31.8% from centralized exchanges, and 8.8% from exchanges deemed “high-risk.” The rest originated from darknet markets themselves or other unnamed services.
It was a similar picture for crypto leaving DNMs: 42.8% of cashed-out currency went to centralized exchanges and 23.2% to P2P exchanges; unnamed services accounted for 11.7%, while darknet markets got 9.1% and high-risk exchanges 4.7%. Only 4% went to mixing services , wherein privacy-minded users can obscure the ties between their BTC addresses and real-world identities by shuffling their coins.
Although darknet market sales are on the up, the report indicates that the number of DNMs has not really grown since 2016. Indeed, the figure of 49 is the same as 2018. However, the fact that eight DNMs were taken down in the past 12 months indicates that replacements soon spring up. On average, each active market generated more revenue in 2019 than those open in any other year, except during the pinnacle of Silk Road in 2012/13, before law enforcement wrapped their heads around the dark web.
The success of traditional markets is governed by market forces – the actions of buyers and sellers which cause the price of goods and services to rise or fall. However, darknet markets appear to be relatively invulnerable to such economic forces.
While exchanges, gambling portals and merchant services saw spikes in July, when bitcoin’s price rose, darknet markets demonstrated a much more modest upturn. In fact, a review of bitcoin’s transaction volume across the year indicates that sales remain stable regardless of what the cryptocurrency market is doing.
Publication of the Chainalysis report occurred in the same week that Paxos sent a threatening message to a user suspected of using a “known bitcoin mixing service.” It would require mental gymnastics not to see the correlation here: tools developed by the Chainalysises of the world erode personal privacy and give rise to nonsense of this nature repeatedly occurring. Heaven forbid anyone would use a coin-mixing service to restore their right to privacy.
Wtf?? Apparently you are not allowed to do what you want with your bitcoin once you own the keys. Fortunately that's not how Bitcoin works, but the level of chain analysis here is alarming. What is a correct response? @MartyBent @matt_odell @vandrewattycpa pic.twitter.com/BhMDThLHGc
— Ronald McHodled (@RonaldMcHodled) January 28, 2020
The trend that sees centralized crypto companies berating and browbeating users for mixing coins – after they’ve withdrawn them to a noncustodial wallet – is troubling, and in the above case prompted the user in question to respond: “Apparently you are not allowed to do what you want with your bitcoin once you own the keys. Fortunately that’s not how Bitcoin works, but the level of chain analysis here is alarming.”
If you care about your privacy, and don’t fancy being smeared as a criminal, the best idea is to take your business away from centralized exchange before the censorious email hits your inbox.
As for DNMs, they’re not going anywhere. As noted by Chainalysis, many are implementing new decentralized infrastructure to avoid shutdowns, while others are considering mandating the usage of privacy coins like monero, which is already accepted by Empire and enforced on White House Market and Monopoly Market . Defending the work of blockchain forensics firms, one monero advocate urged : “Boycotting services that are taking advantage of Bitcoin’s flaws is futile. All services and governments will eventually take advantage of Bitcoin’s flaws. It’s like walking around nude and blaming everyone for looking at you. Put some pants on. Convert your Bitcoin to Monero.”
What are your thoughts on the Chainalysis darknet market report? Let us know in the comments section below.
Did you know you can verify any unconfirmed Bitcoin transaction with our Bitcoin Block Explorer tool ? Simply complete a Bitcoin address search to view it on the blockchain. Plus, visit our Bitcoin Charts to see what’s happening in the industry.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
The bitcoin ASIC mining rig manufacturer, Ebang International Holdings, was recently listed on Nasdaq last Friday on June 26. Ebang is now the second mining rig manufacturer to have a U.S. initial public offering (IPO) by selling company shares. Since ... read more.
A number of cryptocurrency proponents have been discussing the stablecoin DAI this week, as the DAI allegedly held on the Compound platform is much larger than what is recorded in circulation. At press time, Compound statistics show there’s $523 million ... read more.
A Russian district court has dismissed bitcoin theft as a crime since cryptocurrency is not regulated in Russia and there is no legal status for bitcoin. The accused were found guilty, sentenced to prison, and ordered to return only the ... read more.
The UK is denying Nicolas Maduro access to Venezuela's gold worth about $1 billion, stored at the Bank of England. The UK High Court has ruled that the country does not recognize Maduro as president of Venezuela, blocking him from ... read more.
Arcane Crypto, a Norway-based investment company, said Thursday that it is planning to go public through a reverse takeover by Vertical Ventures, a publicly traded Swedish firm. Vertical Ventures will buy Arcane Crypto for $33 million by issuing over 6.6 ... read more.
According to a number of crypto prediction markets and futures, Trump will still win the election in 123 days, but his chances have lessened a great deal. No matter who wins, however, the large sums of money flowing into these ... read more.
Crypto Use-Cases in Africa on the Rise, According to Luno
Twitter and Square CEO, Jack Dorsey recently said “Africa will define the future (especially the Bitcoin one!)” But was he right? Crypto in Africa on the Rise Sad to be leaving the continent…for now. Africa will define the future (especially ... read more.
The United States tax agency has published a request for information pertaining to privacy-centric cryptocurrencies and technologies that obfuscate crypto transactions. The IRS-CI Cyber Crimes Unit request is also asking for information in relation to “layer two offchain protocol networks, ... read more.
A global bitcoin scam has reportedly leaked personal data of about 250,000 people from more than 20 countries. The majority of the compromised data were of people in the U.K., Australia, South Africa, and the U.S. This bitcoin scam operates ... read more.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has a new president as Germany took over the presidency from China. The intergovernmental organization also highlighted the need for more guidance on cryptocurrencies as many countries have not yet fully implemented its revised ... read more.
More than 2,500 merchants in Austria can accept three types of cryptocurrencies via the payment processor Salamantex. The company explained that the system was tested with a number of select A1 5Gi network shops. Since the Covid-19 outbreak, contactless payments ... read more.
Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome ... read more.
