with infections and deaths rising in South Korea, Italy and the
of infections jumped to over 700 and deaths rose to seven. In
from just three before Friday.  Iran, which announced its first infections last week, said
it had confirmed 43 cases and eight deaths, with most of the
infections in the Shi'ite Muslim holy city of Qom. Saudi Arabia,
immigration restrictions on the Islamic Republic.
In a sign of panic, U.S. stock futures were sold with
Asian share indexes were also a sea of red.
February. Japanese markets were closed for a public holiday.
Shane Oliver wrote in a note.
"Of course, there is much uncertainty about the case data,
The virus has killed 2,442 people in China, which has
It has spread to some 28 other countries and territories,
with a death toll of around two dozen, according to a Reuters
coronavirus outbreak became a global pandemic.
stimulus to support economic growth U.S. Fed fund futures surged signalling more rate cuts later this year.
on Monday against the yen to be last at 111.48.
American business activity stalled in February, signalling a
contraction for the first time since 2016. The manufacturing
sector also clocked its lowest reading since August. "The data was a wake-up call for the U.S. equity market,
early to throw the towel" on the greenback.
week and is still up 2.7% so far this year.
misleading data releases," Catril said.
"The U.S. had a bad data day, but we think that is just a
plays, was down 0.3% as it languished near an 11-year low.
The euro eased a tad to $1.0828.
That left the dollar index slightly higher at 99.489.
Brent crude slumped 3%, or $1.77, to $56.72 a barrel
while U.S. crude dropped 2.7%, or $1.48, to $51.9 a
U.S. gold futures climbed 1% to $1,665.1 an ounce.
marking its biggest weekly gain last week since early August.
Disclaimer: The views expressed in this article are those of the author and may not reflect those of Kitco Metals Inc. The author has made every effort to ensure accuracy of information provided; however, neither Kitco Metals Inc. nor the author can guarantee such accuracy. This article is strictly for informational purposes only. It is not a solicitation to make any exchange in commodities, securities or other financial instruments. Kitco Metals Inc. and the author of this article do not accept culpability for losses and/ or damages arising from the use of this publication.
