After a sizable delay and numerous run-ins with NBA executives, it now appears that Brooklyn Nets point guard Spencer Dinwiddie will get to bring his tokenization strategy to the market. Dinwiddie took serious heat from the league when he announced plans to tokenize a portion of his contract. Now, after almost three months of delays, Dinwiddie’s token-based investment tool prepares to enter the market.
Dinwiddie wants to let his fans own a portion of his contract via the DREAM fan shares platform. This blockchain -based tokenization strategy would allow Dinwiddie to digitize a portion of his contract. These tokenized shares would then be made available to fans seeking to increase their stake in the athlete’s career.
According to Dinwiddie, DREAM shares are set for a January 13th launch date. The date will coincide with Dinwiddie’s first career All-Star Game. In this manner, Dinwiddie can couple the publicity to further promote his unique tokenization strategy.
As part of this strategy, Dinwiddie seeks to sell 90 SD8 coins. Each coin represents a tokenized share in his $34 million contract. If successful, Dinwiddie will be able to collect up to $13.5 million of his guaranteed three-year agreement without having to wait until the final years of the contract. In essence, the agreement provides him with a new age business loan.
For their part, the NBA has been unapathetic towards the young player’s decision to tokenize his contract. These disagreements with the NBA came to a head when the league threatened to terminate his contract and ban him from the league during negotiations. Luckily, Dinwiddie instituted some changes to his strategy which alleviated much of the league’s concerns.
One of the main problems the NBA had with Dinwiddie’s original strategy had to do with his final years. In the original agreement, Dinwiddie wanted to provide his investors with a chance to make larger dividends if he were to acquire a more lucrative contract with Brooklyn or another team. This section struck NBA officials as problematic with some calling it gambling. Officials were so concerned they threatened to terminate his contract if the clause wasn’t removed.
After four intense negotiations in person and three additional correspondences over the phone, Spencer Dinwiddie was able to secure league approval for his concept. Discussing the decision, he admitted that he never expected the league to support his idea fully. Luckily, he had some strong support for the plan from the Players Association. Also, he had a team of lawyers by his side to ensure that his rights were not violated.
It’s not too often that a single player changes the game forever, but in this instance, Dinwiddie has utilized blockchain technology to provide more liquidity in the market. You can expect to see DREAM shares start to tokenize more athletes and entertainers’ contracts in the coming months. In this way, these individuals can cash out their multi-million dollar agreements without waiting years to do so.
David Hamilton is a full-time journalist and a long-time bitcoinist. He specializes in writing articles on the blockchain. His articles have been published in multiple bitcoin publications including Bitcoinlightning.com
Another minor, but significant development in digital securitization is unfolding in Thailand, where the public debt management office (PDMO) is set to issue government saving bonds that will be distributed with the help of blockchain .
This is an initial trial done by PDMO, which is part of the country’s finance ministry, to leverage the blockchain technology in issuing and distributing government bonds to the public.
According to local reports, the office is issuing bonds in total value of around $6.5 million (200 million baht). One particular feature of the blockchain technology is already clearly visible, as the bonds are being sold at a face value of 1 baht – the lowest ever amount for government bonds, which are usually priced at 1,000 baht.
The bond market is one of the oldest and most relied-upon asset classes, providing key financing for governments, corporations, and investors. Despite the market’s popularity with both institutional and retail investors, digitization has been incredibly slow.
Bond issuance is generally a long process that involves multiple intermediaries, incurring high costs and the risk of human error. These are common pain points in the financial securities market that technological innovations are hoping to solve.
This is where bond tokenization comes into play with the aim to lower the various costs associated with bond issuance. The application of blockchain technology can benefit the bond market as a whole by enhancing data visibility, reducing counterparty risk, and improving operational efficiency.
When buying and selling bonds, buyers can instantly verify that the sellers own the bond by looking at the blockchain. This also immediately eliminates the need of having intermediaries since the bond lives on a trustless and immutable ledger.
Blockchain also eases the process of bond issuance with the terms and conditions including the principal amount, coupon rate, and maturity date, being ingrained into code. As a result, the payment process can be automated: issuers can distribute interest payments directly to the bondholder’s wallet address.
With the novel technology, issuers of securities have the possibility to represent financial assets as granular as necessary. Since verifications, transactions and settlements take place on a blockchain ledger, there is no additional hassle or paperwork to go through, compared to traditional methods of asset securitization and distribution.
This is a huge advantage technology provides and general director of the PDMO Patricia Mongkhonvanit, recognizes that this will also open up new opportunities for everyone to buy government bonds:
The government savings bonds will be available for purchase through the Krung Thai Bank’s (KTB) blockchain platform, which is wholly state-owned and the distribution will take place through an e-wallet. While this is an entirely novel way of conducting a government bond issuance, it is not an unfamiliar experience for many.
If the smallest bond partition is 1 baht, the minimum acquiring limit is set at 100 bonds per purchaser, with investment capped at 500,000 baht – according to PDMO.
The initial rollout will take place through digital channels, but PDMO also plans to broaden savings bond distribution channels to bank branches, ATMs and mobile banking.
In order to gauge public interest and spread the message, the government had beforehand let people subscribe through the blockchain-based e-wallet. The 200-million-baht savings bond offering is an initial test and those who are interested in participating must have accounts at KTB and apply through the bank’s e-wallet.
Thailand’s PDMO had recently closed the sales of savings bonds worth 50 billion baht, which was part of the government’s 1-trillion-baht plan to mitigate the economic damage following the COVID-19 pandemic.
The rising interest on the side of the Thai government to pursue more efficient ways for issuing bonds is further confirmation that the role of blockchain technology for digital asset securitization is broadening. Should the trial issuance on the blockchain be viewed as a success, there is a chance to see more government bonds being distributed this way.
Thailand has also been one of the countries eager to step forward with their experimentation of blockchains for financial securitization. For instance, back in 2019 the Thailand Bond Market Association announced it would adopt blockchain for bond registration. The local Toyota Leasing in the country had issued a blockchain bond. In addition to that, the stock exchange also has plans to launch a blockchain-based digital asset platform.
A major milestone towards the launch of a Central Bank Digital Currency ( CBDC ) was achieved in Europe, and more specifically in France.
The acceptance of a digital currency on a global or even on a national level was perennially viewed as a pipedream. Nonetheless, even after dismissing the biggest digital currency in the world – Bitcoin – nation states and central banks started to pay more attention and work on their own currency’s digital version.
While several countries have made some progress, China is known to be at the most advanced stage for launching its own CBDC. At the same time, news of a successful test for a digital Euro comes from France’s central bank.
The Banque de France unveiled that it used the blockchain developed by its own team to settle the issuance of digital securities , using end-to-end blockchain infrastructure.
This first successful test was done in partnership with one of France’s biggest banks – Société Générale. In what is called a covered bond issuance, the total value reaches the €40 million (~$44 million) mark.
This becomes a noteworthy milestone for digital security issuance, since the transaction was instantly settled via the delivery versus payment (DvP) method directly against digital Euros.
Société Générale has lauded the results of the test and is highly optimistic in regards to the benefits digital currencies can bring, saying “It paves the way for the automation and shortening of payment processes, with simplified market infrastructures and strengthened security.”
According to reports, the central bank digital currency is one to be used for interbank settlements, rather than consumer payments. With the positive outcome of this initial test, Société Générale is encouraged to undergo more rigorous testing in the coming weeks:
“This experimentation was performed end-to-end using blockchain infrastructures…It demonstrates the feasibility of financial securities being digitally settled and delivered in Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) for interbank settlements,” stated Societe Generale.
This also becomes a huge milestone for the Banque de France. The central bank’s ambition to test a digital currency was voiced late last year in December 2019, stemming from a political will to take on a leadership role within the European Union.
The development activity and the encouraging test results around the digital Euro coming from Banque de France are cementing the country’s place at the forefront of digital financial securities landscape.
Banque de France said it will continue to do more tests with other financial institutions over the next few weeks, as part of its ongoing exploration of a digital Euro.
“The results of these experiments will be an important element of the Banque de France’s contribution to the more global reflection led by the Eurosystem on the interest of [a CBDC],” stated the central bank.
It’s not too long ago that the central bank launched its digital Euro programme. In April, the central bank said it aims to uncover the benefits of digital currencies for clearing and settlement of tokenized financial assets.
The central bank shared that since the programme launch, there have been a lot of applications and interest to test the central bank digital currency, emphasizing the leading role the country has in payments technology innovation.
This current iteration of the central bank digital currency is being earmarked to be used for and by financial institutions – not retail payments. At the time of the programme launch, the central bank said it is not looking to replace coins and banknotes.
According to the central bank’s governor, the consumer side would have to be complemented by a different digital currency that focuses on usability and may not be underpinned by blockchain technology.
France is not the only country to have started testing central bank digital currencies . Last month, China finally confirmed it had begun testing its digital Yuan in four cities. According to the People’s Bank of China it started researching CBDCs as far as 2014, and finalized a basic design back in January.
If governments were adamant of adopting a digital currency, now it seems central banks are racing to be the first-to-market. It’s not surprising as well, since a successful digital currency issued by a major central bank could be used as an international currency – potentially weakening the role of existing currencies, like the U.S. dollar.
Monetary experts have voiced their thoughts that a digital asset used on a global scale could significantly reduce the influence of the U.S. dollar on global trade and weaken its position as a world reserve currency.
Whether this will come from a digital currency built by a central bank or from a neutral digital asset like Bitcoin, it’s clear that the world of financial securities is set to go through a seismic change.
