Not every STO needs to revolve around a billion dollar tokenization.  One of the draws towards the digital securities sector is the ability to open capital generation opportunities for companies of all sizes.  A young start-up has recognized the potential benefits they stand to experience by turning to this new way of raising capital.
The Nu+ Company, a German company with a focus on healthy and sustainable food practices, have announced their intent to raise funds through tokenization platform, NeuFund .  The company specializes in their line of chocolate bars, which tout unique characteristics.
While full details of their anticipated raise have not yet been divulged, the company has made their pitch deck available for interested parties to peruse.
As this capital generation event is being structured as a security token offering within Liechtenstein, strict compliance measures will most likely be put in place.  This means access to accredited investors only, along with typical AML & KYC practices – although, as stated, structuring of the event has yet to be confirmed.
A large part of the appeal behind a company such as The Nu+ Company, is the ideology which drives them.  This fact is not uncommon in many companies which have sought out the benefits of blockchain.  As the technology has the ability to afford ease of access to capital – while driving new levels of efficiency in many company operations – tokenization through Neufund is right up The Nu+ Company’s alley.
Another example of a company utilizing blockchain, in a means of attaining their goals for bettering our impact on the earth, is Almond.  This London based start-up has developed an intuitive app, designed to incentivize sustainable purchasing habits.  Much like The Nu+ Company, Almond will plant trees to offset carbon footprints, based on user activity.  Make sure to check out the following articles to learn more about how Almond intends on affecting change.
Interview Series – Oliver Bolton, CEO of Almond Impact
The Nu+ Company has developed various chocolate bars, to date.  These products were designed with  the health of both, the environment and the human body, in mind.  They are vegan, nutrient rich, and touted to contain 65% less sugar than a traditional a chocolate bar.
Currently, The Nu+ Company has a product line with three flagship products.
To date, these products have totaled over 1.5million sold, resulting in over €2 million in revenue last year.
The Nu+ Company is more than just their product.  While their chocolate has been engineered with health and sustainability in mind, the team did not stop there.  What is the point of developing such a product, only to package the chocolate in a traditional fashion?, ie. plastic.
This led the team to recently establishing a deal with a company called Futamura.  In doing so, The Nu+ Company will make use of a Futamura product called ‘NatureFlex’.  This is a new form of packaging, which has the potential to replace plastic.  The following are a few key traits of what NatureFlex has to offer.
The aforementioned ideology, which drives The Nu+ Company, is not simply for show.  The team behind the project fully intend to act on their idea of sustainability.  This is most evident in their promise to do their part in re-establishing forestry within the island nation of Madagascar.
The promise, on behalf of The Nu+ Company, is that for every bar sold, the company will fund the planting of one tree.  More specifically, they will plant mangrove trees – known for their ability to consume high levels of CO2.
Madagascar is like no other place on Earth, and has captivated humans for decades, due to the unique wildlife found within its forests.  Unfortunately, it is believed that roughly 97% of dry forests in the country have been decimated – primarily due to human activity.  For those that subscribe to Netflix, an original production was produced under the title ‘Our Planet’.  There is an illuminating episode found in this series, discussing the scope of this issue, which continues to plague Madagascar .
While the team at The Nu+ Company numbers over 40, including advisors, it is the vision of a trio of cofounders which got the company off the ground.
