On February 25, 2020 executives from the Bank of Canada made public statements regarding the issuance of a centralized bank digital currency ( CBDC ). Specifically, the bank’s Deputy Governor, Timothy Lane spoke on the possibility and scenarios in which the bank would pursue this course of action at the CFA Montreal FinTech RDV 2020. The speech touched on the rapidly evolving technology affecting the financial sector, and, how the Bank of Canada is responding to the environment.
The Bank of Canada has been in operation since it was chartered as a Crown Corporation in 1934. Importantly, Crown corporations are state-owned and managed enterprises. As such, the bank functions as the country’s central bank. Consequently, it is the only entity with the legal ability to issue Canadian banknotes.
Since 1944, the Bank of Canada has been the sole issuer of legal tender banknotes in the country. Additionally, the organization is responsible for formulating Canada’s monetary policy. Specifically, the firm’s responsibilities include maintaining a safe and sound financial system within Canada.
The Bank of Canada’s current responsibilities focus on the goals of monitoring and managing predictable inflation.  Notably, the bank must work to ensure a stable and efficient financial system within the country. The bank accomplishes this task in a number of different ways. Primarily, the firm provides effective and efficient funds-management services for the Government of Canada and other local enterprises. Lastly, the bank ‘s responsibilities include providing citizens with a safe and secure currency.
The Bank of Canada continues to evaluate if, and in what scenarios, the firm would issue a CBDC. In his speech, Lane explained how the bank is preparing for a future in which it may deem it necessary to issue digital central notes. He spoke on the responsibilities of the bank to provide citizens with the ability to use their preferred method of payments in confidence.
In the speech , Lane acknowledges that digital currencies provide new opportunities to the market. He also explained that these opportunities can create a host of new risks as well. It’s these unknown threats that continue to hamper the bank’s motivation towards the issuance of a central digital currency.
Lane put forth two scenarios in which the Bank of Canada would consider the issuance of a centralized digital currency. The first scenario would be the result of the mass adoption of cryptocurrencies . In this case, the bank could lose control over the monetary system as more users migrate to private currencies such as Bitcoin . As you would imagine, central banks are not keen on any situation in which they lose control over the ability to monitor payments and regulate markets.
The second scenario that would warrant the bank’s response would be the complete removal of physical cash from the market. While this second scenario seems highly unlikely for the time being, it’s still a very real concern for banking officials. Situations such as pollution or disease could make the use of paper money obsolete in the near future.
What a Canadian CBDC Would look Like?
Interestingly, Lane took a moment to acknowledge the benefits that digital currencies bring to the market. He did so by describing what a hypothetical Canadian Bank digital currency would look like. Lane explained that the new currency would be safe, easy to access, private, and a good store of value. He stated that the new digital banknote would give users the ability to buy things electronically online or in person. Lane’s overall point was that the Bank of Canada is willing to issue a CBDC, only if, or when, it’s necessary.
Will the Bank of Canada Issue a Digital Currency?
Importantly, Lane stopped short of saying the Bank of Canada planned to issue a currency anytime in the near future. Specifically, he stated that there was no real need for the bank to issue its own digital currency at this time. His reasoning for the decision is the fact that the current financial system still serves citizens well. Lane believes at this time, the bank needs to focus on modernizing the current payment system to ensure the bank retains the confidence of its users in the future.
What Would Your Perfect CDBC Include?
Even though the Bank of Canada has no immediate plans to issue a CBDC, officials are still keen to get market feedback on the prospect. As such, banking officials released a series of questions. These questions were geared to citizens in an attempt to get a feel for the market moving forward. The questions included:
How would a digital currency work with other methods of payment?
What design features might make a CBDC attractive for merchants and users?
How would a CBDC work for cross-border transactions?
How can we protect privacy while preventing illicit uses?
Lane’s statement echoes ones made by other central bank executives concerning digital currency issuances. These organizations continue to monitor the markets and explore scenarios in which they would see the need to make such a drastic change.  A recent statement published by the International Monetary Fund shed some light on the current situation surrounding CBDCs. The speech revealed that only around “one-quarter of central banks around the world are now actively exploring the possibility of issuing CBDCs, and only four pilots have been reported.”
The overall tone of Lane’s speech pushed to the fact that Canadian Banking officials understand the need to be flexible in these times. Banking officials appear to be keenly aware that cryptocurrencies could have a huge impact on their ability to control markets. As such, banking officials are ready to make whatever changes deemed necessary to remain in control. For now, the Bank of Canada continues to research the adjustments that are required to remain relevant in a fully-digitized economy.
David Hamilton is a full-time journalist and a long-time bitcoinist. He specializes in writing articles on the blockchain. His articles have been published in multiple bitcoin publications including Bitcoinlightning.com
Real-World Assets as Collateral for DeFi, Made Possible with MakerDAO
The cryptocurrency space was borne out of a desire to bring about a better financial system and infrastructure that is inclusive for anyone, anywhere.
The crypto industry has matured significantly since 2010 when Bitcoin kicked off a new wave that today spawned a whole new industry. The crypto community continually progressed with new tools and capabilities being gradually built up.
Nonetheless these capabilities that promise quicker settlement times, trustless global accessibility and granular asset control have mostly remained gated within the crypto realm.
Now, the ambition is to bridge the gap between real-world assets and cryptocurrencies . Specifically in the DeFi space, that aims to provide a borderless financing infrastructure, the first steps are being made to bring real-world assets as collateral for loan issuance.
The community of Maker DAO , that is behind the DAI stablecoin , arguably one of the most popular DeFi projects, has confirmed the vote on whether to allow real-world assets to be included as collateral options.
This comes following the effort led by the startup Centrifuge, that developed a protocol that lets users turn real assets into securities against which ERC20 tokens can be issued. This enables real world asset securitization as these tokens are interest-bearing and will be issued as NFTs (Non-Fungible Tokens).
DeFi applications built mostly on top of the Ethereum blockchain promise to give more people access to borrowing, lending, and other services because they eliminate the need to go and transact through a financial institution.
In the case of MakerDAO, the system built with Maker (MKR) and DAI lets users deposit cryptocurrency-denominated collateral to take out loans denominated in the U.S. dollar-pegged stablecoin DAI.
While recently the DeFi space celebrated a huge milestone with $1 billion locked in various applications across the board, participation in DeFi today is limited because it requires that users have purely crypto-native assets.
Getting real-world assets involved in the DeFi industry is what Centrifuge is pursuing with its Ethereum Dapp called Tinlake. The app allows for the securitization of real-world assets and have these represented on the blockchain as tokens, which can in turn be used to gain access to DeFi services.
Asset tokenization refers to the act of turning the ownership of a real-world asset into a digital token. This can be done in various ways, but all result in the legally-upheld bridge between the physical asset and its representative token.
Deeds, titles, and certificates are all traditional versions of a token. A deed to a house represents ownership of that house. The token refers to the digitally native asset which represents the real-world asset itself.
The first two types of assets that are available for tokenization are music streaming royalties enabled by PaperChain and ConsolFreight’s freight shipping invoices.
With the positive vote from the MakerDAO community, now anyone – be it individuals or companies – is able to utilize future cash flows from music streaming royalties or shipping invoices as collateral to take out loans for example.
Centrifuge’s Lucas Vogelsang notes the partnership could be the world’s first application of DeFi to a real-world business issue. Particularly, the solution helps ensure quick liquidity for artists and supply chain firms, without the hassles of going through traditional ways of financing.
MakerDAO’s Rune Christensen has also shared a highly optimistic vision as the two proposals represent the first step towards the expansion of DeFi’s field of application:
“These should be seen as the first two [RWAs] in the greatest portfolio of assets that’s ever been built. It’s just the first step. Thousands and thousands of assets will exist alongside them.”
There are still issues and restrictions when it comes to securitization of real-world assets and introduces new risks to the DeFi space.
For instance, Centrifuge’s tokenization process through its app still falls under the securities law. Since both Paperchain and ConsolFreight are based in the U.S. only accredited investors will have access to these assets.
Another compromise that was made in order to bring real-world assets to DeFi is Centrifuge setting up a special purpose vehicle (SPV) that will have the assets associated with, from a legal touchpoint. Lenders, in the event of default, would have to rely on the legal system to enforce their rights to the collateral, rather than an automated smart contract that can do so with on-chain assets.
While this is necessary to have a claim for the tokenized real-world assets, it represents a single-point of failure. But this is a trade-off that Centrifuge’s Lucas Vogelsang says is necessary in order to bring real world assets on-chain.
There is a wide consensus in the financial industry that blockchain technology is going to disrupt the securities market. However, despite the claims, there is no double-digit annual growth of securities on blockchain, which would be expected from a disruptive technology. The reason for that are regulatory roadblocks that don’t allow delivering the biggest promise of digital securities – liquidity for previously illiquid securities. In this article we break down this problem and present a solution.
What are security tokens /digital securities?
From a legal perspective, security tokens are common securities and are subject to the same regulations. The difference is that records about securities ownership are stored on blockchain instead of paper-based or other forms of records. That’s why they are often called digital securities.
Innovative technology significantly improves operations with securities, making them digital and automated. In particular, transfer of digital securities is much easier and may happen in minutes or seconds instead of weeks, spent on signing physical contracts, doing compliance checks and updating government registers.
Liquidity of an asset defines how easy it can be sold. For example, publicly listed securities are highly liquid, while real estate and startup equity are highly illiquid. Although security tokens have multiple advantages, greater liquidity is a principal one. For this reason, they often represent ownership in traditionally illiquid assets.
Mass adoption of security tokens first and foremost requires interest from investors, which will create incentives for businesses to issue digital securities instead of traditional ones. For investors, lack of liquidity is the biggest problem of securities that are not listed on exchanges as it makes investments in them riskier and makes investors wait for decades until they pay off. Therefore, unlocking liquidity of security tokens is crucial for their mass adoption.
In the narrow sense of the world, securities are considered liquid if they are traded on a stock exchange. For this reason, lack of regulated secondary markets is considered the main limitation. However, this ignores the fact that there are already operating exchanges for security tokens: tZERO , Open Finance, MERJ, GSX – but very few tokens are listed there. Furthermore, Open Finance is on the edge of delisting all security tokens because their trading does not generate enough fees to support operations.
Therefore, the problem is not in the lack of marketplaces. It is in fact that listing on an exchange is overly complicated. It requires registering the offering at competent authorities, having minimum trading volume, minimum market cap, being under increased reporting requirements, which often include annual audit. Basically, it requires becoming a public company. These requirements will arise not only in the case of listing on a classical exchange but any kind of regulated market. This means that listing on a regulated trading venue is not feasible for most security token issuers.
Such a flawed understanding of the problem stems from crypto origins of security tokens. They were seen as a regulated continuation of utility tokens and cryptocurrencies , for which listing on exchange is much easier, so it became a synonym for liquidity. This myth should be debunked in order for the market to move to more realistic sources of liquidity.
How is liquidity for security tokens possible?
To answer this question, we need to go back to an original definition of liquidity, which is the ability to quickly sell assets at any moment. It has two main components: complexity of conducting the transaction and how easy it is to find a counterparty.
The former problem is solved by blockchain technology. Its main benefit for private securities is that it vastly simplifies conducting the securities transaction, making it possible to do everything online in a few minutes. Conventionally, transfer of securities would require signing physical agreements, reporting changes to the government register, settling a transaction via a wire transfer, and doing manual compliance checks on individuals engaged into the transaction.
Complexity of the transfer also impacts the number of potential counterparties. When the transfer is complicated and expensive, it becomes not feasible to transact small amounts. This cuts off smaller traders and investors from the market, making it even harder to find a counterparty.
The problem of finding a counterparty is traditionally solved by an order matching mechanism of exchanges, which for security tokens is not feasible. Therefore, the key to unlocking liquidity is in creating an efficient way to find counterparties for transactions that would not be considered a regulated market.
This way is already known. It is a bulletin board for P2P transactions. As these transactions are private and do not involve an intermediary, they don’t require regulation. However, there are a number of nuances and requirements for such a venue not to be regulated, which will be covered in a separate article.
To the author’s knowledge, at the time of writing there is no venue that enables legally compliant and efficient P2P liquidity for security tokens.
What impact unlocking the liquidity of security tokens will have on capital markets?
Currently, venture investors may sell their shares only if businesses they invest into go public or are acquired. This has two implications, which both lead to money being used inefficiently and slow down the economic growth.
Firstly, it means that only businesses with the potential for IPO are worth investing. Businesses that can offer a solid yield but don’t offer “disruption” and outsized returns are deprived of funding. These are often businesses with a need for high capital investments – manufacturing, agriculture, physical infrastructure etc. The problem with a lack of capital investment is covered in a widely discussed article in Andreessen Horowitz blog “It’s time to build” .
Secondly, illiquidity makes VCs prioritize growth over profitability because when most investments don’t pay off even a 10x exit from successful ones may be not enough. It creates incentives to scale even when the business model is not tested enough, leading to extremely large companies, such as WeWork or Uber, struggling to deliver a profit.
The plague of private markets has impacts on public markets as well. It leads to the emergence of the IPO bubble, when more than 80% of newly public companies are not profitable. It is problematic because public securities are considered less risky, and thus fit into portfolios of retail funds and pension schemes, harming them by being overpriced.
Thus, solving the liquidity problem will have a drastic impact not only on the VC industry but on the entire economy.
