by Ian | Mar 14, 2020 | Announcement , Cool , Cryptocurrency , Economic Freedom , Living Free , Monero , New Hampshire , News , Personal Freedom | 13 comments
For more than half-a-decade , the Shire Free Church has been providing a Cryptocurrency Vending Machine (CVM) in Keene as a service to the community.  Eventually expanding to a CVM in Manchester and a second one in Keene , we have had the pleasure of connecting countless people with Bitcoin (BTC) at the lowest rates in the region.  A few years after launching in Keene we also began offering buyers a choice of other cryptocurrencies besides BTC – DASH and Bitcoin Cash (BCH), the two most-used-at-retail cryptos across New Hampshire.
Started in 2014, Monero (XMR) was immediately different from all of the other “altcoins” competing with the crypto-King-of-the-hill, Bitcoin (BTC).  Uniquely at the time, Monero wasn’t a fork of the Bitcoin source code.  Monero is instead based on a technology called “Cryptonote”.  The Cryptonote white paper describes a major flaw with Bitcoin. Bitcoin’s public ledger, the “blockchain”, allows all Bitcoin transactions to be totally traceable.  Despite what some in media and government might claim, Bitcoin is not anonymous and every transaction can be tracked, all the way back to the very first one.  Monero’s system solves this problem and introduces true anonymity and fungibility to cryptocurrency – the way it should have been from the start.
Today, there are a myriad of privacy coins out there, but since the supermajority of them were based on Bitcoin, the private features of the other coins are always added on and that means there are still public transaction options in most other privacy coins like Zcash and its variants.  With these coins, the user must choose to send a private or public transaction and roughly 90% of Zcash transactions, for instance, are “unshielded”.  With Monero there is no choice.  All transactions are private.
As you might imagine, the government gang does not like this privacy technology one bit.  They want to know everything you do with your money, so they can better control you.  One of the best things about Bitcoin was that it allowed for the first time a money system to exist completely outside the control of the state.  Cryptocurrency is a true competitor to the multi-generational dominance of the central banks’ fiat currencies like the Dollar.  However, Bitcoin and most of its crypto-competition still allow the government gangsters to monitor transactions.  Monero fixes that.  Once you buy Monero, the trail ends.
The Shire Free Church is an interfaith church with a mission to foster peace.  Every dollar of value we can help people convert to cryptocurrency like Bitcoin or Monero is value the state can no longer steal to commit violence like going to war across the planet, or going to war against the people – like with their insane War on Drugs.  Therefore, offering cryptocurrency in return for a donation to the church is a direct method to increase peace.  Connecting the community to crypto also allows people to protect their wealth from the ravages of the state cultists and now with the addition of Monero, allows them to completely obscure how much they have and how it’s spent.
Right now with the recent bloodbath in crypto prices during the Coronavirus downturn, Monero and other cryptos are super cheap compared to where they were just a week ago.  You may purchase Monero from our CVMs at your own risk, so long as your intention is to use it for peaceful, legal purposes.  You can learn more about our Crypto Vending Machines and their locations and hours here .
