3) Speculators will want to trade BTC in a crisis because it has more beta volatility “pop” than gold or oil, so you trade that for maximum situation volatility instead of slow gold or oil.
4) Anyone wanting to hedge their stocks might use the roughly, 5x hedging beta of bitcoin to cover their equities in a crisis situation. By my ready reckoning, currently, $1 of bitcoin gives you about $5 of equity downside hedge. That’s very cheap and compelling.
But bitcoin is not the only game in town. This is the performance of the big high privacy coin monero, bitcoin and upstart bitcoin cash:
You can see that bitcoin cash and monero have even bigger beta than bitcoin. For maximum impact it is the altcoins that can deliver the maximum return in the high risk trading game.
It is truly fascinating that the ultra-privacy coin monero takes off early alongside oil and gold but that bitcoin lags a few hours. You can come up with your own conclusions on that one. I would put that down to two different audiences reacting to the news in different time zones.
Whatever the reason, you can see that monero is the winner and you can judge that it is the privacy aspects of the coin that gives it the extra punch as there are most certainly “big money” players who will want extreme secrecy when using crypto as a hedge or a haven.
This U.S./Iran conflict is not going to go away; as such there is a strong catalyst unpinning crypto for many months to come.
The more dire an investor’s prognosis for what happens next, the more bitcoin they should hold because the worse the developments the higher bitcoin and altcoins will rise.
In any event what is clearly established is that Bitcoin is a financial instrument that reacts to world events and that in itself it an extremely powerful use case, no less than any valuable futures derivative contract that trades in the billions of dollars of value between parties wishing to swap risks.
Clem Chambers is the CEO of private investors website ADVFN.com and author of 101 Ways to Pick Stock Market Winners and Trading Cryptocurrencies: A Beginner’s Guide .
Chambers won Journalist of the Year in the Business Market Commentary category in the State Street U.K. Institutional Press Awards in 2018.
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I wrote a stock column for WIRED – which described me as a ‘Market Maven’ - and am a regular columnist for numerous financial publications around the world. I have written for titles including:  Working Money, Active Trader, SFO and Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities in the US and have written for pretty much every UK national newspaper.  In the last few years I have become a financial thriller writer and have just had my first non-fiction title published: 101 ways to pick stock market winners. Find me here on US Amazon.
You’ll also see me regularly on CNBC, CNN, SKY, Business News Network and the BBC giving my take on the markets.
