Unlike traditional state-issued currencies, Venezuela’s petro could be obtained and spent on goods around the world as easily as bitcoin or any other cryptocurrency. Imagine buying a loaf of bread from a bakery in Lincoln, Nebraska, and being able to pay for it with Venezuela’s petro as easily as downloading a mobile app.
More than any of the other blockchain bills now being considered by U.S. lawmakers, Senate bill 1025, officially called the Venezuela Emergency Relief, Democracy Assistance, and Development Act of 2019, or the VERDAD Act for short, could set a dangerous precedent for other cryptocurrencies, according to Brett, who was previously a Booz Allen Hamilton lead associate. If the bill, proposed in April by Democratic senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey, is approved, petro would be the first cryptocurrency banned in the United States, and as Brett puts it, could make future bans as easy as filling in the blank.
“The implications for this are huge because it could be bitcoin or some other cryptocurrency inserted into this language,” says Brett, who after leaving Booz Allen joined ethereum startup ConsenSys as policy head and now runs Value Tech. “We’re talking about a road map for how to ban a particular cryptocurrency.”
Of particular concern to Brett is Title VII of the bill. Buried beneath pages of philanthropic sounding measures promising to provide humanitarian relief, restore democracy, and support the reconstruction of Venezuela, the section on the potential impact of cryptocurrencies on U.S. ability to sanction countries requires that the secretary of state and the secretary of the treasury consult with the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, “to develop a methodology to assess how any digital currency, digital coin, or digital token, that was issued by, for, or on behalf of the [Venezuela President Nicolas] Maduro regime is being utilized to circumvent or undermine United States sanctions.”
Within 180 days from the time that happens, the bill requires that the U.S. secretary of state and secretary of the treasury both brief the relevant congressional committees on the best course of action.
While the U.S. has previously allowed cryptocurrency transactions to legally occur, so long as taxes are paid in accordance with existing IRS regulations relevant to commodities, other nations have been more aggressive—and effective—on similar bans similar as the VERDAD Act. China has effectively shuttered China bitcoin exchanges and other companies or forced them outside the nation’s borders, even while making rapid progress on its own centralized cryptocurrency , which, similar to the petro, is being designed to be spent anywhere in the world.
This is what makes the VERDAD Act is so interesting. On the surface the reasons the law includes for banning the cryptocurrency, “public corruption, narcotics trafficking, and money laundering,” are easy for most Americans to agree on. But as Venezuela, China and other nations that would love to see the U.S. dollar lose its position as global reserve, start to explore cryptocurrency, the asset once thought of as “un-censorable” becomes both a potential threat and a potential solution.  Bitcoin, and more privacy-focused cryptocurrencies like zcash and monero could keep citizens in some of those very same oppressive regimes connected to global commerce.
According to Brett, the benefits of a borderless, global ledger of transactions not controlled by a government outweigh the risks of a borderless, global ledger of transactions controlled by a government. Unfortunately, he says, bill 1025 is “essentially banning the use of a particular cryptocurrency throughout the U.S.,” adding, “that’s to me a large act and a really wide net on the way we’re going to start to do sanctions in this country because of the fact that cryptocurrencies cross borders so seamlessly.”
Since Trump originally signed the executive order banning petro, Facebook revealed plans to co-develop a cryptocurrency called libra, backed by central bank assets, causing Congress to raise its hackles against cryptocurrency more than ever before, according to Brett. Last week alone, Congress hosted three hearings related to cryptocurrency, and Brett expects that the pace will only increase as giant corporations and state governments increasingly adopt digital assets.
In addition to VERDAD, Brett has identified two other bills pertaining to blockchain in the senate and 17 bills in the House of Representatives , for measures a simple as a House FinCEN study to educate law enforcement in areas including cryptocurrency and as broad as the Senate’s Digital Taxonomy Act of 2019, which would give the Federal Trade Commission $25 million a year for five years to help prevent cryptocurrency fraud.
“Now is the time to pay attention,” says Brett. “And the fact is, because there are 20 active bills that could be impacted and could change in some way shape or form along the way, it’s very important that we watch them, almost like the weather map.”
I report on how blockchain and cryptocurrencies are being adopted by enterprises and the broader business community. My coverage includes the use of cryptocurrencies such
I report on how blockchain and cryptocurrencies are being adopted by enterprises and the broader business community. My coverage includes the use of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Ethereum and Ripple, and extends to non-cryptocurrency applications of blockchain in finance, supply chain management, digital identity and a number of other use cases. Previously, I was a staff reporter at blockchain news site, CoinDesk, where I covered the increasing willingness of enterprises to explore how blockchain could make their work more efficient and in some cases, unnecessary. I have been covering blockchain since 2011, been published in the New Yorker, and been nationally syndicated by American City Business Journals. My work has been published in Blockchain in Financial Markets and Beyond by Risk Books and I am regularly cited in industry research reports. Since 2009 I’ve run Literary Manhattan, a 501 (c) (3) non-profit organization dedicated to showing Manhattan’s rich literary heritage.
