What is a Digital Wallet?
The term “digital wallet” is more popular than ever before thanks to the introduction of blockchain technology. These handy protocols largely eliminate the need to carry your traditional wallet. Instead, digital wallets store all of your valuable information via an App. Digital wallets also go by the name “e-wallets.”
Today’s Digital wallets can serve a multitude of purposes. These mobile applications allow you to upload items such as your driver’s license, gift cards, credit cards, tickets for entertainment events, and transportation passes. In this manner, digital wallets simplify your daily activities. You gain added security knowing you don’t have to carry your original documents. Additionally, you can recover lost data via backups. Try doing that with a lost wallet.
How Does a Digital Wallet Work?
Thankfully, digital wallets aren’t complex in nature. In most instances, you just need to download a digital wallet mobile app to get started. These mobile wallets are ideal for a couple of reasons. For one, they can function on nearly any smart device. These devices include smartphones, tablets, and smartwatches.
For those concerned about keeping all this data on their mobile device, there are also CPU-based versions of digital wallets available. These platforms are not as popular as their mobile counterparts. However, they are a bit more secure, especially from loss or theft. Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin , offer CPU digital wallet options to users as a more secure alternative to mobile apps.
Nowadays, digital wallets are more available than ever before. You can find these applications in a multitude of places. One of the first places to locate a reliable digital wallet is from your bank. All major banks offer some form of a digital wallet to supplement their banking services.
Additionally, there’s also no shortage of mobile wallet options available from third-parties. Simply go to Google Play or the Apple Store and you are met with a variety of popular options to choose from. Importantly, always do research on e-wallet app providers prior to downloading their product. Remember, this app will host tons of private and important data for you. You need to be sure you only go with the trusted alternatives.
In the case of cryptocurrencies, there are additional options to consider. Usually, the wallet provided by the crypto’s developers is the best option. It will be the most secure. However, it may not provide you with all the flexibility you may require. Luckily, third-party developers have also introduced a number of reputable multi-crypto options for you to consider.
To use your digital wallet to make everyday purchases is simple. The first step is to find a merchant that accepts digital wallet payments. This step is easy enough. Simply look for a digital wallet symbol on the merchant’s POS. Importantly, there are usually two types of digital wallet POS systems in use today – contactless and magnetic.
Contactless terminals will allow you to conduct transactions via NFC, Bluetooth, WI-FI, or some other form of wireless transmission. Near Field Communications, or NFC technology is one of the fastest-growing types of mobile wallet tech currently in the market. This technology allows you to effortlessly send funds simply by being in the vicinity of the POS. Comparingly, most other forms of mobile wallet transactions require you to hold the phone up to the POS directly to complete the transactions.
After locating a participating retailer, you’re ready to put your mobile wallet to use. Simply hold your Smartphone to the POS and await an approval prompt. Once the prompt ques, approve the transaction and your transaction is complete. It’s as easy as that.
Digital Wallets also make ATM visits more pleasant and efficient. Similarly to a POS, you don’t need to physically handle any items other than your phone to conduct your transaction. Simply, hold your smartphone near the ATM and wait for the prompt to appear. From here you can manage your account and receive cash from the ATM, all from the security of your smartphone. Importantly, this feature continues to gain popularity during the Coronavirus pandemic. Now, more than ever, touchless consumer options are ideal.
Digital wallets bring some major advantages to the market. For one, e-wallets provide users with more security. Have you ever lost your wallet? Can you remember that feeling you got realizing that all of your personal and sensitive information was now floating around free in the world? You can eliminate that scare with a digital wallet.
Digital wallets incorporate various security protocols to ensure that only the rightful owner gains access to the information within. Depending on your wallet provider, this security could entail passwords, fingerprint or face scan technology, 2-factor authorization techniques, and encryption.
You gain a lot of organization with a digital wallet. All of your information can be accessed in a convenient manner. No more digging through your wallet or purse to locate that one membership card you barely ever use, but now you need so badly. No more lost or forgotten ATM or credit cards.
Perhaps one of the most important reasons to consider a digital wallet is the fact that these apps are just so much easier to use than traditional wallets. Aside from not having to carry a bulky wallet with you, you also gain the ability to effortlessly make payments via your phone. Once you have your wallet set up with all of your payment info and membership cards, you can realize some real savings. Now, you always have your discount information on hand.
Today, there are all types of digital wallet providers at your service. However, due to the sensitive nature of the information in your wallet, including the ability to access your bank account, It’s important to stick with only reputable brands. Here are the top digital wallet choices:
When you hear the word “digital wallet” you may assume that this term is exclusive to the blockchain space. In reality, digital wallets evolved separate from blockchain technology, although during the same time frame. Major financial providers have always been interested in ways to simplify user transactions. Consequently, digital wallets were always a topic of interest for financial service developers.
Today, consumers have access to more digital wallets than ever. New providers continue to enter the space, all with their unique features and settings. As the space gets more crowded, it’s important to recognize the pioneers in the sector:
The PayPal OneTouch platform comes from one of the oldest major digital payment companies in the world – PayPal. As such, this platform leverages the network of this established provider to give you the ability to use your e-wallet nearly anywhere. Additionally, the platform streamlines PayPal’s most popular services. You can send, receive, and request funds directly from the wallet’s interface.
Venmo is one of the most popular digital wallet apps in the world. As of 2019, the payment app registered over 40 million active users. One of the best parts about Venmo is the fact that many businesses have embraced the app. This support from the public and business sectors pushes mobile wallet adoption to new heights.
Venmo became so popular thanks to a variety of reasons. Importantly, Venmo provides free bank transfers for users. The average bank transfer time can take 3 days with the app, but you can expedite the funds for an extra 1%. Notably, PayPal purchased Venmo in 2016 as part of the $800 million Braintree acquisition.
Samsung was one of the first firms to recognize the need for more digital wallet options in the space. As such, Samsung Pay entered the market way back in 2011. Today, the platform is stronger than ever. You can pay in person, on the app, or online using the interface. The only downside to the platform is you must own a Samsung Smartphone to utilize it.
Apply Pay came about as a response to Samsung Pay. This e-wallet includes all the features you would expect from one of the most recognized names in the tech industry. Per company policy, Apply Pay is exclusively for iPhone or Apple Watch users. The platform allows iPhone users to make in-store and online transactions directly from their devices.
Apple Pay has led the way in terms of security in the sector. The platform incorporates a built-in ID verification system. The system requires you to provide a Face-ID or Pin code to confirm transactions.
The eWallet app is an extremely versatile app that is available on Apple, Android, Mac, or Windows desktops. This unique platform doesn’t fit the normal functionality of a digital wallet because you can’t send or receive payments. However, the platform can store all of your sensitive financial information in a secure online location that you can access from any device globally.
Along with the ability to hold your credit and debit card information, eWallets can store your Passports, Insurance cards, Loyalty program cards, Library cards, and even your Airline frequent flyer cards. All of this functionality will cost you around $9.99.
Digital wallets are a core component of the blockchain infrastructure. They are the main interface for cryptocurrency interactions. Consequently, these digital safes are meant to keep your private keys stored securely. Additionally, they interact with different components within the blockchain ecosystem to facilitate transactions
Most large scale cryptocurrency projects such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Monero provide a native wallet. In most instances, the developer wallet option is the most secure. You can send, receive, monitor markets, and even stake your coins to earn more depending on the type of cryptocurrency you hold.
Third-party digital wallets designed to support cryptocurrencies are the most popular option. These wallets provide users more interoperability in the market. For example, wallets such as Jaxx , allow you to store multiple cryptocurrencies in the same wallet. You can also access valuable market data including volume, news, and block explorers.
One of the main issues surrounding digital wallet adoption stems from technological restrictions, not from the protocols, but of the devices they run on. Basically, even the best digital wallet in the world is useless if your phone battery dies. You may have dealt with a declined or lost credit card in the past, but imagine one that needs to charge before you can use it. In extreme situations, users could be left without access to their funds.
Another major roadblock facing digital wallet adoption is the fact that most people still prefer to use plastic and cash. Studies have shown that consumers feel no real need to upgrade their payment systems at the moment. In fact, 3 out of 4 consumers don’t see the point in the upgrade currently.
According to research fielded by YouGov, 43% of consumers don’t think mobile wallets are secure. Additionally, around 38% are concerned about losing their device. Your mobile wallet won’t be much help to you if you can’t locate your phone.
Despite these concerns, the digital economy requires digital wallets to function. You can expect to see these protocols continue to be a critical component of the financial sector moving forward. For now, the blockchain revolution appears to be pushing digital wallets into the spotlight yet again.
David Hamilton is a full-time journalist and a long-time bitcoinist. He specializes in writing articles on the blockchain. His articles have been published in multiple bitcoin publications including Bitcoinlightning.com
Its been almost ten years since Satoshi Nakamoto first introduced Blockchain technology to the world in his 2008 Bitcoin Whitepaper. Since that time, these revolutionary networks have gained popularity in both the corporate and governmental sectors. This growth is easily explained when you consider that blockchain technology provides the world with some unique advantages that were previously unimaginable. Consequently, today, you can find blockchain technology in nearly every sector of the global economy.
A blockchain is a network of computers that share a distributed ledger across all network participants (nodes). This strategy is far different than say, fiat currencies that originate from a centralized authority figure. Importantly, this ledger keeps an unbroken chain of transactions since the birth of the network. This “chain” of transactions grows larger as new “blocks” of transactions are approved and added to it.
In order to approve new transactions, each node works together with others to validate new blocks. Additionally, the nodes also validate the current state of the entire blockchain. In order for a new block of transactions to be added to the blockchain, they must receive approval from 51% of the network’s nodes. Nodes are also referred to as miners. In this manner, blockchain networks are decentralized networks that provide unmatched security to the world of digital assets .
Decentralization is an important aspect of blockchain technology because it makes these revolutionary ledgers immutable and unalterable. In fact, since there is no centralized attack vector, hacking a blockchain is nearly impossible. The larger the blockchain network, the more secure the data on it remains.
For example, let’s look at the world’s largest blockchain, Bitcoin. Currently, the Bitcoin blockchain has over 10,000 active nodes located across the globe. This distribution means that in order for an attacker to alter even just one tiny piece of information on the blockchain, they would need to successfully hack 5,000+ computers at once.
While this task may not be impossible for the quantum computers of the future, it’s so unprofitable that it makes no sense to even attempt such a monumental task. Additionally, on top of successfully hacking 5000+ computers at once, an attacker would also need a supercomputer to recalculate the new blockchain transactions in time to introduce them into the network. It would literally be more affordable to create a new cryptocurrency from scratch.
One of the reasons why blockchain networks are so secure is the integration of consensus mechanisms. Consensus mechanisms are cryptographic protocols that leverage the participants of a blockchain network in securing its data. In the case of Bitcoin, the Proof-of-Work (PoW) consensus mechanism is used.
The Proof-of-Work consensus mechanism was revolutionary to the world of cryptography when it was first introduced years prior by Adam Back in his Hashcash whitepaper. In the concept, Back describes the integration of a mathematical equation to the network’s security protocols. In this way, every computer can show “proof” of their work securing the network.
It’s important to understand that nodes receive a reward for their mining efforts. These rewards adjust automatically depending on the network’s difficulty and value. In the case of Bitcoin, miners originally received 50 Bitcoin for their efforts. Today, this seems like fortune, but back in 2009, Bitcoin was only worth pennies. As the value of the token rises and the network goes, the mining rewards shrink. Today, Bitcoin miners receive 6.5 BTC if they add the next block to the chain.
Notably, every node validates and secures the blockchain, but only one gets to add the next block of transactions to the network. To determine who the next miner is that gets to add this block, every computer competes in a mathematical race to figure out the PoW equation. In the case of Bitcoin, the equation is known as SHA-256 . Importantly, the first SHA algorithm dates back to Hashcash. This early version of the equation was known as SHA-1.
Notably, the SHA-256 equation is so difficult that it’s easier and more efficient for your computer to just make random guesses rather than attempting to figure out the equation directly. The answer to the equation must begin with a predetermined amount of 0s. In the Bitcoin blockchain, the equation’s answer must start with four zeros. However, if the network’s congestion rises, so does the difficulty of these equations. This difficulty adjusts by the addition of another zero at the beginning of the required SHA-256 answer.
Similarly to traditional commodities such as gold, there are costs that are associated with the creation and introduction of these digital assets into the market. These random guesses utilize intense computational power. This power equates to real-world costs such as electricity bills. Studies have shown that securing the Bitcoin network can use more electricity than required by entire countries. Luckily, over 80% of Bitcoin’s power consumption comes from renewable sources such as solar or hydroelectric.  This cost of mining also adds measurable value to each Bitcoin.
As Bitcoin began to gain in profitability,  its network’s computing power expanded significantly. In the beginning, nodes, also known as miners, could mine for Bitcoin using nothing more than your home PC. Eventually, miners realized that graphic cards were far better at the repetitive guessing required to figure out the SHA-256 algorithm. This led to a computational race in the market.
Eventually, large blockchain firms such as Bitmain introduced Application Specific Integrated Circuit ( ASIC ) miners into the equation. These purpose-built miners were thousands of times more efficient at guessing the SHA-256 algorithm than the GPUs and CPUs before them. Consequently, their introduction created a scenario in which the average miner now needed to invest thousands in mining equipment to stay relevant.
Luckily, some creative minds in the field began to think of ways to level the playing field out again. They developed “mining pools.” A mining pool is a network of miners that all share computational power for the common goal of mining blockchain transactions. Importantly, mining pool participants receive a percentage of the reward based on their contributions to the network’s overall hash (computational power).
Importantly, over the last three years, there has been a push to move away from power-hungry consensus mechanisms such as PoW. This desire to secure blockchains in a more efficient manner has led to the development of some truly unique consensus mechanisms in the sector.
The Proof-of-Stake mechanism does away with the difficult mathematical algorithms and instead utilizes a more psychological approach to securing the network. In a PoS blockchain, users don’t need to compete mathematically to add the next block to the blockchain. Instead, PoS users “stake” their coins via network wallets to secure the network. The way staking works is simple.
Keeping a certain amount of coins in your wallet allows you to participate in transaction validations. The more coins you stake, the more likely the chances are you get to add the next block of transactions to the network. In most PoS systems, a miner from those with the most tokens staked at the time receives the chance to add the blocks.
The advantages of a PoS consensus mechanism are immediately evident. For one, you don’t need to pour tons of resources into your network to keep it safe. Additionally, since nodes are chosen based on their amount of staked coins, there is never a scenario in which a node gains anything from validating incorrect transactions. Basically, a hacker would have to fully invest in the cryptocurrency prior to attacking the network. In this way, PoS systems create a huge deterrent to attackers.
Blockchain technology has come a long way from its early days as a means to secure cryptocurrency networks. Today, blockchain technology has numerous uses across every type of industry imaginable. Specifically, blockchain programs have impacted the logistical, financial, and data security sectors in a major way.
Blockchain logistical systems are more efficient and cost-effective to operate than traditional paper-based models. In fact, the immutable and unalterable nature of blockchain tech makes it ideally suited to logistical tasks. Soon, you may be able to ascertain much more information regarding the creation and delivery of your products thanks to these new-age systems emerging.
Blockchain technology has also altered the way in which businesses raise funds. In a traditional corporate crowdfunding strategy such as an IPO, companies must balance between cost-effectiveness and participation. The inability to process smaller transactions meant that for the longest time, companies had to turn away potential investors. Nowadays, blockchain technology enables businesses to easily automate these procedures via smart contracts .
Smart Contracts feature preprogrammed protocols that execute when they receive a certain amount of cryptocurrency sent to their address. These contracts live on the blockchain and enable remarkable functionality. For example, in the case of fundraising, a smart contract can automate processes such as the approval of investors and the distribution of funds.
You can expect to see further expansion of the blockchain sector in the coming months as more governments and institutions explore its benefits. For now, the blockchain revolution is well underway.
As an informed investor, you need to understand what cryptocurrencies are, and how they continue to alter the financial sector globally. At their core, cryptocurrencies are internet-based decentralized mediums of exchange. These unique financial instruments differ from traditional fiat currencies in some key ways.
Unlike, say the US dollar, cryptocurrency issuance and transactions aren’t controlled by a central organization. Instead, a group of computers known as a blockchain all work together to secure and operate the network. Consequently, this makes blockchain networks far safer than traditional systems because there is no centralized attack vector.
Importantly, blockchain technology provides a more secure and efficient market experience. It’s both immutable and unalterable. These attributes make it ideal for peer-to-peer transactions.
In this way, cryptocurrencies provided the world with one of the first successful alternatives to government-backed currencies. In the case of cryptos, such as Bitcoin , a combination of private and public keys enables p2P cryptographic transactions via a distributed ledger.
The history of cryptocurrencies starts in 1998. At that time, the internet was gaining popularity. However, it would still be nearly almost half a decade before high-speed became popular. Interestingly, it’s recorded that a computer engineer by the name of Wei Dai first introduced the concept of cryptocurrencies via his B-money concept. In the paper, he proposed a digital form of money that utilized a privacy protocol to create an anonymous cash system.
Later in the year, another, now well-known programmer by the name of Nick Szabo introduced the BitGold concept. Szabo felt that decentralization needed to be at the core of any digital currency to prevent centralized manipulation. Sadly, neither of the projects made it to the market. However, they did inspire the infamous creator of Bitcoin – Satoshi Nakamoto.
One of the main hindrances to the development of a reliable form of digital money was the problem of double-spending. Double spend is when a hacker uses the same digital currency more than once. It’s a huge issue that boggled some of the most advanced computer minds of the time.
To create a reliable digital currency, someone would need to figure out how to make a digital asset that was, somehow, usable only once. Additionally, it needed to be impossible to duplicate or counterfeit to serve its purpose. The issue of double-spending isn’t a concern for the traditional financial system because banks utilize third-party verification systems. Additionally, they operate a centralized system that allows edits, refunds, and corrections.
In 2002, now famous Bitcoin programmer Adam Back began to unravel parts of the double-spend mystery. He proposed some form of system to ensure that each network participates played their part. Specifically, Back proposed that Hashcash utilize a decentralized system that required users to complete a difficult mathematical equation to process a transaction.
Importantly, this strategy cut down on malicious intentions because it required a hacker to utilize a huge amount of computational power to gain entry into the network. This new form of network consensus became known as the Proof-of-Work (PoW) algorithm. Today, PoW algorithms are found in all types of cryptocurrencies.
Bitcoin Changed Everything – What are Cryptocurrencies?
In 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto introduced the world to its first cryptocurrency – Bitcoin. Bitcoin was a major milestone for many reasons. It marked the first succesful decentralized cash system to function utilizing a “Non-trust based system.”
Instead of a centralized network, Bitcoin relies on an international network of transaction validators known as “nodes” or “miners.” A node’s main purpose is to secure the network through the validation of “blocks” of transactions. In the case of Bitcoin, these blocks appear every ten minutes and contain 1MB of data.
Importantly, all the nodes validate transactions, but only one gets to add the block to the chain of transactions forming the “blockchain.” For his help in the inspiration, Satoshi gave a nod to Adam Back’s HashCash project. He spoke on his previous work in his communications when he stated “we will need to use a proof-of-work system similar to Adam Back’s Hashcash.”
Satoshi was able to solve the double-spend issue via the introduction of a timestamp into the consensus algorithm. A consensus algorithm is a cryptographic function used to secure a network. In the case of Bitcoin, this algorithm is known as SHA-256. In the early days of PoW, HashCash utilized the SHA-1 PoW algorithm.
Critically, each block in a blockchain contains portions of the hash from the previous block. Each block also contains a timestamp. In this manner, a blockchain is really just one long mathematical equation. Consequently, this strategy makes blockchain networks incredibly difficult to hack.
For one, you would need to recalculate the entire blockchain from the start which would require a ton of computational power. Additionally, you would need to hack over 51% of the blockchain to ensure that your new blockchain is approved by validators. In the case of Bitcoin, that equates to hacking over 150,000 computers simultaneously. Consequently, it’s would cost more than the value of all Bitcoins to hack the network.
Miner Rewards – What are Cryptocurrencies?
The first node to complete the SHA-256 algorithm gets to add the next block to the transaction chain and receives a reward for their mining efforts. Think of this reward as a refund for the computation and electrical contributions put into the network. Originally, this reward was 50 Bitcoin. Of course, back then, Bitcoin was worth only pennies. Today, the block reward is 6.25 coins per block. At today’s pricing, that is just around $60,000 worth of Bitcoin.
Intelligently, miner’s rewards automatically decrease by 50% every 210,000 blocks. On average this halving occurs approximately every 4 years. The first halving transpired on November 28, 2012. The second halving took place on July 9, 2016. Lastly, the final halving to occur happened just this year on May 11, 2020.
Mining rewards also serve another purpose within Bitcoin’s ecosystem. Crucially, it’s the only time new Bitcoin is introduced into the blockchain. In this way, Bitcoin provides a predictable monetary supply that can’t be manipulated such as with central bank currencies.
Additionally, because Bitcoin is finite with only 21 million slated for release, it enjoys growing scarcity as time passes. Currently, there are already 87.68% of Bitcoin mined. That equates to 18,413,369 BTC in circulation today. Of these coins, about a million reside in Satoshi Nakamoto’s wallet. These coins haven’t moved since Nakamoto first mined them during the early days of the coin’s release.
October 31, 2008, is the date that Satoshi Nakamoto chose to change the world forever. It’s on this day that he first published the Bitcoin Whitepaper. In the paper, he gives insight into his concept and how he solved the double-spend problem.
Two years later, Bitcoin took a major leap into the economy after the first real-world purchase occurred. On May 2, 2010, an early Bitcoinist by the name of Laszlo Hanyecz made Bitcoin’s first real-world transaction. He ordered two pizzas from his local Jacksonville Florida shop.  The price he paid for those delicious pies and a slice of Bitcoin history was 10,000 Bitcoin. That’s around $90,000 in today’s market.
By March 2010, the first crypto exchange entered the market. The now-defunct platform went by the name bitcoinmarket.com. It allowed users to buy, sell, and trade Bitcoin. The same year, the now infamous Mt.Gox crypto exchange took trading to the next level.
No one can say for sure if Satoshi Nakamoto predicted the birth of the crypto market, but it wasn’t long after his invention that the advent of crypto exchanges led to the development of other popular cryptocurrencies. At first, these cryptos resembled Bitcoin with a few minor tweaks, such as larger block sizes.
A perfect example of these early cryptocurrencies is Litecoin . According to Litecoin’s creator, Charlie Lee, he developed the token to serve as silver to Bitcoin’s gold. As such, Litecoin shares the same cryptographic functions as Bitcoin albeit with some miniscule changes.
By 2013, there were ten major cryptocurrencies trading in the sector. It’s here that you see cryptocurrencies begin to emerge with more functionality and alternative purposes in the market. For example, the introduction of Ethereum brought smart contracts to the forefront of the crypto space.
Smart Contracts – What are Cryptocurrencies?
Smart contracts feature preprogrammed protocols that execute upon receiving a specified amount of cryptocurrency. These automated protocols provided crypto users with advanced options. As such, Ethereum ushered in a new age of functionality in the crypto realm. Today, smart contracts reside at the core of the crypto sector.
Another example of the shifting landscape of the cryptocurrency sector is Ripple. This early cryptocurrency entered the market with a very unique strategy. Unlike Bitcoin, which many see as a means to replace the current financial system, XRP is meant to provide banks with access to blockchain technology and all of its advantages.
In December 2017, Bitcoin reached an all-time high of around $20,000. It was here that scalability concerns reached a fevered pitch. The huge influx of Bitcoin users had left many in the crypto sector to state that Bitcoin was unable to full fill its primary purpose as a “peer-to-peer electronic cash system.” These concerns eventually led to various hard forks and the development of the Lightning Network.
Importantly, a hard fork occurs when a new cryptocurrency launches from the blockchain of another crypto. The new cryptocurrency shares all the previous transactions of the original cryptocurrencies blockchain but all future transactions are placed on a new ledger. Consequently, miners of the old blockchain are unable to mine the new currency without updating their nodes.
Hard Forks are often controversial in the market. For example, Bitcoin Cash came as a result of a split in the Bitcoin community regarding an increase in the block size from 1MB to 2MB. Even after the hard fork, tensions still remained high in the community as many believed that the team from Bitcoin Cash wanted to hijack Bitcoin. Reversely, Bitcoin Cash supporters argued that Bitcoin was failing in its current state to serve its primary purpose.
As more cryptocurrencies emerged, so did alternative ways to secure blockchains. Notably, the Bitcoin PoW consensus system utilizes an incredible amount of computer processing power. Consequently, the entire network requires a huge amount of electricity to function. In the past, studies have shown that Bitcoin uses more power than some countries.
This power consumption led to the development of other, less power-hungry options such as the Proof-of-Stake (PoS) consensus mechanism. In a PoS system, users receive rewards for keeping a certain amount of their cryptocurrency in a network wallet. These “staked” coins help verify the status of the network. Importantly, the more coins you stake, the more transactions you validate.
This strategy works well because it would require any hacker to stake a large amount of cryptocurrency to enter the network. As such, they would be forfeiting all of their funding if they were to then attack the blockchain responsible for securing their staked tokens. Notably, Ethereum plans to convert over to a PoS consensus system by the end of 2021 according to developers.
The Lightning Network emerged as another option for those seeking to alleviate Bitcoin’s blockchain congestion. The Lightning Network utilizes private payment channels that reside off-chain. In this way, users can conduct unlimited transactions without bogging down Bitcoin’s network. Only once the private payment channel closes, do the transactions add to the blockchain. Additionally, the Lightning Network introduced a host of new functionality to the world’s first crypto.
Cryptocurrencies continue to revolutionize the concept of money. You can expect to see these unique financial instruments take center stage in the coming years as many of the world’s most powerful fiat currencies appear to be mathematically unsound. For now, the world still debates on how to handle these new-age currencies with new regulations emerging monthly.
