I have written extensively in recent years about the gargantuan outperformance of the S&P 500 versus many sub-segments of the stock market.  It is fair to say that during the past few years, when it comes to this popular indicator, the whole has been worth more than the sum of its parts.  So, what I try to do in this space is to dissect what investors and media flippantly refer to as "the stock market," because unless you are a young investor with an investment time horizon of multiple decades, the skewing that has occurred within the S&P 500 in the latter stages of this 8 1/2 year old bull market is like heavy drinking before the hangover...but the hangover is inevitable.
I have covered this skewing from two angles that are crucial for investors to understand if their portfolio is being tapped to fund their lifestyle currently, or will be within the next 10 years:
The Nasdaq is slaughtering the NYSE Composite.  These two stock exchanges make up nearly all the U.S. Stock market.  This also has had the effect of lifting the S&P 500 to new heights, as a limited number of successful Nasdaq glamour stocks have had an outsized positive impact.
Stocks with higher yields have not participated in this year's S&P 500 rally.  This will be strikingly clear in a moment when I show you some statistics I compiled.  Suffice it to say that if you are motivated by acquiring steady dividend cash flow in your portfolio, that part of your mission has been smooth as usual.  But you are probably underwhelmed by the additional price gains those high-yield stocks have delivered this year.  This is a tradeoff investors accept when they choose to earn a substantial part of their total return from the predictable cash flow of dividends.  The dividends flow in, but the price gains are less consistent.  This is not only because the stock market is an often volatile place, but also due to the whims of investors regarding higher-yielding stocks.  And when the market is focused on hi-fliers and companies that pay no dividends, they get the lion’s share of the assets.  That can at times limit the amount of buying pressure directed toward other market segments.  High frequency traders and index funds dominate daily trading these days, and they are not dividend-investing types. It is easy to forget that you accepted that when the media is touting all-time highs in the headline indexes, and you may also forget that investing for life's objectives is a not a sprint.  As one who has been an active, professional participant in the markets for over 30 years, do not forget that!
Now, let's peek at some numbers.  I took the current holdings in the S&P 500, and divided them according to what I call "Dividend Tiers."  I created this approach because too many investments, including many ETFs, try to sound like they are dividend-focused but they are not.  Their yields are too low.  So while they invest in stocks that pay dividends and check that box, the yields on those stocks don't amount to enough to fund most people's retirements.  "Dividend yield" sounds enticing, but not if it is followed by the words "of 1-2% per year."  Most retirement plans are geared toward producing 4% returns or higher.  If you can get that from the dividend on an annual basis, that gives you the luxury of waiting out the market's cycles, and potentially adding some price return to that lifestyle-funding yield you are getting year in and year out.  This is precisely what is being lost on some investors right now in the current Nasdaq-infused S&P 500 mania.
In the chart below, I summarized my findings.  I looked at the different yield segments within the S&P 500 (which actually has 504 holdings), noted how many stocks fell into each segment, and recorded the average (equal-weighted) year to date return of each stock and yield group through August 8th.
Note that there are many reasons a stock's yield lands it in one of these categories. Some of the high yield stocks got there because their stock prices were pummeled this year, and that lifted their yield to the point where they moved into the last group. Others had the opposite effect, whereby their stock prices rallied enough to take them from, say, White Chip status to the Low Yield group. I am working on a more comprehensive study of these segments for an upcoming research paper, so I suspect this will not be the last time you see this type of analysis from me.
“No Yield” speaks for itself. “Low Yield” stocks pay a dividend, and therefore qualify for the many “Dividend-Paying Stock” strategies that exist today. But their yields won’t pay the bills without dipping into principal unless your portfolio is at least 8 figures in size, or you are extremely frugal.
“White Chips” are a name I created for those stocks in the 2.00%-3.49% range, as they are predominantly what we would refer to as "Blue Chip" stocks. And since Red has a negative connotation in investing, we call these "White Chips."
“Sweet Spot” stocks are more in the annual dividend payout range of what many retirement plan withdrawal rates call for, 4-6%. There were more Sweet Spot stocks in the S&P 500 a few years ago, but the latter phases of this long bull market lifted their prices up and their yields down. The next market correction (and there is one coming, despite what some with green eyeshades will tell you) will probably create more investment opportunities from the White Chip list, as they drift back into Sweet Spot territory.
A key point here is that while the S&P 500 is not loaded with Sweet Spot stocks, if you look outside the S&P 500 to mid-cap and small-cap stocks, as well as several ADRs (US-traded foreign companies), the universe expands quite a bit. But in this S&P 500-focused culture, many of these strong income payers are neglected, at least for now.
“High Yield” and “Extreme Yield” also speaks for themselves. However, note that there is such a thing as too high a yield to make an investment attractive (at least to me). As with all of this discussion, each stock should be evaluated on many factors, of which its dividend yield is one. There are only 5 stocks between the two groups within the S&P 500, which is even more evidence that being an index-fund investor and being a yield-seeker are two very different paths.
The S&P 500 Index is not chock-full of dividend investing opportunities.  I know that, my colleagues know that, and other dividend-oriented investors know that.  But the common perception amongst investors and the media is that we are all playing in the same sandbox.  We are not.  And there are plenty of stocks in the S&P 500 that yield in a range that is worthy of consideration for a dividend-income portfolio these days, the index in aggregate is dominated by companies that don't make the cut, or at best are toward the lower end of the dividend yield range that such investors would consider for investment.  About 1/8th of the current stocks in the index (64 out of 504) are yielding above 3.38%.  No wonder the media refers to some 2% yielders as "great dividend stocks."  In their sandbox, that's OK.
Dividend investors must cast a wide net to achieve their goals. Fortunately, there are over 3,500 stocks listed in the US as well as many thousands elsewhere.  So the ocean for dividend yield is wide and deep.  The S&P 500 is merely one harbor in one city within that larger ocean.  One indicator of this is the fact that Small cap Value investing, a favorite of so-called "Modern Portfolio Theory" investors, is generally having a rough year.
Well over half of the stocks in the S&P 500 pay no dividend at all, or yield less than 1.88%. But, this is where 2017's returns have been concentrated so far.
There is a more significant tradeoff between dividend collecting and "total return" (dividends plus market price appreciation) than in recent years. So far in 2017, dividend investors had no place to hide within the S&P 500 unless they were willing to drop their yield significantly.  This year reminds us that every investor needs to determine for themselves the relative importance of dividend cash flow now, and price appreciation over time.  Because as you can see, sometimes the market does not offer both simultaneously.
This is merely a time frame of 7 months and a week. What I hope you get out of this article is that while the objectives of appreciation and income should be compartmentalized by the investor.  Otherwise, a pattern of performance envy, yield-reaching, speculation and the downfalls of each can rear their ugly head very quickly.
"The Market" is way up this year...or is it? If your priority can be described as growth or aggressive growth, you are probably doing well this year, as opposed to 2016 when the relationship between higher-yielding stocks and lower-yielding ones was reversed.  And if you are more income-oriented, you are enjoying your dividends but your total return is in a slump.  Viewing this part of the stock market's cyclical nature is a good perspective to have.  But if your mind starts to play tricks on you, and convinces you that there is something "wrong" with your income-driven equity portfolio this year, you are walking right into the lion's den.  This will be more obvious during the next correction and/or bear market, but by then the lions will have been fed well.
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former mutual fund manager.  My work for Forbes.com aims to break investment myths and bring common sense analysis to my audience. My firm's website is www.SungardenInvestment.com.  Connect with me on Linked In, follow me on Twitter @robisbitts. Financial Advisors can visit www.TheHedgedInvestor.com for more.
