Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
In the 2nd quarter, the small-cap iShares Russell 2000 (IWM) was up 7.8%, but was only able to manage a 3.5% gain in the 3rd quarter. This was forecast by the relative performance (RS) analysis for IWM , which dropped below its WMA in late July. At the time, I pointed out this activity means that it is no longer a market leader.
For eleven out of the past twelve quarters, the SPY was also higher, only closing lower in the 1st quarter of 2018 (point 1). That quarter had a wide range, as it moved well above the quarterly starc+ band early in the quarter. For the fourth quarter, the starc+ band is at $299.17, which is only 2.9% above the September close.
Historically, more gains are expected of the market in the last quarter, as since 1950 the averages gains have been as follows; October +0.78%, November +1.39% and December +1.53%.   The stock market is known to be quite volatile in October, and seasoned investors tend to concentrate on the several market crashes that have occurred during the month.
For the month, the best performer was the Health Care Sector (XLV), which was up 3.5%, followed by a 2% gain in the Energy Sector (XLE). For the 3rd quarter, XLV is also the leader, up 14.6%, while the Industrials Sector (XLI) was up 10.2%.  Technology (XLK) and the Consumer Discretionary (XLY) also had good quarters, up 8.7% and 7.7% respectively. One of the weakest sectors was the Materials (XLB), up just 0.6% as it was down 1.8% in September.
The Health Care Sector has been getting a lot of press lately , as it has apparently become a favorite of hedge funds and some stock pickers. According to data from Lipper, more than $4.6 billion has flowed into U.S.-based healthcare mutual and exchange-traded funds since May.
From a technical standpoint, the Health Care Select (XLV) has been positive since May 2016 (line 1)  when the on-balance-volume (OBV) completed its correction by moving through resistance (line b). The OBV is often a leading indicator: as you can see above, the OBV for XLV broke through its resistance well before price (line a). This is why I use it for selecting both ETFs and stocks. The OBV for XLV twice tested its WMA in the past two years, and each was a good buying opportunity. XLV is already quite close to its monthly starc+ band at $96.56 so late buyers need to be careful.
In looking at the seasonal tendencies of sectors in the fourth quarter, there are several sectors that typically do well during this historically strong period for the stock market. It is important to remember that these seasonal tendencies still need to be supported and confirmed by the technical indicators.
Looking at seasonal trends, the Consumer Discretionary (XLY) tends to turn in October when its downtrend (line a) is broken. This sector typically tops out in April, but as the chart indicates this was not the case this year. XLY is up 19.8% YTD, as the relative performance analysis gave a strong positive signal in November 2017 ( see chart ) and still looks strong technically.
The Materials Select (XLB) typically bottoms in November and then rallies into the year-end. It then forms another low early in the year and is strong until May. XLB had a rough September losing 1.8%, and is down 3% YTD. The XLB had closed strong a week ago but gave up those gains last week, closing below the past four week lows. The weekly technical studies are negative as the RS for XLB has been below its WMA since June. Clearly, last week’s action did not improve the outlook.
So how does the market look technically? Despite the solid gains for the month, the market does not look nearly as strong technically as it did for most of the summer. Those analysts who are looking for stocks to 'melt-up' based on the strong economy and fundamentals are therefore likely to be disappointed.
As part of my regular weekend analytical routine, I look at six key advance/decline lines . The strongest market rallies occur when they are all making new weekly and daily highs and are above their WMA's. In contrast, if the A/D lines are giving mixed signals, it is time to be more cautious. When a majority of the A/D lines are below their weekly and daily WMA's, it points to a serious market decline. That was the case in 2015 and 2016.
The NYSE Composite had a sharp decline last week down 1%.  It is well above its rising 20-week EMA at 12,888. It is still well below the January high. Many do not know that the Composite includes all common stocks listed on the NYSE, including ADRs, REITs and tracking stocks.  On this WSJ public page , you can see that many ADRs dropped sharply on Friday.
This is especially important when looking at the A/D data. The weekly NYSE A/D line, which includes all issues, failed to make a new high the week ending September 21st. Therefore a divergence (line b) is now evident with last week’s lower close. A higher close last week could have erased this divergence but did not as the NYSE was lower.
When this occurs it is important to look at the other A/D lines to see if there are additional warning signs. The NYSE Stocks Only A/D line did make new highs (line c) and shows a pattern consistent with the price chart. If the weekly Stocks Only A/D line had also formed a negative or bearish divergence, it would be a more serious warning.
In reviewing the other four A/D lines, I found that in the S&P 500, Nasdaq 100, Russell 2000, and Dow Industrial A/D lines, no other weekly divergences are evident. The weekly chart of the Invesco QQQ Trust (QQQ) shows that it had a strong close last week, as it was up 1.3%. This was above the prior week’s doji high. The weekly starc+ band is at $193.25. There is first weekly support in the $180-area with the rising 20-week EMA at $177.82.
The Nasdaq 100 A/D line was one of the few that held above its WMA during the market’s sharp drop in early February. It made another new high last week even through the QQQ is still below its late August high. The Nasdaq 100 A/D line is well above its WMA and is acting stronger than prices.
The S&P 500 A/D line (not shown) also made a new high last week and shows no signs yet of a top. The iShares Russell 2000 (IWM) was under pressure for most of the month and its weekly A/D line continues to decline, but there does not show any divergence between price and the A/D line. Watching the A/D lines as we head into October will be important.
The data on the consumer last week shows no signs of an economic slowdown. The Consumer Confidence was the “highest in 18 years”  and Consumer Sentiment is holding near the highs from early in the year.
The Chicago Fed National Activity Index was strong on Monday with Durable Goods up 4.5% on Thursday when the consensus estimate was for a gain of 2.2%.  The Chicago PMI was a bit lower than expected on Friday but is still in a solid up trend.
The ISM Manufacturing Index comes out on Monday with the Non-Manufacturing Report on Wednesday. The week ends with the jobs report on Friday before the long weekend.
Investors seem to be more nervous or even fearful heading into October. The latest AAII survey shows that the bullish and bearish % are range-bound at relatively neutral levels. The Index Put/Cal ratio was 1.61 on Friday, indicating a fairly high level of bearish sentiment. Such a high level was last seen in early September, just before the market completed its pullback.
For investors or traders who had a good third quarter, it is not a time to be aggressive. The focus should be more on the risk of any new positions rather than the reward. I do expect the major averages to make additional new highs in the 4th quarter, as patience is likely to be rewarded. Of course, a deeper correction is possible in the interim.
In my Viper ETF Report and the Viper Hot Stocks Report , I provide market analysis twice a week with specific buy and sell advice. New subscribers receive five trading lessons for just $34.95 each per month.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
