Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
We value Arconic Inc (ARNC) using 2021e EV/EBITDA methodology by valuing Howmet Aerospace (Stub) and Arconic Corporation (Spin-Off) separately. Our intrinsic value of $29.00 (Previously: $28.50) for Howmet Aerospace (Stub) is based on 2021e EV/EBITDA multiple of 9.8x. Our fair value estimate for Arconic Corporation (Spin-Off) stands at $7.00 (Previously: $7.50) per ARNC share based on 2021e EV/EBITDA multiple of 6.5x. We have factored in the cash distribution of approximately $700 million from SpinCo to Howmet Aerospace (Stub). We arrive at a target price of $36.00 per share for Arconic Inc, which implies a potential upside of 15.0% from the current market price of $31.30 as of 2/7. We thereby retain our ‘Buy’ rating on the stock.
In Connection with Spin-off, The Arconic Inc board further announced that Timothy Myers, William Austen, Christopher Ayers, Margaret Billson, Austin Camporin, Jacques Croisetiere, Elmer Doty, Carol Eicher, Fritz Henderson, E. Stanley O’Neal, and Jeffrey Stafeil are expected to join Arconic Corporation’s board, while Joseph Cantie, Robert Leduc, Jody Miller, and Nicole Piasecki are expected to join Howmet Aerospace Board following completion of the spin-off. Goldman Sachs and J.P. Morgan are acting as fi nancial advisors to Arconic Inc. in connection with the separation transaction, and Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz is acting as its legal advisor.
ARNC shareholders will receive one ordinary share of Arconic Corporation (Spin-Off) for every four ordinary shares of ARNC held as of the record date. Arconic Inc will distribute all of the outstanding shares of Arconic Corporation common stock on a pro-rata basis to holders of ARNC common stock. The distribution remains subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions described in Arconic Rolled Products Corporation’s Registration Statement on Form 10, as amended, including the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) having declared effective the Form 10.
We value Arconic Inc by using the Sum of the parts (SOTP) methodology by valuing both RemainCo (Howmet Aerospace) and SpinCo (Arconic Corporation) using the EV/EBITDA valuation technique.
A] Arconic Inc (Stub) RemainCo (Stub) to be renamed as Howmet Aerospace at the spin-off completion, includes Engineered Products and Forging businesses.
EV/EBITDA Valuation: We value Remain Co (Stub) - Howmet Aerospace at $29.00 (Previously: $28.50) per share based on 2021e EV/EBITDA multiple of 9.8x. This multiple is at approximately 5% premium to median peer multiple of 9.3x. With its superior portfolio, Howmet Aerospace’s Key Data Ticker ARNC Primary Exchange NYSE Price ($ as of Feb 7, 2020) 31.30 52 Week Range ($) 17.30 - 31.99 Shares Outstanding (million) 432.9 Market Cap ($ billion) 13.6 Net Debt ($ billion) 4.2 Enterprise Value ($ billion) 20.3 Market Float 99.4% FY20 Estimated P/E (x)* 13.2 Dividend ($) / Div. Yield (%) 0.08/0.3 Fiscal Year Ending Dec 31 FY19 Revenue ($ billion) 14.2 Index Member NYSE Composite * P/E is calculated on the basis of Bloomberg Consensus estimates Source: Bloomberg, Company Reports and Spin-Off Research Source: Company Data 3 closest competitor was Precision Castparts Corporation (which was acquired by Berkshire Hathaway Inc in 2016). We expect 2021 EBITDA of $1,690 million for Howmet Aerospace factoring in spin-off related costs, net of corporate overheads. Our net debt incorporates cash distribution by SpinCo to RemainCo (Stub) at the time of spin-off to the tune of $700 million.
B] Arconic Corporation (Spin-Off) Arconic Rolled Products Corporation (which will be named as Arconic Corporation) at the completion of the spin-off, will comprise the Global Rolled Products (GRP) segment.
EV/EBITDA Valuation: We value Arconic Corporation (Spin-Off) at $7.00 (Previously: $7.50) per share by applying 2021e EV/EBITDA multiple of 6.5x. As the Company includes a more volatile metals-exposed end markets in the rolled-products business, we assign a lower EV/EBITDA multiple. The assigned multiple is at approximately 3% premium to median peer multiple of 6.3x. We expect 2021 EBITDA of $870 million for Arconic Corporation (Spin-Off) factoring in possible spin-off related costs, net of corporate overheads. Our net debt incorporates cash distribution from Spin-Off to RemainCo at the time of spin-off to the tune of approximately $700 million.
C] Consolidated Valuation: Our consolidated target price for Arconic Inc stands at $36.00 per share, implying a potential upside of15.0% from the current market price of $31.30 as of 2/7. We thereby retain our ‘Buy’ rating on the stock.
Arconic (to be renamed as Howmet Aerospace at the separation) is a global leader in lightweight metals engineering and manufacturing. Arconic’s innovative, multi material products, which include aluminum, titanium, and nickel, are used worldwide in aerospace, automotive, commercial transportation, building and construction, industrial applications, defense, and packaging. Arconic has two operating and reportable segments, which are organized by product on a worldwide basis: Engineered Products and Forgings (EP&F), formerly named the Engineered Products and Solutions segment and Global Rolled Products (GRP). The Engineered Products and Forgings (EP&F) segment develops and manufactures high performance, engineered products, and solutions for the aerospace, industrial gas turbine, and commercial transportation markets. EP&F offers unique, comprehensive capabilities, from advanced alloy development to advanced manufacturing and qualification expertise. The Global Rolled Products (to be spun-off), provides a range of highly differentiated aluminum sheet, plate, and extruded products for the aerospace, automotive, commercial transportation, brazing, and industrial markets. In FY19, the company recorded revenue of $14.2 billion. On completion of the spin-off transaction, Engineered Products and Forgings (EP&F) segment will be a part of the RemainCo and will be renamed as Howmet Aerospace Inc.
Arconic Rolled Products Corporation (which will be named as Arconic Corporation) at the completion of the spin-off, will comprise the Global Rolled Products (GRP) segment. The segment offers a range of highly-differentiated aluminum sheet, plate, and extruded products for the aerospace, automotive, commercial transportation, brazing, and industrial markets. The company has invented the industry leads: Kawneer created the first modern storefront more than a century ago, and Reynobond® & Reynolux® products deliver innovative solutions for architectural and retail applications that seamlessly integrate with architectural systems to produce dynamic visual effects. Today, these brands hold leading market positions. The GRP segment recorded revenues of $7.1 billion in FY19.
I am the founding principal and publisher of Spin-Off Research , an independent advisory report featuring analysis of spin-off situations. I am the author of the book Spin
I am the founding principal and publisher of Spin-Off Research , an independent advisory report featuring analysis of spin-off situations. I am the author of the book Spin-Off to Pay-Off: An Analytical Guide to Corporate Divestitures (McGraw-Hill). In addition to being a Forbes contributor, I have been featured or quoted in various media such as Barron’s, The Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg, Business Week and Fox Business. I have published “Spin-Off Research”, an institutional advisory report featuring analysis on spin-offs since March, 1997. Spin-Offs often result in higher aggregate value for the constituent pieces. Many diversified companies are electing to spin-off parts of their business finding they can create significant value for shareholders.
