As the stock market is in turmoil, here’s what experts are watching for as the NYSE operates without humans for the first time
NYSE’s trading floor is shut down temporarily.
The New York Stock Exchange is going all-electronic on Monday, marking the first time that the centuries-old exchange will operate in regular hours without its legion of trusted flesh-and-blood floor traders.
“It’s unprecedented, it’s never happened before,” said one NYSE official who declined to be identified because they weren’t authorized to publicly talk about the exchange’s operations. “Our markets have never been open while our trading floor’s not open.”
James Angel, professor at Georgetown University and an expert in market structure, told MarketWatch on Sunday that the stakes for the NYSE are “very high.”
To put things into perspective, the NYSE traces its origins back to May 16, 1792, and in 1817 the New York Stock Exchange Board was formed. And over those past 228 years, the NYSE has never operated without a group of traders functioning as the anchor to the U.S.’s biggest trading platform by market share. The NYSE has shut on a number of other occasions, most recently in 2012 during superstorm Sandy.
“In previous closures, the entire market was closed,” said Angel. “This will be the first time the NYSE classic will be operating purely electronic,” he said.
“The stakes are very high because the NYSE has always been in the crosshairs of the media and the slightest misstep they make will be seen by millions of people,” the Georgetown professor explained.
, on Wednesday said it was temporarily closing the floor and shifting to all-electronic trading after a trader and an employee tested positive for COVID-19 , the infectious disease that has claimed more than 14,000 lives globally and has caused near national lockdown, with a number of state and city governments implementing severe restrictions to attempt to limit the spread of the deadly pandemic.
Wednesday’s announcement of the temporary floor closure also came after MarketWatch wrote an article in which market participants raised questions about the possible public-health hazard to employees and traders involved in keeping the trading floor open.
The exchange touts its ability to provide a “human touch” in its operations, and that is a point that the NYSE employs to differentiate itself from its all-electronic rivals, including the Nasdaq Inc. NDAQ,
“We do believe that the market quality that investors and issuers enjoy from that human interaction is unparalleled,” said NYSE Group chief operating officer Michael Blaugrund in an ICE podcast on March 20, after the floor-closure announcement.
To be sure, operating electronically should be uneventful for the NYSE in theory because the exchange operator has frequently tested the capacity of its all-electronic operation. As recently as the first week of March and again over the past several days, including this weekend ahead of its Monday open, according to people familiar with the tests.
“We, as a practical matter, are always ready, any day for a potential disaster,” said Blaugrund during the podcast. “So we regularly test on weekends both with the exchange alone as well as with the industry broadly,” he explained, noting that those doomsday scenarios include being unable to access 11 Wall St., the NYSE’s headquarters in lower Manhattan, and its Mahwah, N.J., data hub coming offline.
However, the transition to all-electronic in an exchange platform that represents more than 20% total average market volume comes at a historically turbulent time for markets, partly fostered by the COVID-19 outbreak, which is roiling markets due to cessation of business activity across the globe.
Concerns about an abrupt recession forming domestically and elsewhere due to the halt of businesses and personal activity also is forcing investors to rapidly reprice assets that were trading at all-time highs a little over a month ago.
In fact, mechanisms to decelerate vicious market downturns kicked in four times from March 9 to March 19. Those so-called circuit breakers, which take effect when the S&P 500 SPX,
