Bank stocks plunge — it may be an overreaction, longtime analyst says
Banks have increased profits during periods of low interest rates, says Odeon Capital Group’s Richard Bove
Shares of Citigroup plunged 13.4% on Thursday, bring the year’s decline to 39%.
Bank shares skidded Thursday as investors turned bearish after the Federal Reserve said it would keep official interest rates near zero for years amid lasting economic pain. Investors may be overreacting, according to at least one longtime bank analyst.
The Fed predicted that the federal funds median target rate would be 0.10% through 2022. You can read the projections here and see related tables here .
On Thursday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
fell 5.9% and the Nasdaq Composite Index COMP,
The KBW Bank Index comprises 24 stocks of universal and large regional U.S. banks. Here’s how all 24 fared during the early minutes of trading Thursday, with Goldman Sachs GS,
added to the list so that the “big six” U.S. banks are all included:
Scroll the table to see the data. Click on the tickers for more about each bank, including news and business profiles.
Odeon Capital Group analyst Richard Bove quoted a colleague as saying: “Apparently, it is true that the only factor that impacts bank stock prices is interest rates,” in a report early Thursday.
Bove refuted that assertion: “For example, the period of lowest interest rates, in modern times, over a sustained period, in the United States was from 2008 to 2015. In this seven-year period, bank earnings declined in 2009 and 2014. They increased in 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2015. They hit all-time records in 2013 and 2015 and were close to an all-time record in 2014.”
Bove went on to point out that banks have differing business models and predicted that the best industry performers during the expected period of very low interest rates would be those with “the ability to acquire resources and sell products,” and those that could maintain the best loan quality.
He cited the tremendous increase in money supply, from the action of the Federal Reserve and other central banks, which has helped lead to increased trading revenue and debt underwriting for investment banks.
Bove has “buy” ratings on J.P Morgan Chase JPM,
