DOW Drops More Than 400 Points, NASDAQ Composite Also Falls, Stock Market Volatility Continues!
Stock Markets pose a risk to all investors. One small piece of news can crash the market overnight. Another small piece of news, however, can cause a stock to skyrocket within days. Investors understand and accept this volatility when they decide to invest in shares. But the Coronavirus pandemic has changed everything.
Coronavirus has been having a big effect on markets since February. Businesses are not being allowed to run. Most shops are not open. People can not travel outside their houses. Governments are only allowing important things such as hospital and groceries to run. Most companies are not earning anything right now. This is leading to a lot of instability in stocks. While instability is always there, it is higher than normal right now.
On Tuesday, May 12 2020, the Dow Jones Average fell by over 400 points. The Dow Jones Average takes the share price of 30 big companies in the United States and provides an index on the basis of that. Many investors look at the Dow Average to see where the market is going.
The closing price for the Dow Average on Tuesday was at 23,764.78, which is 457.21 points and 1.9% lower than the day’s opening. NASDAQ Composite is another index that a lot of investors use. It fell by 2% on Tuesday and closed the day at 9002.55 points.
For the past few days, many stocks had been trending up. There was optimism in investors about easing of lockdowns. Many were hoping that businesses would run better after this. NASDAQ composite was on a six-session streak of continuous rise in index score. The Dow, on the other hand, had risen by 400 points as recently as Friday, 8 May 2020. The fall in both indices today, as well as a fall in many stocks broke the recent uptrend in the stock market.
The stock market has continued to be volatile in recent weeks over growing fears that the spread of coronavirus will push the world economy into recession.
The sudden fall in the market on Tuesday continues the trend of high volatility in the market since the pandemic started. Investors lowered their expectations on Tuesday after days of overoptimism that led to the rise in stock markets. All major indices have been daily volatility, giving positive returns on some days and negative returns on others. Investors are lacking confidence in the market due to this, and it will take some time before stability returns to the markets.
