finished 43.37 points, or 0.5%, lower at 9,368.99.
The Tell: Stock-market bull who called the bounce off March lows says economy bottoming, now sees S&P 500 at 3,250 by August
President Trump’s announcement of a news conference on China came amid growing worries that tensions between world’s largest economies may put economic recovery in jeopardy.
The U.S., Australia, Canada and the U.K. governments issued a joint statement Thursday reiterating their “deep concern regarding Beijing’s decision to impose a national security law on Hong Kong,” after China’s parliament, the National People’s Congress passed legislation Thursday that could greatly curtail democratic freedoms.
The U.S. on Wednesday said it no longer considered Hong Kong highly autonomous under a 1992 law, a move that could lead to measures to limit Hong Kong’s trade privileges and open the door to sanctions against individuals the U.S. sees as suppressing civil liberties in the territory.
“I wouldn’t say this is a major downturn to be too concerned about it,” said Randy Frederick, vice president of trading and derivatives at Charles Schwab, of the slide in the stock market on Wednesday.
“Obviously, President Trump has been escalating the rhetoric…but how this all plays out is  something that could take time, he said.
“But what’s the U.S. going to do? Launch a military strike against China? I don’t see that happening,” Frederick said.
Still, investors shouldn’t discount those tensions, said Andrew Smith, chief investment strategist of Dallas-based Delos Capital Advisors. “We’re in an inflection point,” Smith told MarketWatch, and it is possible to see pullbacks of as much 5-10% as investors rotate toward smaller-cap, value-oriented names.
Capitol Report: Revoking Hong Kong’s special status is Trump’s ‘nuclear option’ that could trigger irrevocable U.S.-China split, analysts warn
“We’re in what we call a very typical business cycle dynamic,” Smith said. “We have a lot of ground to pick up, a lot of things to fix, but we think everything is moving in the right direction. People shouldn’t worry about valuations. They play second fiddle to market dynamics. Money has to go back to work,” he added.
On the economic front, another 2.13 million Americans filed for first-time unemployment benefits in the most recent week, the Labor Department said. That was in line with the consensus forecast among economists surveyed by MarketWatch.
Orders for durable goods plunged 17.2% in April, the Commerce Department said, a slightly less steep fall than economists had expected, but GDP contracted at an annual 5% pace in the first quarter instead of 4.8%, revised government data showed, slightly worse than anticipated. And home-contract signings fell 21.8% in April, the National Association of Realtors said, the biggest such decline in the history of that metric.
For the week, however, the U.S. stock indexes are  higher, riding on optimism over  businesses reopening, with shares of technology companies lagging behind after leading the bounce back from March 23 lows on expectations they would be most insulated or even benefit from the lockdown, analysts said. The S&P 500 and Dow were up 2.5% and 3.8% week to date, respectively, while the Nasdaq is up 0.5% this week.
While stocks appear expensive based on forward earnings estimates, “what seems to be priced in at this stage is the economy will recover much faster than previously estimated, the pandemic will soon end and life return back to normal,” said Hussein Sayed, chief market strategist at FXTM in a note.
Separately, New York Federal Reserve Bank President John Williams, speaking at an online event, said that the central bank has “more powerful” tools than negative interest rates, according to media reports .
Which companies are in focus?
Shares of social-media companies were in the spotlight after President Trump on Thursday signed an executive order ostensibly to prevent online censorship, a broad government review of private companies’ activities with potentially grave consequences for social-media companies. Twitter Inc. TWTR,
