The US Fed intervenes, Dow, Nasdaq and S&P 500 futures rise, and reports of a US$1 trillion infrastructure proposal emerge.
Shane Walton | Financial Writer, Australia | Publication date : 2020-06-16T05:52:13+0100
US markets were on shaky ground heading into Monday’s session. Indeed, as we reported before the market open yesterday:
‘Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) futures were trading down 935 points or 3.66%, suggesting the market would open significantly lower on Monday, 15 June.’
Unsurprisingly, the DJIA dropped sharply in the opening hours of trade, before rebounding as the session wore on, eventually finishing out the day up 0.62% or 157 points, at the 25,763 point level.
On a more granular level, a number of key financial stocks were bid higher on Monday, with Goldman Sachs rising 2.25%, American Express up 2.23% and JPMorgan Chase & Co up 1.38%. By comparison, the worst performing Dow constituents during the day were Merck , Chevron , and Pfizer .
Elsewhere, the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite rose 0.83% and 1.43%, respectively.
Looking at the catalysts behind the above market moves, on Monday, the US Federal Reserve announced that it would commence buying individual US corporate bonds, under the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF) program.
If that wasn’t enough to drive bullish sentiment amongst investors, reports have begun to surface that US President Donald Trump is in the process of preparing a US$1 trillion infrastructure proposal.
According to individuals familiar with the stimulus proposal and as reported by Bloomberg:
‘A preliminary version of the proposal being prepared by the Department of Transportation would reserve most of the money for traditional infrastructure work, like roads and bridges, but would also set aside funds for 5G wireless infrastructure and rural broadband.’
In response to all this, as of 12:51am (EDT), Dow Jones Industrial Average futures traded some 464.5 points or 1.8% higher, suggesting the key US benchmark would open higher on Tuesday, 16 June.
S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite futures were also up at the time of writing.
Finally, it’s set to be a jam-packed day in terms of economic data releases on Tuesday, with retail sales data (May), industrial production data (May), capacity utilization data (May), home builders' index data (June), and business inventories data (April), all set to be released during the day.
Trading pre- and post-market enables you to take a position on key US shares – like Tesla , Apple , Amazon and Netflix – outside normal trading hours.
Most AU traders can only trade the US stock market's from 23.30 to 06.00 AEST, but with our extended hours you can trade for much longer.
18.00 to 10.00 Monday to Thursday, and 18.00 Friday to 07.00 Saturday AEST
21.00 to 07:30 Monday to Thursday, and 21.00 on Friday to 07.00 Saturday AEST
You'll find our extended trading hours markets labelled ‘All Session’, to distinguish them from the shares which can only be traded in normal US market hours.
To start taking advantage of pre and post-market trading, click here now to create a live IG Trading Account.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Go long or short on thousands of international stocks.
