Dow recovers to post modest gains despite  dismal U.S retail sales data, tensions with China
Shoppers explore a mostly empty mall in Columbus, Ohio, earlier this week, where several stores reopened for the first time since a shutdown of all nonessential businesses in mid-March.
Stocks recovered from steep losses early Friday to close higher, despite data showing U.S. April retail sales plunged more than forecasts and news the Trump administration will block shipments of semiconductors to China’s Huawei Technologies, stoking fears of renewed trade tensions.
However, sentiment was improved by news the House of Representatives was set to vote on another $3 trillion coronavirus package that could be the opening bid in another round of fiscal stimulus.
What did the major indexes do?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
closed at 9,014.56 after gaining 70.84 points, or 0.8%.
However, stocks closed out the week lower, with the Dow down 2.7%, the S&P 500 losing 2.3% and the Nasdaq 1.2% lower.
U.S. retail sales fell 16.4% in April,  the Commerce Department reported, as businesses remained all but shut down, exceeding the 12.5% drop expected on average by economists polled by MarketWatch. Excluding autos, sales still dropped 16.2%.
“Consumers reacted quickly to the near shutdown in the economy in mid-March, stocking up on groceries while slashing spending on virtually everything else,” said Jim Baird, chief investment officer at Plante Moran Financial Advisors, in emailed comments. “That pantry-stocking buying binge subsided in April, leaving traditional retailers feeling the pain across the board,”
“Until there is a greater sense of confidence that the virus is under control, economic activity is unlikely to return to normal,” he said. “Still, the gradual lifting of restrictions across the country should signal a bottoming in the economy and the first steps toward recovery.”
Helping boost sentiment were expectations that the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives would authorize more than $3 trillion in new spending to blunt the economic impact of the COVID-19 epidemic, the centerpiece of which would be nearly $1 trillion in aid to state and local governments. The measure is not expected to pass the Republican-led Senate, but the Trump Administration has indicated willingness to work out a deal on new spending.
“This week’s trade looks and feels like a backfill, amidst persistent bearishness and growing impatience with the pace of reopening,” Brian McCarthy chief strategist at Macrolens, wrote in a Friday note to clients. “But re-opening we are, a process that seems likely to accelerate. Meanwhile, “Stimulus IV” has begun to come into focus and it looks like it has tremendous bullish potential.”
The expiration of individual stock and stock-index options at the close of trade could also have driven some of the back-and-forth action in equities markets, hedge fund manager and former Goldman Sachs portfolio manager Will Meade said on Twitter.
The New York Fed’s Empire State business conditions index rose 29.7 points but only to  negative 48.5 in May.  Economists had expected a reading of -65, according to a survey by Econoday. A figure below 50 indicates a contraction in demand.
The Federal Reserve said industrial production fell 11.2% in April for its largest monthly drop in the 101-year history of the data series. Economists, however, had forecast a  slump of 12.5%. Capacity utilization fell to 64.9% in April from 72.7%. Economists had forecast a reading of  63.2%.
The University of Michigan said its preliminary consumer sentiment index f or May rose to 73.7 from 71.8 in April.
Investors also eyed reports that the U.S. Commerce Department was moving to block shipments of semiconductors by global chip makers to China’s Huawei Technologies. The Commerce Department said it was amending an export rule to “strategically target Huawei’s acquisition of semiconductors that are the direct product of certain U.S. software and technology,” the report said.
Global Times editor Hu Xijin, who is widely thought to have close ties to the Chinese government, said China may retaliate if the U.S. prevents microchip shipments to Huawei.
“Based on what I know, if the U.S. further blocks key technology supply to Huawei, China will activate the ‘unreliable entity list,’ restrict or investigate U.S. companies such as Qualcomm QCOM,
