Dow ends 200 points lower after losing steam in late trade, following loss of 20 million private sector jobs
Investors now await Thursday’s U.S. weekly jobless claims data and Friday’s monthly nonfarm payrolls and unemployment report
U.S. stocks closed mixed, with the Dow off 200 points, as investors pored over data showing a collapse in private-sector employment in April and weighed the easing of lockdowns imposed by the coronavirus pandemic.
Investors also parsed corporate quarterly updates from some of the nation’s largest companies, with Walt Disney Co.’s profit diving more than 90% in the second quarter due to the hit from the pandemic on the entertainment giant.
How did stock benchmarks fare?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
added 98.41 points, or 1.1%, to close at 8,809.12.
Unemployment has skyrocketed in the U.S. during the pandemic, but investors have mostly discounted the glaringly negative headlines and bought highflying technology-related shares, with modest gains in other sectors indicating that investors are looking ahead to economic growth resuming as businesses reopen after the lockdowns designed to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
showed private-sector employers shed more than 20 million jobs in April, but the data closely matched the consensus estimate from economists polled by Econoday.
The private-sector employment number comes a day before the weekly U.S. jobless claims report and ahead of Friday’s more closely followed monthly nonfarm-payrolls report.
“As investors, we see this Friday’s employment report, which will show a job loss of 21 million people, as marking the bottom for terrible economic news,” Bryce Doty, a senior portfolio manager at Sit Fixed Income Advisors, wrote in emailed comments.
“So, ironically, we are becoming more optimistic about the future,” Doty quipped. “We see the good news coming out of New York City in terms of sustained improvement in testing and slowing new cases as an additional sign of hope,” he said.
The coronavirus has infected 3.6 million people world-wide, and a third of that figure is in the U.S. alone, according to data supplied by Johns Hopkins University. More than 250,000 lives have been lost globally.
“The stock market is certainly pricing in the beginning of a downtrend in new virus cases for the U.S. as a whole,” Scott Wren, senior global market strategist at Wells Fargo Investment Institute, wrote Wednesday in a weekly note.
“We have been predicting a short but very deep recession that appears to have started earlier than we initially thought but will likely still end in the second quarter.
President Donald Trump on Wednesday backed away from plans to shut down his coronavirus task force, saying the group will continue its work “indefinitely,” in a series of Twitter posts. The reversal follows a day after Trump stressed that restarting business activity was paramount.
“We have to get our country open and we have to get it open soon,” the president said Tuesday, while visiting a Honeywell International HON,
Meanwhile, there is tussle forming around a key provision of the Trump administration’s hallmark small-business rescue program, namely how much of the aid should go to employees.
See: Mnuchin rejects calls to have less Paycheck Protection Program money go to employees, but Pelosi sounds open to changing 75% rule
Which stocks were on the move?
Shares General Motors Co. rose 3% after first-quarter sales and earnings fell less than estimated as U.S. truck sales rose sharply.
late Tuesday reported fiscal second-quarter profit of $460 million, or 26 cents a share, on sales of $18.01 billion, up from $14.9 billion in the year-ago quarter, but closures of its theme parks cost the media giant more than $1 billion in profit. Shares closed 0.2% lower.
gained 6.9% after the e-commerce retailer posted a surprise adjusted profit and said that gross merchandise volume accelerated in April from the first quarter.
