Dow Jones futures trade softly, Covid-19 cases continue to climb and a number of key employment data releases loom.
Shane Walton | Financial Writer, Australia | Publication date : 2020-07-02T03:05:00+0100
The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) struggled to gain much traction on Wednesday – falling 0.30% or 77 points – to finish the session at the 25,734 point mark.
The S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite by comparison rose during Wednesday's session, with the FANG cohort leading the gains. Facebook , coming off concerns of an ‘ad exodus’ finished the session up 4.62%, Google (Alphabet) traded 1.73% higher, Amazon was up an impressive 4.36%, Apple's stock fell; while the Netflix share price surged 6.72% to finish at US$485 per share.
The Dow’s constituents traded far less evenly on Wednesday, with Pfizer , Walt Disney and Merck all trading higher, while Walgreens Boots Alliance , Exxon Mobil and IBM were the worst performing Dow stocks.
Mind you, even though the Dow finished Wednesday’s session lower, the general atmosphere was one of optimism in US equity markets, after pharmaceutical giant Pfizer and BioNTech announced positive results from early-stage Covid-19 vaccine trials.
In a press release, Pfizer Senior Vice President and Head of Vaccine Research & Development, Dr Kathrin Jansen said:
‘We are dedicated to develop potentially groundbreaking vaccines and medicines, and in the face of this global health crisis, we approach this goal with the utmost urgency. We look forward to publishing our clinical data in a peer-reviewed journal as quickly as possible.’
Pfizer finished out the session up 3.21% at US$33.74 per share.
Covid-19 cases continue to rise, Dow Jones futures soft
Though the prospect of a coronavirus vaccine represents a distinct positives, cases of the virus continue to spread across the US at a rapid rate.
Indeed, vaccine or no vaccine, Covid-19 cases continue to climb in a number of key US states, with IG’s Market Analyst, Kyle Rodda saying:
‘The rate of new cases leapt 1.8 per cent across the US, with the state of California, and the state of Arizona reporting their highest daily jump in coronavirus cases since the pandemic began, and the state of Texas reporting its highest ever active case numbers.’
Regardless of that, as of 10:03PM (New York time), Down Jones futures were trading up 23 points or 0.09%, implying the key US benchmark would open in positive territory on Thursday.
Elsewhere, on Thursday a deluge of employment data is set to be released, including: nonfarm payrolls data, unemployment rate data, average hour earnings data, as well as initial and continuing jobless claims data.
Want to trade US futures – long or short?
Create an IG trading account or log in to your existing account to get started now.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Go long or short on thousands of international stocks.
