The S&P 500 leaped 1.2% and turned positive for the year in the prior session in a quick about-face following the springtime fears over the virus. At one point this year, the S&P 500 was down more than 30% from its all-time highs. It was positive for 2020 by 0.05% by Monday's close but Tuesday's losses put it back down 0.6% year to date.
Those sharp gains came even as the official economic arbiter in the U.S. declared that the economy entered a recession earlier this year. The National Bureau of Economic Research determined that a "clear peak in monthly economic activity" occurred in February.
Traders say the market's hot streak over the last two months is in large part thanks to confidence about the reopening of the U.S. economy and a barrage of government stimulus.
Market optimists pointed to improving economic signals for the most recent rallies, including the government's far-better-than-expected jobs report last week. The Labor Department said Friday the economy added 2.5 million jobs in May, a record . Economists polled by Dow Jones had forecast a drop of more than 8 million.
"Recent data points like the jobs report and not-as-bad-as-feared company updates have fueled the view that the worst of the declines could be behind us," a team of RBC Capital Markets analysts told clients Monday. "The risk-on trade really is gaining traction. Valuations have spiked to historical highs in many industrial sub-sectors, signaling a strong recovery is potentially taking hold."
But some investors are starting to wonder whether the move has gone too far, too fast considering the economy as just started to reopen. The Federal Reserve begins a two-day meeting Tuesday.
All in, the S&P 500 is up 46% from its March low. Much of those gains have been thanks to the so-called reopening trade, those stocks that would benefit the most if all the Covid-19 precautions and business closures were removed.
Airline shares, which swooned in March amid travel restrictions and contagion fears, have been one of the strongest groups of late. Delta, United and American Airlines are up 50.4%, 75.6% and 82.9% over the last month alone. Another "reopening" group, cruise line operators Carnival and Norwegian Cruise Line are up 62.1% and 94.1% over the same period.
"Equities continue to trend higher in anticipation of improving economic conditions," said Terry Sandven, chief equity strategist at U.S. Bank Wealth Management. "But I think it's premature to declare happy days are here again."
"What gives us caution is the duration of Covid-19 remains unknown," said Sandven. "We don't have treatments, we don't have prevention and we're a little bit at the mercy of how fast the virus spreads."
Subscribe to CNBC PRO for exclusive insights and analysis, and live business day programming from around the world.
