President Donald Trump speaks at the White House on Monday.
U.S. stocks closed sharply higher Tuesday after a volatile session that restored about half of the losses seen Monday when stocks saw the biggest one day fall since the 2008 financial crisis.
Tuesday’s rebound was partly fuelled by a White House push to persuade Congress to agree to a fiscal stimulus package that may include a payroll tax cut to mitigate the economic impact of the COVID-19 epidemic.
What did the major indexes do?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
The Tuesday rebound was not unusual  —  Bespoke Investment Group strategists found that in the 10 previous times since 1952 that the S&P 500 fell 5% or more on a Monday, the index has gained the following day, by an average of 4.2% .
The Dow on Monday plunged 2,013.76 points, or 7.8%, to 23,851.02, while the S&P 500 fell 225.81 points, or 7.6%, to end at 2,746.56, near its session low. The Nasdaq Composite Index  plunged 624.94 points, or 7.3%, to finish at 7,950.68. All three benchmarks suffered their biggest one-day percentage declines since 2008.
Stock-index futures found support Tuesday after President Donald Trump advocated for payroll tax relief and other measures to help businesses deal with the economic slowdown resulting from the coronavirus epidemic. Lawmakers in both parties though expressed skepticism about a payroll-tax cut to bolster the economy.
Monday’s stock plunge was the result of fears that government attempts to contain the epidemic may also shut down economic activity globally. At the same time, the biggest one day fall in crude oil prices since the 1991 Gulf War, after Saudi Arabia and Russia began a price war last Friday, also raised fears of a credit crisis in the energy industry.
“My personal view is that there’s still some more downside to come, largely due to the fact that we don’t have good data on the extent of the virus in the US,” said Donald Calcagni, chief investment officer with Mercer Advisors, in an interview.
Equities markets may perk up on discussion of tax cuts, Calcagni said, “but I don’t think that’s a long-term solution. Eventually we’ll have to take it back. I think what the market really needs to see is better leadership out of the White House in terms of dealing with the virus.”
Markets are now pricing in an easing of monetary policy from the European Central Bank at its Thursday meeting this week and from  Federal Reserve at next week’s policy meeting.
“The big question now is: Will a potential bear market in stocks usher in a recession?”,  said LPL Financial Senior Market Strategist Ryan Detrick. “After all, stocks tend to lead the economy both into and out of recessions. Now the good news is not all bear markets occur in recessions; in fact, when the economy has avoided recession, stocks have bottomed right around down 20% over the past several bear markets.”
In corporate news, airlines, including American Airlines Group Inc. AAL,
