added 59.48 points, a gain of 0.7%, at 8,887.22, extending its seventh-day winning streak and setting another record.
On Wednesday, the Dow and S&P 500 snapped a five-day winning streak to end slightly lower.  The Dow ended with a loss of 27.88 points, or 0.1%, at 28,239.28, while the S&P 500 gave up 1.38 points, or less than 0.1%, to end at 3,191.14. The Nasdaq Composite held onto a small gain to eke out its fifth-straight record close at 8,827.73, a gain of 4.38 points, or less than 0.1%.
While the vote to impeach Trump by the Democratic party controlled House dominated headlines, investors have largely brushed off the proceedings, analysts said. Expectations the Republican-controlled Senate will vote against removing Trump from office have insulated the market against any concerns.
“The market is suggesting right now that it’s meaningless,” said Kent Engelke, chief economic strategist at Capitol Securities Management, of Trump’s impeachment. “Right now, it's all about trade, economic activity and the yield curve at its steepest it’s been for all of 2019. That’s an indicator of greater economic activity in the interim.”
Meanwhile the market remains heartened by the truce in the U.S. - China trade war after last week’s agreement, while recent economic data has tentatively soothed worries over global economic growth.
The Chinese Ministry of Commerce said Thursday that it remains in contact with the U.S. as the text of the deal is drafted, according to Reuters, though it has declined to confirm claims by the Trump Administration that it will involve $32 billion of agricultural purchases beyond the $24 billion of purchases made by the Chinese in 2017, before the trade spat began.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said the deal will be signed in early January, telling CNBC Thursday morning that the deal “is just going through what I would consider to be a technical legal scrub.”
As the market closed, the U.S. House also passed a  bill to replace the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with the USMCA and is likely to be passed by the Senate in the new year.
Compared to NAFTA, the new treaty aims to help U.S. farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, workers and consumers by opening new markets to American goods and reducing the cost of household staples such as drugs and groceries. It would also shield U.S. industries like autos and steel from what the Trump White House saw as unfair competition.
Meanwhile in U.S. economic data, new applications for U.S. jobless benefits fell during the week ended Dec. 14, dipping 18,000 to a seasonally adjusted 234,000 after surging to 252,000, a two-year high, the week before. The Conference Board’s index of leading economic indicators was unchanged in November, after three months of declines.
“With the reduction in risks from the uncertainty that the American trade war produced in 2019, we’re keeping our fingers crossed that the economy will get some more wind in its sails in 2020 to extend its longest winning run in history,” MUFG chief economist Chris Rupkey said.
Shares of chip maker Micron Technology Inc. MU,
