The original version of this article had incorrect figures for the individual ETFs, as they included AUM from the mutual fund versions of some of the ETFs due to the way the data provider classifies certain funds.  We identified the correct figures, and we now believe the figures presented in the table to be accurate, as of December 14, 2017.  We have also corrected the number of ETFs that make up 1/2 of the total US ETF universe assets, to 34 from 15.  Our thanks to Deborah Fuhr ETF industry veteran and Managing Partner of ETFGI, for pointing out this issue, and helping us to correct it.
Exchange-Traded Funds or ETFs, once a cool niche creation for the asset management industry, have now become a potent force in the day-to-day life of investment markets and investors.  In a nutshell, an ETF is a security that trades on a stock exchange like a stock, but it is not an operating business.  It is a portfolio of securities that is intended to mimic an index.  While some of the indexes existed long before ETFs were created in the mid-1990s, many ETFs came to life because someone thought up an interesting investment style or theme, and then created an index so that the ETF could exist.  ETFs now account for a significant portion of daily stock exchange transactions, and U.S. ETF assets have recently topped the $3 trillion mark.  They appear to be here to stay.
I think that is a really good thing, but I also see increasing signs that ETFs are being used as a sales pitch, with lots of oversimplification. They appear to be the latest version of what Wall Street so often does: take a great idea, nurture it well, and then overdo it. As ETFs play an important role as part of the portfolios I manage, and since I have been using ETFs for about 20 years (since back when their impact was dwarfed by mutual funds), I wanted to share some current observations in hopes that you can separate the good and fake news about this innovative financial instrument.
The table above shows how the ETF market has evolved. There are about 2,100 ETFs traded on U.S. Exchanges.  But 50% of all U.S. ETF assets are in only 34 of them! Certainly, there are some good reasons for this, including excellent branding by some of the leading ETF providers, and the fact that some of the products have been time-tested, as opposed to others that smell like Johnny-come-lately-types, with companies fighting to bring to market the latest, greatest hottest style.  It is kind of like the fashion industry, or like how fast food companies keep using bacon in so many different ways.  But I digress.
In addition, 2017 has seen massive inflows of money into certain styles.  As with mutual fund flows patterns, this gives us excellent insight into what investors are thinking in the aggregate, and ETFs are reaching the point where market prices can be influenced heavily in the short-term by where capital is moving to and from.  This has made life a bit more challenging for investors (like me) who actually care about the underlying businesses I own in a portfolio, and the price that I pay for those businesses. Between ETFs and the huge daily impact of algorithmic trading systems, more of the market’s movement is being determined by price-insensitive factors than at any time in my 30-year career.  I have and am adapting my own investment style to account for this, and my hope is that through this introduction to the ETF environment and future articles on the topic, you will figure out how your own unique situation should account for these important changes in how the stock and bond markets work.  For now, here are some top-level observations from an ETF veteran:
ETF inflows are heavily in favor of the products with the lowest fees (known as expense ratios). I think that low cost is great for investors, but you also must know that you get what you pay for.  It sounds great these days to just “buy the market,” but based on a study I published on Forbes recently, the S&P 500 has an 80% chance of being down over the next 5 years.  (Click HERE for article.) In addition, the S&P 500 has an annualized return of about 5% this century, thanks to two bear markets that each saw that index fall by more than 50%.  So, just keep your thinking balanced before you forget exactly what it is you are getting with these most inexpensive and convenient types of ETFs.
The biggest ETFs invest in the “headline” market indexes, and it has become a self-fulfilling prophesy. That is, the largest ETFs are based on those indexes, more and more money flowed into them, and that lifted the prices of the largest securities in those indexes.  As we have seen in the past in the mutual fund business, this is great while it lasts, but when it turns around, the same “herd mentality” can be vicious on the way down.
2017 ETF asset flows highlight investors’ penchant to “reach for yield” in the bond market. Funds investing in floating rate bonds, emerging market bonds, preferred stock, short-term high-yield bonds, and mortgage-backed securities have seen huge inflows this year.  That tells us that with pathetically-low rates on U.S. Treasuries and other high-quality bonds, investors are willing to trade safety for yield, even if that yield is well below where it has been historically.  For instance, high-yield bonds are trading at near their lowest rates in history.
A lot of ETF assets are simply chasing past performance. This is not a surprise, since that is the dominant theme in the investment markets for the past 25 years.  It is why we have seen two of the biggest bull markets and two of the biggest bear markets during that time.  As one market observer put it, people want to invest in what they wish they bought a year ago.  So true.  And, on the flip side of that, investors are showing a penchant for selling off what has been lagging. Dividend funds were doing just fine, but their severe performance lag versus the headline indexes and other shiny objects this year have not produced a flock of “contrarian” buyers to this point.  In fact, one ETF that specifically devotes itself to owning deeply undervalued companies has seen its assets plummet.  Another, which tracked the venerable New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) Composite Index, was liquidated due to lack of demand last year.  You see, the Nasdaq is where all the action is these days.
Finally, for now, I will state for the first time that I think the next stage of the ETF revolution is in funds that operate more like portfolios than simply cheap index-trackers. These are still passively-managed, with changes being made to the portfolio quarterly.  They are small relative to the low-cost S&P 500 and other funds you see in that table above, and that is OK because investing in the long run is not a popularity contest like it is in the short term.  ETFs have a lot to offer investors.  To assume that the current behemoths that occupy 50% of the shelf right now are the most useful ways to use the ETF structure is shortsighted. I look forward to sharing more ETF insights with you into 2018 and beyond.
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former mutual fund manager.  My work for Forbes.com aims to break investment myths and bring common sense analysis to my audience. My firm's website is www.SungardenInvestment.com.  Connect with me on Linked In, follow me on Twitter @robisbitts. Financial Advisors can visit www.TheHedgedInvestor.com for more.
