GE anesthesia equipment at a Wisconsin factory in April.
General Electric stock has been left behind in the recent market rally , a performance gap that raises the question: Are things really as bad at the American manufacturer as the numbers suggest?
General Electric (ticker: GE) shares are up about 5% from their March lows, while the S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average are up 33%. The Nasdaq Composite is up 37% . Even stock in the embattled aircraft maker Boeing (BA)—a key GE customer—is 50% above its 52-week low.
What is more, GE shares are down about 4% for the week. The market has rallied more than 3%.
It is tough to blame Wall Street. Almost two-thirds of analysts covering the company rate shares the equivalent of Buy, up from only 21% two years ago and about 47% one year ago. The average Buy-rating ratio for stocks in the Dow is about 55%. Wall Street remains high on GE’s prospects.
The average target for the stock price among analysts has fallen as Covid-19 has disrupted the economy, but at about $8.50, it is almost 40% higher than recent levels. The average target price for stocks in the Dow is about 13% above recent levels.
So why is the stock stuck?
Exposure to commercial aerospace is the best explanation. Warren Buffett dropped a bombshell Saturday when he disclosed his Berkshire Hathaway (BRK.A) sold its entire stake in U.S. airlines. Berkshire was a huge holder of airline stocks, owning between 7% and 11% of the four largest U.S. carriers.
That news hit a sector already reeling from the coronavirus. Roughly two-thirds of the commercial jet fleet is grounded world-wide because no one is flying. Passengers going through government security checkpoints at U.S. airports are down more than 90% year over year. (Shares of U.S. airlines, like GE stock, are also down for the week.)
“No quick or easy fix,” wrote Gordon Haskett analyst John Inch in a research report reviewing GE’s prospects this week. He rates the stock Hold, but he cut his price target to $5 from $9. He calls 2020 “a perfect storm” for the company, saying the bull case for the stock had been based on an idea that the company could produce $1 a share in free cash flow.
That goal now looks as if it won’t be reached for a long time.
Not every analyst is as cautious as Inch. Morgan Stanley analyst Josh Pokrzywinski believes GE’s business can bounce back faster than the overall industry because planes that utilize GE engine technology are “less susceptible to retirements.” GE engines, parked right now, will find their way back into the skies, boosting GE’s aftermarket business.
Still, given the uncertainty in aviation, Pokrzywinski understands the recent stock declines, but thinks share have fallen far enough. He rates shares the equivalent of Buy and has an $8 price target for shares.
The downturn in aviation is why investors are nervous about shares, but Inch hit on one issue that could turn the tide: cash flow. Better-than-expected free cash flow in coming months would reignite optimism.
It won’t be easy. In March, GE management told investors to expect about $3 billion in free cash flow in 2020. More than $4 billion was to come from the aviation business, but since then management has withdrawn its full-year forecasts because of the pandemic.
Now analysts, on average, expect GE to burn about $3 billion in cash this year. Inch is more bearish. He expects the company to burn through almost $6 billion in 2020.
Even though cash is going out the door, near-term liquidity doesn’t appear to be a concern. Management has been working overtime to fix GE’s balance sheet. And a recent $20 billion asset sale to Danaher (DHR) makes GE’s financial leverage look comparable to other U.S. industrial companies.
Something has to give for GE stock. Either analysts will sour on the name or investors will rotate back into the beaten-up shares. If the latter happens, it could mean a bump for traders and aggressive investors as the U.S. economy starts to reopen.
Year to date, GE shares are down about 44%, a loss similar to those of other aerospace suppliers Barron’s tracks. The stock rose 3% to $6.29 Friday. The S&P 500 had gained 1.7%.
GE Stock Hasn’t Rallied With the Market. Wall Street Still Thinks It’s a Buy.
