Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
By 2010, the unemployment rate had started to turn lower and was in a well-defined downtrend (line d) until the April report was released on Friday. The unemployment rates rose to 14.7% from 4.4% in March. Historically, the only time more than a million jobs were lost in a single month was in September 1945. At the height of the Great Recession, only 800,000 jobs were lost in a single month.
Since the March market low, investors have ignored most economic reports, as they seem to have assumed that the reports would always be worse than expected. In that light, I guess it was not too surprising that the market did not decline in reaction to Friday’s jobs report⁠—although there was no certainty of that going into Friday! Nevertheless, the weekly gain of 5.8% in the Nasdaq 100 exceeded the most bullish expectations.
As the table indicates, all the markets were higher last week. Even the beaten-down small cap iShares Russell 2000 (IWM) had another good week. Despite the 3.5% gain in the S&P 500, it is still below the high at 2954 from April 29. On a Year-To-Date basis, the Nasdaq 100 is now up 5.6% for the year, but is still lagging behind the 12.3% YTD gain in the SPDR Gold Shares (GLD).
As the stock market continues to push higher, there are more and more previously-reluctant analysts that are joining the bullish crowd as more appear to have decided that hope might be an investment strategy. The market’s strength is being explained by the conclusion that the economy and the unemployment rate is at its worst now. That is despite the fact that the surveys used in the monthly jobs report are taken early in the month, meaning that the most recent report did not include the late April data. Unfortunately, the May report on June 5, 2020 may be worse.
In my March article on bear market rallies , I focused on the 48% rebound from the November 1929 crash lows that ended in April 1930. The comments on the Dow Jones Industrial chart above are just a few of the ones covered in an article by Dan Alpert from Westwood Capital that reviewed headlines and analyst reactions to the crash as it was happening.
The February 7, 1930 “Easy Money is driving a rapid recovery” sounds eerily familiar. The March 4, 1930 quote that “the 1929 thing wasn't a crash—It was just a buying opportunity!” is something we have not heard⁠— yet.
I have already heard some comments from those expecting to see green shoots of an economic rally in the months ahead. In 1930, that comment occurred three weeks before the market topped out.
During the 2008 bear market rally, I pointed out that there were similar hopeful comments ( see chart ) that helped support new buying and demonstrated a bullish change in market sentiment as the market moved higher. This is the function of a bear market rally. Continuation patterns like these in bull or bear markets cause a change in sentiment prior to the continuation of the dominant trend.
In both bear market rallies, I am sure there were stocks whose rally was tough to explain. Even with the encouraging news about the prospects for Gilead Sciences (GILD) drug remdesivir, the stock is down 7.7% this month. On the other hand, Uber Technology (UBER) posted a net loss of $2.9 billion last Thursday, but the stock was up 15.5% last week.
The NYSE Composite closed up 2.7% last week, but at 11,354 is still below the rebound high of 11,675. The declining 20-week exponential moving average (EMA) has dropped to 11,854, and the key level I am still watching is the 61.8% Fibonacci resistance at 12,075.
This level is 6.3% above Friday’s close. In my analysis, a close above this level is needed to indicate that major trend has indeed changed for the positive. The NYSE Advance/Decline numbers were strong last week, with 2167 issues advancing and 871 declining. The weekly NYSE Advance/Decline line has finally moved above its weighted moving average (WMA) which is a positive sign.
A week before the stock market made its low, my indicators were deeply oversold, with the major averages trading well below their weekly starc- bands. As I said at the time, “I would not be surprised to see the major averages rally 25% or more from last week’s lows in the next month or two”. As it turned out, the stock market made further new lows the next week before it turned higher.
I thought at the time that the most likely scenario was for a rally of a week or more, and then a drop back towards the lows. Based on my method of analysis, this was needed to create a favorable risk entry on the long side. By focusing on minimizing risk, one does miss some opportunities, but in my view, it is still the best strategy, especially in a volatile or seemingly irrational market. Many investors and traders do not realize that being out of the market is also a position, as there will always be further opportunities to invest.
In last week’s post , I focused on the reversal in the Spyder Trust (SPY). Its high from April 29 at $294.88 as not been overcome. The SPY close last week was above the flat 20-week EMA. There is still formidable resistance in the $298-$300 area, which corresponds to 3000 in the S&P 500 itself. Last week’s low in SPY at $293.28 is now the support to watch.
The volume in the SPY was lower again last week. At the low 1.5 billion shares were traded, but last week there were only 360 million shares, which was 86% below the peak volume. This has been part of a consistent downtrend in the volume (line b). The weekly on balance volume (OBV) has turned up, but is still well below downtrend (line a) and its WMA.
There was a significant change in the latest survey from the American Association of Individual Investors (AAII). The Bullish% dropped 6.9 percentage-points to 23.7%, after being quite high at 32.9% when the market was making its low. At most market bottoms, the Bullish% will often drop to 20% or lower. Last week the Bearish% rose to 52.7%, which is above the 52.1% level seen at the March market low.
Typically, such a high level in the Bearish% would come after a significant market decline, not a significant market rally. Such high Bearish% and low Bullish% numbers after significant price gains does allow for a bullish interpretation, but they could also offset each other. These are very abnormal sentiment readings, and I will be keeping an eye on them.
The strong close last week favors further gains, but the low-volume, narrow leadership of the rally makes it vulnerable to heavy selling. A drop below last week’s lows will be the first sign that the rally has stalled. It is still a split market, as the financial and industrial sectors are still performing very weak, while tech is strong.
In my Viper ETF Report and the Viper Hot Stocks Report , I update subscribers with my market analysis at least twice a week, and more often when the markets are volatile. I give specific advice on the long and short side of the market, and I will be watching any market rebound closely.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
