This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Is the Stock Market Open on New Year’s Day?
Updated January 1, 2020 / Original December 31, 2019
New Year’s Eve promises some respite to reflect on what went well and what didn’t over the past 12 months (not to mention the past 10 years ). Champagne will be shared, resolutions made , and gym memberships inevitably neglected.
Apart from the usual revelry, investors are likely finalizing end-of-year trades, jettisoning poor-performing assets from their tax bill , and kicking off the next decade with a positive outlook. Here’s everything you need to know about the markets’ trading hours before—and after—the clock strikes midnight.
What time does the stock market open and close on New Year’s Eve? Is the stock market open on New Year’s Day?
It’s business as usual for U.S. exchanges on New Year’s Eve, Dec. 31. The New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq are open their normal hours,  9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. EST. They will be closed on New Year’s Day, Jan. 1, which is sure to come as a relief to late night party-goers.
U.S. bond markets close early on New Year’s Eve at 2 p.m. EST, according to Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association recommendations, and are closed Jan. 1.
Are international markets closed New Year’s Eve? How about New Year’s Day?
The Toronto Stock Exchange, London Stock Exchange , Shanghai Stock Exchange, and the Tokyo Stock Exchange are all open on New Year’s Eve, but the world’s major markets come to a halt on the first day of 2020.
Read more: The Stock Market Is Ending the Year With a Strong December. Here’s What History Says Happens Next.
What will the new year bring investors?
      and Nasdaq Composite went from strength to strength, each reaching record highs in 2019. The major indexes began this week on a flat note. The S&P 500 dropped -0.6% on Monday to close at 3,221. The Dow and Nasdaq each fell -0.6% to 28,462 and 8,945, respectively.
The new year might bring a more muted market , but there’s still the potential for growth. The Fed has signaled its intention to leave interest rates low. Internet stocks continue to rise and opportunities are emerging overseas as the U.K. begins to take steps to depart from the European Union in 2020.
Is the Stock Market Open on New Year’s Day?
