Is the Stock Market Open on Black Friday?
Updated November 29, 2019 / Original November 26, 2019
Though Black Friday deals have crept their way into Thanksgiving Thursday, you’ll have to wait a bit if you want to buy stocking stuffers from U.S. exchanges .
Is the Stock Market Closed on Black Friday?
No, the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq will be open on Black Friday. But get your trades in early because both close at 1 p.m. EST. U.S. bond markets and U.S. OTC Markets will close an hour later, at 2 p.m.
Are Foreign Stock Exchanges Open on Black Friday?
There is no day off for Black Friday on the Toronto Stock Exchange, the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, the London Stock Exchange , and the Shanghai Stock Exchange .
Can I Take the Day Off Anyway?
You probably won’t be alone. On an average day since November 2007, about 2.03 billion shares changed hands on the Nasdaq Composite, according to Dow Jones Market Data via FactSet. During that same period, the average volume on a Black Friday clocks in at 833 million. It’s the same story for the New York Stock Exchange, which falls from 4 billion shares on an average day to 1.8 billion on Black Friday.
How Has the Market Performed on Black Friday?
As Barron’s noted last week , the S&P 500 has gained 58 out of the past 69 years from Tuesday’s close to the end of Black Friday. It rose more than 1% during 19 of those years. The index has only fallen more than 1% in 1951, 1987, 2009, and 2011.
What Does Black Friday Mean for Retailers?
Investors are already bracing over concerns about the retail industry ahead of this holiday season after a disappointing earnings outlook sent Kohl’s stock (ticker: KSS) sinking. Macy’s (M) echoed this sentiment when it cut its full-year sales and earnings outlook. And the Black Friday to Christmas shopping window comes shorter this year since Thanksgiving is almost a week later than usual . Still, Nordstrom, a retailer that sports tight inventory, may stand to benefit by being more selective about what they mark down.
Was the Stock Market Open on Thanksgiving?
The New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq were both closed on Thanksgiving , as explained in this article , as were U.S. bond and OTC Markets. Other international exchanges, like the Toronto Stock Exchange and the Shanghai Stock Exchange, were open for the American holiday.
Is the Stock Market Open on Black Friday?
Though Black Friday deals have crept their way into Thanksgiving Thursday, you’ll have to wait a bit if you want to buy stocking stuffers from U.
