Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
For the week, the Nasdaq 100 (NDX) was the lead performer, up 7.2%. This performance was more than twice the gains in the S&P 500 (SPX), which was up 3.0%. Despite the strong gain on Friday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up just 2.2% for the week. Surprisingly the NDX is now up 1.1% YTD, while the SPX is still down 11%.
The small-cap iShares Russell 2000 (IWM) was up 4.4% on Friday, but was still down 1.3% for the week and is down 26% YTD. The Dow Jones Transportation Average ($TRAN) is not doing much better, down 24.5% YTD. The SPDR Gold Trust (GLD) made a new high last week but then closed a bit lower, as my technical outlook last week suggested it was ready for a pullback.
Is the market-leading strength of Nasdaq 100 a sign that the overall stock market formed a major low on March 23? The comparison chart of the NDX, SPX, and NYSE shows the slow divergence after the February highs, and the much wider disparity since the March 23 lows.
So why did the Nasdaq 100 perform so well since the lows? Part of it has to do with the extremely narrow composition of the index. Five large-cap tech shares; Microsoft (MSFT), Apple (AAPL), Amazon (AMZN), Facebook (FB) and Alphabet (GOOGL) make up over 40% of the NDX. This is a sign that the rally has not been broadly based, which historically, is not a good sign.
These five stocks also make up over 21% of the S&P 500. At the market peak in 2000 MSFT, GE, CSCO, INTC, and WMT made up 18% of the average ( see chart ). That did not turn out well then, as MSFT declined 66% during that bull market, dragging the market down with it.
The weekly chart of the Invesco QQQ Trust (QQQ), which tracks the Nasdaq 100, looks strong after last week’s action. QQQ closed decisively above the 61.8% Fibonacci retracement resistance at $209.76. The next chart resistance is the weekly high from the week ending March 6, at $219.14. The weekly starc+ band is at $222.37.
The weekly Nasdaq 100 Advance/Decline line closed above its weighted moving average (WMA) last week for the first time since February 21. As I have been pointing out since the March lows, the volume has not been supporting prices. It has been about half of the level seen during the market’s decline, which is not a positive sign.
The broadly-based NYSE Composite was up just 0.64% last week, and has not yet overcome the 50% retracement level at 11,424. There is a gap on the weekly chart in the 11,794 to 12,050 area, which is a band of resistance. A close above the key 61.8% resistance at 12,075 is needed to signal a change in the major trend The 20-week exponential moving average (EMA) is just a bit higher at 12,099.
For the NYSE last week, 1285 issues advanced and 1749 declined. The NYSE-All A/D line was, therefore, a bit lower last week, and is still just below its flat WMA. A week of positive A/D numbers next week could move the A/D line above its WMA, which would be positive. The NYSE-Stocks Only A/D line (not shown) is further below its moving average resistance.
In the last week’s discussion of bear market rallies , I pointed out that the bullish% in the American Association of Individual Investors (AAII) survey did not decline when the market crashed. Last week, it was only down slightly at 34.9%, while the bearish% is relatively high at 42.7%.
From some in the media, the sentiment seems to be more one-sided, as Jim Cramer commented over a week ago that “There's 'Too Much' Bullishness In The Market”. In my work studying past market phenomenon, I have often been surprised by just how eerily similar the comments are in the financial press during market highs and lows throughout history.
The current rebound in the stock market is looking a bit more like the March 17 to May 19 rally in 2008. The rally lasted 45 days and the market commentary for the period revealed that as the rally continued hope seemed to dominate reason. As a reminder, the 2007-09 bear market actually made its bottom at 666.79 on March 6, 2009.
But during this bear market rally, from the March 17 low at 1257 to the May 19 high at 1440, optimism grew steadily.
On March 25, 2008 , just a week after the lows, investors were trying to adjust to higher prices as commentators tried to “look beyond weak reports”. This was immediately followed by a correction. The rally resumed and then stalled again in early April, and the market corrected sharply. The selling was over on April 16 , and stocks closed strong as a few positive earnings reports “reassured investors”.
The stock market continued to rally for the next three weeks. The bullish% from the AAII peaked at 53.3% on May 1. Just a few days later on May 6 , some on Wall Street had concluded: “that the economy is stabilizing and the worst of the credit crisis is over” (emphasis mine).
The bear market rally continued until Monday, May 19 , as the headline read “Blue chips stay buoyant”, with the “S&P 500 narrowly eking out a five-month high”. The S&P 500 high that day was not exceeded again until sixteen months later on September 28, 2009.
The current rally has only lasted 18 days. The current rebound could last even a few weeks longer. Given the recent strength of the markets, this suggests we could see another sharp pullback before the end of this bear market rally.
If the NYSE can close above its 61.8% resistance. then it will be a sign that this is more than a bear market rally. If not, then stocks are likely to reverse sharply to the downside in the coming weeks. But if stock prices continue to move higher, while the economic and earnings data gets worse, I hope you will remember these headlines, and prepare accordingly.
Hopefully, the catalyst for the next decline will be solely economic, and not due to further spread of COVID-19.
In my Viper ETF Report and the Viper Hot Stocks Report , I update subscribers with my market analysis at least twice a week, and more often when the markets are volatile. I give specific advice on the long and short side of the market, and I will be watching any market rebound closely.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
