Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
Kudlow, who complained about deficits under Obama, has continued to claim that the tax cut has already been paid for and that the economy can get back to a growth rate 3.5%. The repeated claims that the deficits were declining has not been supported by the data.
While there are many of Kudlow’s forecasts that have not panned out, it is interesting that despite Navarro's claim on Face The Nation that “I spent the better part of 20 years forecasting the business cycle and related stock market trends”, Navarro's actual forecasts are difficult to find. It's clear that he has made economic forecasts in the past, but until he was tapped by the Trump administration, Peter Navarro was relatively obscure, and so his record is hard to track.
So what is the problem with the Navarro's lack of a record or Kudlow's poor record? We all remember “It's the economy, stupid” which became the slogan of President Clinton’s successful 1992 presidential campaign and has been attributed to James Carville. The popularity of President George H.W. Bush’s plunged prior to the 1992 election as the economy had entered a recession. In my recollection of the period, it seemed that it was the lack of confidence in Bush’s understanding of the economy and his reversal on taxes that hurt him most in the election.
The evidence is building that confidence in President Trump's handling of the economy is dwindling. Numerous comments from corporate CEO's are reporting that they are not willing to invest in expansion into various foreign countries because it seems that any country could become the focus of the next Tweet storm. After Denmark earned Trump's ire for refusing to sell part of their country, it could happen to anywhere. These CEO's, as well as most investors, have no idea what the next Tweet may bring.
I think that is the same for stock investors who heard analysts’ bullish forecasts for the stock of Apple Inc. (AAPL) early in the week, issued in part because of President Trump's sympathetic comments to Apple’s Tim Cook.
Those who followed those buy recommendations must have been disappointed when the stock dropped 4.6% to close down 1.87% for the week at $202.64. The weekly chart shows last week’s reversal, but it would likely take a decline below the 20-week EMA (currently at $196.82) to signal weakness. A decline below $191.85 would be much more negative and signal a likely drop to support (line a) at $183.
The weekly relative performance (RS) analysis is still above its rising WMA, which is a sign that it is still outperforming the S&P 500. The RS also shows a solid uptrend (line b). However, the On Balance Volume (OBV) looks more negative, having dropped below its recent lows (line c) and now in a clear downtrend as it is below its declining WMA.
A clear example of why there is a lack of confidence and high level of uncertainty regarding US economic policy surfaced this morning . President Trump appeared to have “second thoughts” about his escalation of the trade war. Apparently, he has also changed his mind about ordering US companies to withdraw from China, as he commented “I have no plans right now”.
But then, just after 9:00 AM ET today, the White House said Trump's comments were misinterpreted, saying he “regrets not raising tariffs higher.” As we all know, Trump's plans could change again before the stock market reopens on Monday.
So what about the market averages? Once again, the Russell 2000 Small Cap ($RUT) was hit the hardest, down 2.29% for the week. It is now only up 8.2% YTD. I have added a column with the YTD % from 4/26/19 for comparison, when $RUT was up 18% YTD. The Dow Jones Transportation Average was almost as weak this past week, and is only now up 6.2% YTD, down 12.5 percentage points since April.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq 100, which is quite sensitive to tariffs, was down 1.83% last week, a bit more than the 1.44% decline in the S&P 500. All the averages are sharply lower from late April, except for the Dow Jones Utilities, which is now up 16.7% YTD, up almost 6.9 percentage points from April. Comparing these averages to their earlier performance and to each other can help identify market-leading sectors. This is the power of relative performance analysis.
For the second week in a row, the advance/decline data was decidedly negative, as there were only 1184 stocks advancing with 1854 stocks declining. The weekly advancing versus declining volume data was less negative, with an advancing volume of 7.3 billion and a declining volume of 8.7 billion.
The weekly chart of the broadly-based NYSE Composite shows that it has held above the prior week’s lows with next good support in the 12,200 area (line a). The declining 20-week EMA is at 12,789 which is now the first barrier on the upside.
The weekly NYSE All A/D Line has been above its EMA and positive since late December. The A/D line has further support (line b). The NYSE Stocks Only A/D Line has now dropped below its WMA but is still above the support (line c). The NYSE Stocks-Only A/D Line had dropped briefly below its WMA in May. The May lows for both A/D lines are now the important support levels to watch.
The stock market’s daily trend turned negative with Friday’s close, but the intermediate-term trend is still positive. A weekly close in the S&P 500 below 2820 is likely to trigger a decline to the 2720-50 area. The monthly A/D lines are a long way from turning negative.
There are no signs yet that interest rates have bottomed, or that the economy has topped out. Last week’s Leading Economic Indicators (LEI) came in stronger than expected, which is a good sign. However, it should be noted that the Markit Manufacturing PMI dropped below 50 for the first time since September 2009.
There are a number of important economic reports out this week. I will be focusing on Tuesday’s Consumer Confidence as well as Thursday’s GDP report.
Those readers who followed the four-week dollar-cost averaging plan that I recommended before Christmas were 75% long, at an average value of 2497 based on the S&P 500 but were stopped out as Friday’s close was below the 3rd Quarter Pivot at 2878. Based on the close of 2847 the total gain was 13.6%. With real yields negative, I continue to favor stocks until there are signs of a major top like there were in 2007.
In the Viper ETF Report and Viper Hot Stocks Report , I teach subscribers how to pick stocks or ETFs, and provide specific buy and sell advice along with market commentary. Each report comes out twice weekly and is only $34.95 per month.
Lastly, if any of my readers have audio, video, or written versions of Peter Navarro's economic forecasts from before November 2016, please let me know in the comments below.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
