—three companies that have since fallen by the wayside or gone in and out of bankruptcy. It turns out there was more to the AMZN story than just books. The point here is that there's TSLA the maker of electric cars, and there's TSLA the idea, the vision, and the potential. It's tough to say whether its valuation is an Amazon story, a Pets.com story, or something in between.
Seesawing Toward Gains in the Second Half? Yesterday, the SPX finished out the second quarter with a 20% gain. That followed the first quarter’s loss of the same percentage magnitude. While the main theme of Q1 was coronavirus-related selling, last quarter’s narrative was the rebound. According to investment research firm CFRA, there have been four presidential-election years since 1960 when the SPX declined in Q1 and then rose in Q2. In all four of those years—1960, 1968, 1980, and 1992—the SPX posted a second-half gain that averaged 8%, CFRA said. Although the past isn’t necessarily precedent, looking into the historical record can provide some interesting insight.
Manufacturing Enters Expansion Territory: The U.S. manufacturing sector returned to expansion in June, according to data released on Wednesday, marking an important step in the nation’s economic recovery. But with the reopening outlook uncertain it remains to be seen whether that momentum can be sustained. The Institute for Supply Management’s June manufacturing index beat expectations. It rose to 52.6 from May’s 43.1. A Briefing.com consensus had expected the new number to come in at 49.2. Numbers above 50 indicate expansion while figures below that mark contractions. Wednesday’s print was the first time the index had been above 50 since February. “The key takeaway from the report is that it reflects a clear bounce back from the super depressed conditions seen in April and May,” Briefing.com said. “It's a natural rebound so to speak as the economy reopens, but the key is its sustainability, which is still an open question.”
TD Ameritrade® commentary for educational purposes only. Member SIPC.
I am Chief Market Strategist for TD Ameritrade and began my career as a Chicago Board Options Exchange market maker, trading primarily in the S&P 100 and S&P 500 pits.
I am Chief Market Strategist for TD Ameritrade and began my career as a Chicago Board Options Exchange market maker, trading primarily in the S&P 100 and S&P 500 pits. I've also worked for ING Bank, Blue Capital and was Managing Director of Option Trading for Van Der Moolen, USA. In 2006, I joined the thinkorswim Group, which was eventually acquired by TD Ameritrade. I am a 30-year trading veteran and a regular CNBC guest, as well as a member of the Board of Directors at NYSE ARCA and a member of the Arbitration Committee at the CBOE. My licenses include the 3, 4, 7, 24 and 66.
