The Hindenburg Zeppelin flying over Walney Island in 1936. (Photo credit: Wikipedia)
The Hindenburg Omen has been signaling quite a bit lately, thus, it's been getting a lot of press. It is generally considered to be an ominous sign that a big crash could be imminent. I'll get into the specifics in a second, but the idea is that while the market is doing well when looking at broad indexes -- like the S&P 500 Index (or SPY), for instance -- there is some underlying weakness when you dig deeper and actually look at individual stocks. In other words, the stock-market index is increasing, even though a significant number of stocks are showing some considerable weakness.
Using New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) tickers, the criteria for the Hindenburg Omen is as follows:
The NYSE Composite index is up over the last 50 trading days.
The McClellan Oscillator is negative.
The number of 52-week highs is not more than twice the number of 52-week lows.
In case you're wondering, to calculate The McClellan Oscillator, you find the number of advancing stocks and subtract the declining stocks each day. You then take the 19-day exponential moving average of that number and subtract the 39-day exponential moving average of that number.
Our Own Universe of Stocks : One problem I have with the Hindenburg Omen is its use of NYSE issues. The majority of tickers making new lows on the NYSE are related to bonds, which peaked about a year ago and have been heading lower since. Therefore, while a significant number of tickers are struggling, it's because they are almost all related to one asset class: bonds. This is hardly a sign of widespread underlying weakness in stocks.
This got me wondering how many Hindenburg Omens have signaled when we use our own universe of stocks. In other words, I ran the numbers using all optionable equities in our database (about 2,700 stocks). Below is a chart since the 2009 bottom showing all the Hindenburg Omens that have signaled.
That's right, just one signal since 2009, occurring in May of 2012. Admittedly, it was a good time to leave the market, as the S&P fell about 8% over the next month, but it was hardly catastrophic. And more importantly, there have been no signals since then.
Special Offer: Forbes Dividend Investor recommended Apple at $428. Total return for all 200 picks since 7/11/2012 is 23.1% vs. 15.7% for buying the SPY. Average yield: 5.6%. Click for a 30-day free trial.
Historical Signals: This got me wondering further. Does the Hindenburg Omen mean anything at all when we use our own universe of stocks? In other words, if we didsee a bunch of signals, is that a reason to worry? Below is a chart of Hindenburg Omens from 2004 through 2009. In fact, t
Okay, now I'm curious about prior signals. Below is a chart of the SPX in the 1990s heading into the tech boom and bust. Some of the credibility in the last chart is lost with this one. Did the Omen call the top of the tech boom? Yes, it called it almost yearly for about 10 years. There are a lot of false signals on this chart. However, if we did suddenly get a lot of signals, it would be notable because of how perfectly it called a top in 2007, and you can bet I'd write an article telling everyone to be cautious. But when I look at the data, it's not very close to signaling. Over the past month, the highest percentage of stocks making a 52-week low on any one day was 1.5%, with the majority of the days showing a percentage below 1%. The bottom line is that I think the Hindenburg Omen is flawed when you use the NYSE as your universe of stocks.
We're an investment research company specializing in options trading, strategies, and education.  We're also big fans of sentiment analysis, with a contrarian edge.
We're an investment research company specializing in options trading, strategies, and education.  We're also big fans of sentiment analysis, with a contrarian edge.
