Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
Two lagging market indexes, the Dow Jones Transportation and small-cap iShares Russell 2000 (IWM), led the market higher this week, up 9.1% and 7.8% respectively. There were also solid gains in the S&P 500, up 3.2%, and the Dow Jones Industrials, up 3.3%. The Nasdaq 100 added another 2.9% and is now up 7.8% YTD.
These past months, as I've been discussing bear markets and bear market rallies with my clients, I often get a lot of the same questions. Most focus on the premise that this time things are different. Rates are low now, and the Fed is being very accommodative now in a way they were not in 2008. During the bear market rally in the spring of 2008, crude oil was surging above $140 a barrel, and it is much lower now.
To those looking for another overview of past bear markets, this NBC article gives a brief synopsis of eleven bear markets since 1929. While the causes and economic indicators were often quite different, there are many repeating technical formations and sentiment readings. This is especially true when you examine bear market rallies . This week, I want to explore some similarities and differences in how various sectors are performing, looking at our current situation and the bear market rally of May 2008.
The price action during the recent rally has varied dramatically across the sectors. The above table shows the sector performance over the past month. As of Friday’s close, the Energy Sector (XLE) is leading the rest, up 15%, followed by a 12.6% gain in the Communications Services (XLC) and 10.4% in the Technology Sector (XLK). As I have mentioned before, XLK is not very well-diversified, with over 41% in Apple Inc. (AAPL) and Microsoft (MSFT).
These gains are in contrast to the monthly return of the Utilities Sector (XLU), down 4.2%, Consumer Staples (XLP), down 2%, and the Real Estate Sector (XLRE), down 1.9%. Although biotechnology has been strong this month, the Health Care Select (XLV) overall was up just 1.2%.
In last week’s post , I looked at the technical signals in 2008 that gave the warnings that the market’s rebound was over and that the bear market was resuming. I chose three sectors in particular that represent three major parts of the U.S. Economy: Financial, Technology, and Healthcare. The chart above reveals that in the first few days of May 2008, the Financial Sector (XLF) peaked (line 1) and started to decline sharply while the S&P 500 did not peak until May 21 ( see chart ).
The Technology Sector (XLK) stayed strong as XLF was declining (line 2) and was still near its highs in early June. The Health Care Sector (XLV) did not rally with the overall market in May, instead trading in a sideways fashion before breaking support (line 3) in early June.
The current sector chart shows some similarities to 2008. XLV just made a marginal new high last week and has been range-bound for the past five weeks (line 1). XLK has been in a strong uptrend (line 2) since April and made a new high last week. As was the case in 2008, XLF has been declining for most of May (line 3), with a particularly sharp drop on May 14. It would take a break below that day’s low of $20.09 to confirm a significant new downtrend for XLF.
The weekly chart shows that the NYSE Composite had the narrowest range this week since February 2020. The weekly technical outlook improved last week, as there were 2656 issues advancing and just 384 declining. The weekly NYSE All Issues Advance/Decline line has moved back above its weighted moving average (WMA) and is positive. The NYSE Stocks-Only A/D line (not shown) has turned up but is still below its WMA. Of the six weekly A/D lines I monitor, half are positive and half are negative. Resistance for the NYSE is still at the 61.8% retracement level of 12075.28.
The yield on the 10 Year T-Note has been range-bound for the past month, with a high in yield of 0.743% and a low of 0.581%. A move back above 0.784% (the last significant swing high) may signal a rally back to the 0.981-1.00% area. The weekly MACD line (in blue) has turned up but has not turned positive yet. The MACD-His is also improving and could easily turn positive in the next week or two.
Even though it is a holiday-shortened week, there are plenty of economic reports dropping as we close out May. On Tuesday, we get the Chicago Fed Index and Consumer Confidence along with several housing reports. On Thursday, we get the second estimate on the Quarter 1 GDP, along with the Durable Goods report. The month-end reading on Consumer Sentiment, Consumer Spending for April, and the Chicago PMI come out on Friday. I think that the consumer data will be particularly interesting, as it is unclear how rising unemployment and social distancing have been offset by the stimulus and one-time purchases.
In sum, these reports could help one better assess the prospects for a V-Shaped recovery which has been fueling bullishness in the stock market. Although I hope for a speedy recovery, I am not convinced that even the swiftest recovery will justify the current level of stock prices, as future earnings are likely to still be quite weak. With that in mind, I feel a patient approach is best for now. The risk for most stocks and ETFs is high right now, and so one should be very selective.
In my Viper ETF Report and Viper Hot Stocks Report , I update subscribers with my market analysis twice each week, and more often when the markets are volatile. I also give advice on the long and short side of the market with specific recommendations for stocks and ETFs. Each service is available for $34.95 per month.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
