Nasdaq  Futures made a sharp decline yesterday before reacting higher strongly  into the closing for the day. In this article, we would take a look at  the charts we presented to clients yesterday and the blue box area we  highlighted for 3 waves decline to end and buyers to appear for the  rally to resume or a 3 waves bounce at least to take place.Blue Boxes  are High-Frequency areas which are based in a relationship of sequences,  cycles and calculated using extensions. We also call these areas  no-enemy areas because majority of the times, both buyers and sellers  agree in these blue box areas in direction of the next move for 3 swings  at least. Lets start by taking a look at New York chart update from  yesterday.
Chart below shows wave (1) ended at 9604. As per Elliott Wave Theory ,  after a 5 wave move ends, there should be a pull back to correct the 5  waves rally and this pull back could take different forms like a Zigzag,  FLAT, Double Three Elliott wave structure etc. Drop to 9373 completed  wave A and this was followed by a bounce to 9508 which completed wave B  and wave C of (2) was expected to complete in the blue box area shown on  the chart and hold above 9131 level for a turn higher in wave (3).
Chart  below shows wave C of (2) completed at 9171 and Nasdaq Futures saw a  sharp reaction higher after buyers entered in the blue box as expected.  At the time of printing the chart, price had already reached 50%  retracement of the decline from B wave high allowing any buyers which  entered in blue box to eliminate risk. We expected some more upside to  complete red wave 1 before a pull back in wave 2 to correct the rally  from 9171 low and higher again.
We  complete 5 waves rally from yesterdays low in wave 1 and now expected a  pull back in wave 2 in 3 waves before the rally resumes. Price should  stay above 9171 low for this idea to remain valid.
Chart  below shows Nasdaq futures completed wave 2 pull back and are about to  break above red 1 peak. A break above red 1 peak would suggest dips  should hold above todays low for extension higher toward 9631  9824  area within proposed red wave 3.
