Stock Markets 1 hour ago (Jul 06, 2020 21:07)
Investing.com –  The Nasdaq closed at a record high on Monday as mega-cap tech stocks continued to sparkle despite a rise in Covid-19 cases nationwide that threatened the pace of economic recovery.
Tech was among the biggest gainers, with FANG and chip stocks driving the move higher.
Netflix (NASDAQ: NFLX ) rose more than 3.5% even as Imperial Capital downgraded the streaming stock to inline from outperform on worries there is "modest" room for upside given the stocks surge in recent months.
In chip stocks, Xilinx (NASDAQ: XLNX ) surged 6% after Goldman Sachs (NYSE: GS ) analysts reiterated a buy rating on the stock and a price target of $113, noting the company's diversified end-market product mix.
Florida and Texas reported new single-day records for infections over the weekend, as coronavirus outbreaks across pockets of the U.S. showed little sign of abating.
Infections now total nearly three million nationwide, with 132,000 dead.
The surge in cases comes as data showed the U.S. services sector, which is responsible for the bulk of economic growth, rebounded strongly last month, renewing investor expectations for a sharp economic rebound.
The Institute for Supply Management’s (ISM) non-manufacturing purchasing managers’ index (PMI) jumped to 57.1 in June from 45.4 in May.
"With broad-based reopening and a very low bar set by the readings of the past two months, we saw a very solid rebound this month to 57.1, the strongest reading since February 2020 (57.3)," Jefferies (NYSE: JEF ) said.
Energy's move higher was cut short as oil prices pared gains to settle in the red, down 7 cents barrel, as some warn about the long-term Covid impact on crude demand.
"We believe that oil-market participants are focusing on the current demand trends but are still ignoring the long-term implications of the corona pandemic," Commerzbank said.
Amazon (NASDAQ: AMZN ), meanwhile, boosted consumer discretionary stocks, rising 5.8% to top $3,000 for the first time ahead of the quarterly earnings season, which starts in earnest next week.
"(W)hen the next earnings season starts, this (Amazon) is a stock where these analysts, which primarily are all bullish, are going to have to be raising their price objectives," Piper Sandler (NYSE: PIPR ) analyst Craig Johnson said.
On the M&A front, Uber Technologies (NYSE: UBER ) tabled a $2.65 billion shares-only offer to acquire Postmates, the fourth largest food delivery services company, to beef up its UberEATS business.
Elsewhere, Tesla (NASDAQ: TSLA ) surged to another all-time high, up 13.5%, just a week after its second-quarter deliveries topped estimates.
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read and understood Investing.com UK's comment guidlines and agree to the terms described.
