NEW YORK--( BUSINESS WIRE )--The New York Stock Exchange, part of the Intercontinental Exchange 
      (NYSE: ICE) global network of exchanges, today announced that it has 
      widely followed benchmark for the biotechnology industry. The number of 
      at a higher level. The changes will be enacted at the next index 
      rebalance effective before the open on Monday, October 20, 2014.
      biotechnology industry for nearly 25 years,” said Laura V. Morrison, 
      Senior Vice President, Global Index and Exchange-Traded Products. “These 
      biological processes to develop products or provide services. Such 
      processes include, but are not limited to, recombinant DNA technology, 
      Monday, October 20, 2014 will be announced after the close on Wednesday, 
      close of trading on Friday, October 17, 2014.
Background on NYSE Group’s Indices:
With a collective portfolio of over 230 benchmark indices, NYSE is a 
      leading provider of indices. NYSE develops proprietary indices to 
      of key segments of the world economy. NYSE indices are available to be 
      licensed as the basis for tradable products, including Exchange-Traded 
      Funds (ETFs), to be launched in the future. For more information on NYSE 
      index services please visit: www.nyse.com/indices
      Intellidex® and StrataQuant® are registered trademarks of NYSE Group, 
      clearing houses. NYSE Group operates multi-asset exchanges, and a range 
      of related data products and technology services. The company’s equity 
      exchanges - the New York Stock Exchange, NYSE MKT and NYSE Arca - trade 
      more U.S. equity volume than any other exchange group. NYSE is the 
      global leader in capital raising for listed companies, including the 
      majority of technology IPOs globally in 2013. The company’s equity 
      contained in the forward-looking statements, see ICE's Securities and 
      Exchange Commission (SEC) filings, including, but not limited to, the 
      ended December 31, 2013, as filed with the SEC on February 14, 2014.
