The Dow Dropped Last Week. That’s Good News
Opec+, which includes Russia and Saudi Arabia, were supposed to meet Monday, but that meeting is now “tentatively scheduled” for Thursday . The oil-producing nations are trying to negotiate a deal to end volatility in the energy markets. Last week, President Donald Trump said he expected Russian President Vladimir Putin and Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman to announce a deal to cut oil production by 10 million to 15 million barrels, CNBC said . Trump said he had spoken to both. This caused oil to surge late last week.
The coronavirus continues to dominate the news. U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson was taken to an undisclosed hospital on Sunday after suffering from Covid-19 symptoms for 10 days, a statement from Downing Street said. Johnson tested positive for the virus in March.
Yet New York state had fewer deaths from Covid-19 on Saturday compared with the day before, according to Gov. Andrew Cuomo. This means New York could be at or nearing the peak of the Covid-19 pandemic, Cuomo said during his daily coronavirus briefing Sunday. The day before, he had said that New York state was likely within a week of hitting the peak of the pandemic. More than 122,000 people have tested positive for Covid-19; 12,187 have been discharged from hospitals, the governor said.
President Donald Trump on Saturday said that “this week and next week” could be particularly deadly for those suffering from the virus. “There will be a lot of death...there will be death,” he said during his daily coronavirus update. The federal government is deploying about 1,000 people to New York state, including doctors, nurses, respiratory technicians, and therapists. Surgeon General Jerome Adams, in an interview with Meet the Press Sunday, warned that the next week could be the nation’s “Pearl Harbor moment, it’s going to be our 9/11 moment. It’s going to be the hardest moment for many Americans in their entire lives.” Adams said the virus won’t be localized to specific cities or regions but will hit the entire country.
Oil Prices Are Tumbling Again, but Stock Futures Are Climbing. Here’s Why.
Stock futures jumped Sunday even after a meeting between OPEC and its allies that was set for Monday was postponed, causing oil futures to slide.
