since the late-March lows, it’s ominous that people who know a lot more about science than the rest of us are scratching their heads about the optimism.
They caution the coronavirus pandemic is nowhere near over, and it’ll come back with a vengeance after any summer lull. If they’re right, the current market rally is suspect because that’ll be bad for the economy. It’s particularly noteworthy that many of the skeptics come from the normally buoyant and bullish sell-side analyst community.
Take Morgan Stanley biotech analyst Matthew Harrison.
“While we understand the desire for optimism, we also caution that the U.S. outbreak is far from over,” he says. “Recovering from the acute period in the outbreak is just the beginning and not the end.”
Harrison cautions the end won’t arrive until a vaccine is available, in spring 2021 at the earliest.
“We stress that only a vaccine will provide a true solution to this pandemic,” he says.
Reopening the economy, which began in some states late last week, will be a long and drawn-out affair that involves turning various forms of social distancing on and off in a trial-and-error period, he says. Many employees won’t be able to go back to work during this phase.
And large venues including sports arenas, concert halls and theme parks will stay shut, or have attendance capped. Economists at Morgan Stanley predict the economy won’t return to pre-COVID-19 levels until the fourth quart of 2021. No V-shaped recovery — a quick down-and-up — in their forecast, in other words.
Virologist Michael Mina, a medical doctor and assistant professor of epidemiology at Harvard University, cautions that the COVID-19 could easily come back with a vengeance next flu season, possibly causing another shut down of the economy. It could spread even faster.
The reason is there will be thousands of cases smoldering throughout the country that could serve as starting points for the spread, as opposed to a much smaller number from the get-go last winter.
“We could see very rapid transmission, even faster than the first time,” he says.
Jefferies biotech analyst Michael Yee is also cautious.
“We understand that the market wants to embrace the light at the end of the tunnel, but it is probably not that simple,” he says.
He says we need to see a lot more progress on therapies and vaccines before we can fully open up the economy and ease off social distancing.
