CHAPEL HILL, N.C. (MarketWatch) — Don’t be seduced by the U.S. market attempting to recover from its worst-ever start of a new year.
That’s because — quite unexpectedly, I might add — traders in recent sessions have stubbornly refused to become as bearish as they normally do at tradeable bottoms. I initially thought this might have something to do with the Christmas holidays, when many traders weren’t glued to their computer screens. Needless to say, that explanation no longer applies.
Which in turn means that traders must not be taking the market’s recent plunge as seriously as they did previous ones. Consider: even though many smaller-cap indices have now broken their August lows, and some larger-cap indices such as the NYSE Composite NYA,
are less than 2% away, the average trader today is nowhere near as bearish as he was at the August lows.
Hayes Martin, who has extensively and rigorously studied trend changes in the market, concludes from this and other evidence that the market is “dangerous” right now, and that traders therefore should “not jump in at the first sign of a bottom divergence.” Martin is president of Market Extremes , an investment consulting firm in New York.
today is about 1,000 points lower.
In his research, Martin focuses on a number of sentiment indicators. But one index that clearly illustrates what he is referring to is the average recommended equity exposure among short-term stock market timers (as measured by the Hulbert Stock Newsletter Sentiment Index, or HSNSI). At last August’s lows, this average fell to minus 20.3%, indicating that the average short-timer was allocating more than a fifth of his equity trading portfolio to going short — an aggressive bet that the market would keep going down.
Today, in contrast, the HSNSI stands at 5.7%, or 26 percentage points higher.
Contrarians believe that a tradeable bottom won’t be in place until the HSNSI, and other measures of sentiment as well, drop to within at least shouting distance of their August lows. In the meantime, contrarian analysis is mostly neutral on the market’s near-term outlook — not all that different than where the situation stood before Christmas .
One thing contrarian analysis does not do is hazard a guess about when sentiment will reach a bearish-enough extreme to signal a rally worth betting on. But it will most likely take more than just a day or two of low HSNSI readings to do so, since the most significant bottoms are often characterized by stubbornly-held bearishness on the part of the market-timing community.
One thing, though, is clear: We’re not there yet, since — if anything — the market-timers are more stubbornly bullish right now than stubbornly bearish.
