Prestigious Awards, Stock Price Movements, Anniversary Celebrations, Portfolio Management, and Strategic Acquisitions - Analyst Notes on Peabody, Coach, Coca-Cola, Archer Daniels and Crown
Editor Note: For more information about this release, please scroll to bottom.
Today, Analysts Review released its analysts' notes regarding Peabody Energy Corporation (NYSE: BTU ), Coach, Inc. (NYSE: COH ), Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. (NYSE: CCE ), Archer Daniels Midland Company (NYSE: ADM ) and Crown Holdings Inc. (NYSE: CCK ). Private wealth members receive these notes ahead of publication. To reserve complementary membership, limited openings are available at: http://www.analystsreview.com/1348-100free .
On April 10, 2014, Peabody Energy Corporation (Peabody) announced that its Cottage Grove Mine and Twentymile mines have earned the 2013 President's Award for achieving the Company's safest U.S. performance for surface operations and underground operations, respectively. The Company informed that while the Southern Illinois located Cottage Grove Mine is being honored for a second consecutive year, the Colorado located Twentymile Mine has received this award for safety four times in the last ten years. According to the Company, Cottage Grove achieved more than 29 months without a reportable incident and its employees worked more than 460,000 hours in 2013, while Twentymile achieved a safety record of 1.26 for 2013 with over one million hours worked during the year. In another press release issued that same day, the Company announced that it will release its Q1 2014 financial results on, April 24, 2014 at 10 a.m. CDT. The full analyst notes on Peabody are available to download free of charge at:
On April 16, 2014, the stock of Coach, Inc. (Coach) closed the trading session at $48.86, gaining 0.23% over the previous day's close, in line with the broad market index NYSE Composite which ended the session higher by 0.41%. The stock opened at $48.48 and fluctuated in the range of $48.05 - $49.39. A total of 4.57 million shares were traded, which was higher than the previous day trading volume of 4.08 million shares. In the past one-month period, the stock has declined by 0.51%, compared to NYSE Composite which gained 1.14% during the same time period. The full analyst notes on Coach are available to download free of charge at:
On April 7, 2014, Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. (Coca Cola) celebrated the 25th anniversary of its production facility in Wilrijk by launching a new Visitors Center with an investment of 1 million pounds. Kris Peeters, Minister-President of the Flanders Region, and John F. Brock, CEO of Coca-Cola, officially opened the Center which seeks to inspire young people to build a bright future with its interactive and digital concept. The Center will give visitors an overview of the aspects of product innovation and current technologies, helping them learn more about job opportunities at Coca Cola. The Company's Wilrijk plant produces over 70% of all the drinks the brand sells on the Belgian market. The full analyst notes on Coca-Cola are available to download free of charge at:
On April 15, 2014 Archer Daniels Midland Company (ADM) announced plans to sell its fertilizer business in Brazil and Paraguay, and also the global chocolate business, as part of the Company's ongoing portfolio management that seeks to maximize the shareholders' return. ADM stated that it will also acquire the remaining 20% minority stake of Alfred C. Toepfer International for £83 million. Commenting on the development, Patricia A. Woertz, ADM Chairman and CEO, said, "We are committed to ongoing portfolio management to realize value from our businesses and to deploy our capital where it can best improve returns." ADM informed that the Mosaic Company has agreed to acquire its fertilizer business in Brazil and Paraguay for £350 million, including £150 million in working capital. The Company also intended to sell its global cocoa business, but failed to reach an agreement with a potential buyer. The full analyst notes on Archer Daniels are available to download free of charge at:
On April 14, 2014, Crown Holdings, Inc. (Crown Holdings) announced that the European Commission has formally approved its acquisition of Mivisa Envases, SAU, a Spanish manufacturer of two- and three-piece food cans and ends. According to the Company, the Commission had previously granted approval of the acquisition subject to certain conditions and commitments, which have now been satisfied. The transaction is expected to close on April 23, 2014, following which the Company will divest certain Crown and Mivisa operations as required by the Commission. The full analyst notes on Crown are available to download free of charge at:
We do things differently. Our goal is to provide the best content to our exclusive membership. We are constantly hiring researchers, writers, editors and analysts to add to our team and become better than yesterday. If being a part of a fast growing community with an edge in today's market sounds interesting to you, then sign-up today and experience the full benefits of membership.
1. This is not company news. We are an independent source and our views do not reflect the companies mentioned.
2. Information in this release is fact checked and produced on a best efforts basis and reviewed by Nidhi Vatsal, a CFA charterholder. However, we are only human and are prone to make mistakes. If you notice any errors or omissions, please notify us below.
3. This information is submitted as a net-positive to companies mentioned, to increase awareness for mentioned companies to our subscriber base and the investing public.
4. If you wish to have your company covered in more detail by our team, or wish to learn more about our services, please contact us at pubco [at] http://www.analystsreview.com .
5. For any urgent concerns or inquiries, please contact us at compliance [at] http://www.analystsreview.com .
6. Are you a public company? Would you like to see similar coverage on your company? Send us a full investors' package to research [at] http://www.analystsreview.com for consideration.
Content is researched, written and reviewed on a best-effort basis. This document, article or report is prepared and authored by Investor-edge. An outsourced research services provider represented by Nidhi Vatsal, CFA, has only reviewed the information provided by Investor-edge in this article or report according to the Procedures outlined by Investor-edge. Investor-edge is not entitled to veto or interfere in the application of such procedures by the outsourced provider to the articles, documents or reports, as the case may be.
Investor-edge makes no warranty, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or completeness or fitness for a purpose (investment or otherwise), of the information provided in this document. This information is not to be construed as personal financial advice. Readers are encouraged to consult their personal financial advisor before making any decisions to buy, sell or hold any securities mentioned herein.
Investor-edge is not responsible for any error which may be occasioned at the time of printing of this document or any error, mistake or shortcoming. No liability is accepted by Investor-edge whatsoever for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from the use of this document. Investor-edge expressly disclaims any fiduciary responsibility or liability for any consequences, financial or otherwise arising from any reliance placed on the information in this document. Investor-edge does not (1) guarantee the accuracy, timeliness, completeness or correct sequencing of the information, or (2) warrant any results from use of the information. The included information is subject to change without notice.
CFA® and Chartered Financial Analyst® are registered trademarks owned by CFA Institute.
