Stock Price Movements, Company Updates, Earnings Release Schedules, and Awards - Analyst Notes on PCC, Charter Communications, AmerisourceBergen, Intuit, and Youku
Editor Note: For more information about this release, please scroll to bottom.
Today, Analysts Review released its analysts' notes regarding Precision Castparts Corporation (NYSE: PCP ), Charter Communications Inc. (NASDAQ: CHTR ) AmerisourceBergen Corporation (NYSE: ABC ), Intuit Inc. (NASDAQ: INTU ), and Youku Tudou Inc. (NYSE: YOKU ). Private wealth members receive these notes ahead of publication. To reserve complementary membership, limited openings are available at: http://www.AnalystsReview.com/register
Shares of Precision Castparts Corporation (PCC) continued its downward journey and fell for the fourth consecutive session to end the trading session at $250.06 on April 7, 2014, down 1.49% from previous day's close. The stock opened at $254.01 and wavered in the range of $248.63 - $254.87. A total of 0.78 million shares were traded during the day. Over the past 12 months, the stock has gained an upside of 36.68%, outperforming the NYSE Composite which returned 14.98% during the same time period. PCC is a manufacturer of metal components for aerospace and industrial gas turbine applications. The full analyst notes on Precision Castparts Corporation are available to download free of charge at:
On March 31, 2014, Charter Communications Inc. (Charter Communications) issued a press release in response to the FCC Actions on Retransmission Consent and Wi-Fi. As per the release, the Company applauded and thanked Chairman Wheeler and each of the Commissioners for adopting rules that will greatly benefit consumers. The release stated that the Commission's actions will enable consumers to access super-fast Wi-Fi technology and ease congestion in existing bands. In a separate press release, on the same day, the Company informed that it will announce its Q1 2014 financial and operating results on April 28, 2014, at 8:00 a.m., followed by a conference call at 10:00 a.m. ET to discuss the results. The full analyst notes on Charter Communications Inc. are available to download free of charge at:
On April 3, 2014, AmerisourceBergen Corporation (AmerisourceBergen) announced that it plans to release its financial results for the Q2 FY 2014 (period ended March 31, 2014) on April 24, 2014, prior to the opening of trading on the NYSE. The Company will also host a conference call to discuss the results at 11:00 a.m. ET, on the same day. According to Zacks.com, the consensus EPS estimate for the quarter is $1.00. The Company earned revenue of $29.2 billion for the preceding quarter (Q1 FY 2014). Diluted EPS from continuing operations was $0.80, compared to $0.73 in Q1 FY 2013, driven by the increase in operating income. In the earnings release of Q1 FY 2014, the Company had guided adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations in FY 2014 to be in the range of $3.60 to $3.73. The full analyst notes on AmerisourceBergen Corporation are available to download free of charge at:
On April 1, 2014, Intuit Inc. (Intuit) announced in a press release that U.S. small business employment remained flat in March for the second consecutive month, while average hours worked and monthly wages both increased significantly. Overall, small business revenue declined 0.15% in February 2014. According to the release, despite the recent stagnation in employment, small businesses have added more than 575,000 jobs since March 2010. As stated, employees' average monthly compensation grew 0.4% in the month of March, which shows an increase of $9 from February's revised figure and the average monthly hours worked by hourly employees grew 0.2% in March, recording an increase of nearly 18 minutes from February's revised figure. The full analyst notes on Intuit Inc. are available to download free of charge at:
On March 31, 2014, Youku Tudou Inc. (Youku) announced that as per iResearch, Youku App, Company's mobile video application was the third most popular mobile app after WeChat and QQ in the month of February 2014 on the basis of time spent by the users on the mobile platform. As per data released by iResearch, Youku App users spent more than 44 billion minutes on the video application in February. Youku App ranked eighth out of the top 10 mobile apps with unique visitors in February, with more than 81 million unique visitors. In addition, Youku App was the only mobile video app to make it to the top 10 list. The full analyst notes on Youku Inc. are available to download free of charge at:
We provide our members with a simple and reliable way to leverage our economy of scale. Most investors do not have time to track all publicly traded companies, much less perform an in-depth review and analysis of the complexities contained in each situation. That's where Analysts Review comes in. We provide a single unified platform for investors' to hear about what matters. Situation alerts, moving events, and upcoming opportunities.
This is not company news. We are an independent source and our views do not reflect the companies mentioned.
Information in this release is fact checked and produced on a best efforts basis and reviewed by Ananya Ghosh, a CFA charterholder. However, we are only human and are prone to make mistakes. If you notice any errors or omissions, please notify us below.
This information is submitted as a net-positive to companies mentioned, to increase awareness for mentioned companies to our subscriber base and the investing public.
If you wish to have your company covered in more detail by our team, or wish to learn more about our services, please contact us at pubco [at] AnalystsReview.com.
For any urgent concerns or inquiries, please contact us at compliance [at] AnalystsReview.com.
Are you a public company? Would you like to see similar coverage on your company? Send us a full investors' package to research [at] AnalystsReview.com for consideration.
Content is researched, written and reviewed on a best-effort basis. This document, article or report is prepared and authored by Analysts Review. An outsourced research services provider represented by Ananya Ghosh, CFA, has only reviewed the information provided by Analysts Review in this article or report according to the Procedures outlined by Analysts Review. Analysts Review is not entitled to veto or interfere in the application of such procedures by the outsourced provider to the articles, documents or reports, as the case may be.
Analysts Review makes no warranty, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or completeness or fitness for a purpose (investment or otherwise), of the information provided in this document. This information is not to be construed as personal financial advice. Readers are encouraged to consult their personal financial advisor before making any decisions to buy, sell or hold any securities mentioned herein.
Analysts Review is not responsible for any error which may be occasioned at the time of printing of this document or any error, mistake or shortcoming. No liability is accepted by Analysts Review whatsoever for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from the use of this document. Analysts Review expressly disclaims any fiduciary responsibility or liability for any consequences, financial or otherwise arising from any reliance placed on the information in this document. Analysts Review does not (1) guarantee the accuracy, timeliness, completeness or correct sequencing of the information, or (2) warrant any results from use of the information. The included information is subject to change without notice.
CFA® and Chartered Financial Analyst® are registered trademarks owned by CFA Institute.
