Quotes delayed at least 15 minutes. Real-time quotes provided by BATS BZX Real-Time Price . Market Data provided by Interactive Data ( Terms & Conditions ). Powered and Implemented by Interactive Data Managed Solutions . Company fundamental data provided by Morningstar . Earnings estimates data provided by Zacks. Mutual fund and ETF data provided by Lipper . Economic data provided by Econoday. Dow Jones & Company Terms & Conditions.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ©2020 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. FAQ - Updated Privacy Policy
What contributed to retail sales' uptick in May?
BNY Mellon Investment Management chief strategist Alicia Levine, Divine Asset Management founding partner Danielle Hughes and Belpointe Asset Management chief market strategist David Nelson discuss the housing market and how the strong retail sales in May could be due to the Federal Reserve and pent-up demand.
U.S. equity futures are indicating a rise in stocks when the Wall Street session begins.
The major futures indexes are looking at a rise of 0.5 percent, after a day that saw the S&P gain for a third day on record retail sales numbers and hopes of a global economic recovery.
Also Tuesday, the Federal Reserve promised to keep its policy ultra-loose to support business activity.
Traders will get the latest data on the housing market with May's housing starts and building permits numbers.
In Europe, London's FTSE added 0.3 percent, Germany's DAX gained 0.1 percent and France's CAC rose 0.3 percent.
In Asian markets on Wednesday, the Nikkei in Tokyo retreated 0.6 percent, the Hang Seng in Hong Kong gained 0.6 percent and China's Shanghai Composite added 0.1 percent.
Adding to the mixed picture, Japan's government reported May exports fell 28.3 percent from a year earlier in their biggest decline since the 2008 global crisis.
Wall Street's benchmark S&P 500 index rose for a third day, gaining 1.9 percent on Tuesday after U.S. retail spending was stronger than expected.  The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed  2 percent to 26289.98. The Nasdaq Composite added 1.7 percent to 9895.87.
