A large chunk of the workforce in the U.S. is off today, Friday July 3, since July Fourth falls on a Saturday.
So, too, are stockbrokers on Wall Street.
The New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ are both closed today, July 3, in observance of the Fourth of July holiday. They both closed at the end of normal trading hours Thursday and will reopen at 9:30 a.m. on Monday, July 6.
It’s been an interesting few months for anyone invested in either the market here at home or abroad, as the start of the coronavirus pandemic initially sent most commodities stumbling. Many, however, have since soared back to closer, at, or above the price they were trading at in mid-March.
“The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA, +0.35% and the S&P 500 index SPX, +0.45% have gained nearly 40% since touching a late-March low as the COVID-19 pandemic roiled investor confidence, and the Nasdaq Composite COMP, +0.52% has gained nearly 50% over the same period,” MarketWatch writes .
More: IRS second stimulus checks: Next payment could exceed $1,200, President Trump says; when could it come?
“Early efforts to restart business activity have been uneven and been met by reversals of social-distancing restrictions in a number of Southern and Western U.S. states, including Florida, Texas and California. Still, trillions of dollars in aid from the Federal Reserve and the U.S. government have helped to embolden buyers of assets considered risky on Wall Street.”
If you are looking to make a trade today, Barrons notes that most if not all international markets are open, and there actually are a couple of domestic options.
“Some futures and options exchanges on CME Globex, including equity futures and commodities like crude oil and gold, will close early at 1 p.m. Eastern, and agricultural commodities are closed for trading,” Barrons writes .
See other businesses that are open and closed for the holiday weekend at the link below:
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
