A view of the fearless girl wearing a mask in front of the New York Stock Exchange in New York City USA during coronavirus pandemic on April 25, 2020.
Stocks started the day higher in what looked like would be another session of strength, but a sell-off late in the day sent the major averages into negative territory and they closed in the red. The move lower was sparked by President Donald Trump announcing that he will hold a press conference on China on Friday as geopolitical tensions rise, prompting some investors to fear that the U.S.-China trade deal may face hurdles. Here's what happened:
S&P 500 is up 2.51% this week, on pace for its third positive week in four
Dow is up 3.82% this week, on pace for its best week since April 9
Nasdaq is up 0.48% this week, on pace for its third positive week in four
Six out of 11 sectors were negative Thursday, led by energy, which was down 2.91% — Francolla, Li
President Donald Trump called Twitter's behavior "inappropriate" on Thursday, as he urged action against social media platforms so that they no longer have a liability shield. The president said he has directed the attorney general to cooperate with states to enforce laws against what he termed the deceptive business practices of social media companies. The president has been at odds with Twitter ever since the company slapped a "fact-checking" label on two of his tweets. Twitter fell more than 4% during Thursday's session, while Facebook dipped 1.6%. – Stevens
After spending much of the day in the green, the major averages sold off into the close. The Dow fell 147 points for a loss of 0.58%, after rising as much as 210 points earlier in the session. The S&P 500 closed 0.2% lower, while the Nasdaq Composite shed 0.46%. Stocks dipped into the red in the final hour of trading after President Donald Trump said he would hold a news conference on Friday regarding China, leaving some investors concerned that the U.S.-China trade deal could face hurdles. – Stevens
Stocks dropped to their lowest levels of the day just minutes before the closing bell after President Donald Trump said he will hold a press conference regarding China on Friday. The Dow dropped 190 points for a loss of 0.7%. The S&P 500 fell 0.2%, while the Nasdaq dipped 0.45%. Investors have been concerned that anger at China because of its handling of the early coronavirus response could lead to an unraveling of the trade deal with the U.S. – Stevens
The coronavirus pandemic has been not only a health crisis but also an economic crisis that has hurt those most with the least ability to shoulder the new pressures, Philadelphia Federal Reserve President Patrick Harker said. As combats to halt the virus spread have shut down large portions of the economy, the biggest impact has been to low wage earners in service-related industries, helping to widen the nation's wealth disparity, he said. "Both as a health and an economic crisis, COVID-19 has the cruel effect of hurting those who were already most vulnerable," Harker said Thursday. Philadelphia Fed economists have found that the biggest economic hits have been to the poorest neighborhoods in the district. Pennsylvania's unemployment rate in April was 15.1%, compared to the national level of 14.7%. The state continues to have some of the strictest stay-at-home regulations in the country. – Cox
Stocks pared gains with a little more than 30 minutes to go in the trading session after President Donald Trump said that he will hold a press conference Friday on China as geopolitical tensions rise. The Dow last traded 54 points higher, after previously gaining more than 200 points. – Stevens
Oil reversed early losses and settled in the green on Thursday as data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration showed an uptick in gasoline demand. West Texas Intermediate crude rose 90 cents, or 2.7%, to settle at $33.17 per barrel, after dropping more than 5% earlier in the session. International benchmark Brent crude gained 55 cents to settle at $35.29 per barrel. The EIA said that gasoline demand rose 500,000 barrels to 7.3 million barrels per day for the week ending May 22, while also noting that U.S. production declined by another 100,000 barrels. Refinery utilization also rose, which offset concerns over a larger-than-expected build in inventory. – Stevens
With roughly one hour left in the trading session, the major averages were set to add to this week's strong performance. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq were up 0.7% and 0.6%, respectively. The S&P 500 was also on pace to notch its first four-day winning streak since February. The Dow was up for a third day, gaining about 100 points. —Imbert
An analyst at Imperial Capital downgraded Disney to underperform from in line, noting the stock has "risen too far too fast and the performance is due simply to excitement around the prospects of the domestic theme parks re-opening." "As such, we are advising that investors take profits, as Disney now looks like a name that should be 'traded,' rather than 'owned,' at least for now." The analyst also timed his price target on the stock to $105 per share from $107 per share. Disney traded down 2.4% on Thursday, hovering around $118.50 per share. —Imbert, Bloom
The iShares Expanded Tech-Software ETF (IGV) , which tracks 100 software stocks in the technology and communication services sectors, popped 3% in afternoon trading on Thursday, on pace for its best day since April 29. The rally was led by a 9% jump in human resource software Workday on the back of strong earnings. Customer service software company Zendesk soared 8% Thursday and tax software company Avalara gained more than 7%, pushing the ETF to its session high. –Li, Francolla
Shares of UPS popped to their session high after the shipping company said it is adding "peak" surcharges for e-commerce companies such as Amazon and Best Buy amid a surge in demand. The move, starting on Sunday, marks the first time UPS has imposed extra fees during a non-holiday period. The stock last traded up 0.6% on the day. –Li
HP Inc . — Shares of the tech company plunged more than 11% after it missed revenue expectations fiscal second quarter. HP reported $12.47 billion in sales for the quarter, while analysts were expecting $12.93 billion, according to Refinitiv. JPMorgan also downgraded the stock to neutral from overweight.
Abercrombie & Fitch — Shares of the clothing retailer dropped more than 5% after reporting wider than expected losses. Abercrombie reported a loss of $3.29 per share on revenue of $485 million. Analysts polled by Refinitiv expected a loss of $1.39 per share on sales of $497 million. Sales in the Asia-Pacific region dropped by more than 50% on a year-over-year basis, while U.S. sales fell over 30%. The company's Hollister brand also registered revenues that were down 36% from the year-earlier period.
The major averages were headed for a three-day winning streak on Thursday as the most recent U.S. unemployment data signals the economy may be bottoming from the coronavirus-induced shock. The Dow traded 115 points higher, or 0.5%. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq also gained around 0.5% each. —Imbert
11:41 am: S&P 500 stocks hitting all-time highs Thursday:
Dollar General (DG) trading at all-time high levels back to its IPO in Nov, 2009
Home Depot (HD) trading at all-time high levels back to its IPO in Sep, 1981
Lowe's (LOW) trading at all-time high levels back to its IPO in Oct, 1961, LOW has been traded on the NYSE since Dec, 1979
Fastenal (FAST) trading at all-time high levels back to its IPO in August, 1987
Old Dominion Freight Line (ODFL) trading at all-time high levels back to its IPO in Oct, 1991
Synopsys (SNPS) trading at all-time high levels back to its IPO in Feb, 1992 — Hayes
The S&P 500 has rallied more than 36% from its late-March closing low. This makes it the biggest "bear market bounce ever," LPL Financial's Ryan Detrick pointed out in a tweet Thursday. That bounce surpassed the index's surge from the March 2009 low. Back then, the S&P 500 rallied 27.4% from the financial crisis lows. A surge of this magnitude, Detrick says, "opens the question, is this not just a bear market bounce?" —Imbert
Jim Cramer said on "Squawk on the Street" that he was "afraid to go all in on this reopen trade since it's already had a pretty big run. "One thing that may weigh on the large tech stocks and keep the trend going is the potential for regulation, he said."It's already maybe too far, too fast. It's very hard to figure, particular because FANG is being distorted by the president's tweets, Facebook being lumped in with Twitter," Cramer said. —Pound
Retailers are coming off a painful quarter as the pandemic shuttered stores worldwide, but looking forward company execs are optimistic that the second quarter will tell a different story. "We have been pleased with the traffic levels and sales that we have seen so far. There is clearly pent-up demand," Burlington Stores CEO Michael O'Sullivan said. The company missed top and bottom line estimates for the first quarter, but said that 332 stores have now reopened with the remainder expected to open by the middle of June.
Meanwhile Abercrombie & Fitch CEO Fran Horowitz said that with stores reopening the company has "experienced sales productivity for reopened stores of approximately 80%...as compared to last year's levels," while Dollar Tree CEO Gary Philbin said he's "extremely pleased with the momentum we are seeing in our business early in the second quarter." That said, many retailers have stopped short of giving full-year guidance due to continued uncertainty surrounding the pandemic. The SPDR S&P Retail ETF (XRT ) was down about half a percent on Thursday, but it has gained 13% this month. – Hum, Stevens
10:16 am: White House won't release economic projections this summer, report says
White House officials have decided to not release updated economic projections this summer due to what's expected to be a historic growth pullback induced by the Covid-19 outbreak, The Washington Post reported Thursday. The Post, which cited two anonymous administration officials, said the White House made its decision based on the unprecedented volatility the coronavirus has introduced, making it tricky to model economic trends.The White House has for decades released a federal budget proposal each February and follows up with a mid-summer review with refreshed estimates and commentary on economic trends like inflation, GDP growth and joblessness. — Franck
Minutes into the opening bell, the 30-stock Dow quickly erased its early gains of more than 100 points and dipped into negative territory briefly. It last traded up 25 points. The S&P 500 and the Nasdaq were also fluctuating around the flat line.—Li
Oil prices recovered early losses on Thursday – even briefly trading in positive territory – ahead of inventory data at 11:00 am ET. West Texas Interemdiate fell 15 cents, or 0.46%, to trade at $32.66 per barrel, while international benchmark Brent crude dipped 7 cents to $34.67. Earlier in the session WTI had been down more than 5%. WTI is on track for its best month ever, but growing geopolitical tensions have pressured prices in recent sessions. On Wednesday the contract settled more than 4% lower for its second day of losses in three sessions. – Stevens
The market built on its strong rally this week as investors continue to bet on an economic recovery from the pandemic. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose about 100 points at the open, and is on pace for a third straight day of gains. The S&P 500 climbed 0.3%, after closing above the 3,000 threshold and its 200-day moving average on Wednesday. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite underperformed, trading 0.1% lower at the open. --Li
Shares of discount retailer Dollar Tree jumped nearly 10% in premarket trading on Thursday following its blowout earnings thanks to a change on consumer behavior spurred by the covid-19 pandemic. Dollar Tree reported earnings per share of $1.04 on revenue of $6.29 billion. Analysts polled by FactSet were expected earnings of 85 cents per share on revenue of $6.14 billion. Same-store sales soared 7%, compared to the estimate of 4.4%. Family Dollar same-store sales jumped 15.5%, compared to the 8.1% forecast. "After a relatively normal first month in the quarter, our stores experienced an unprecedented spike in demand for certain products in March," Dollar Tree CEO Gary Philbin said in a release. — Fitzgerald
The U.S economy shrank 5% in the first quarter, versus a preliminary reading of a 4.8% decline, according to a revision from the Commerce Department. The coronavirus pandemic caused deep damage on the U.S. economy, dragging down consumer spending, exports and inventories. This also marked the first negative GDP reading since in the first quarter of 2014. --Li
