German officials this week reimposed local lockdowns after an outbreak at a slaughterhouse infected more than 1,500 people. In the United States , a surge in new cases in states including Arizona, Florida and Texas have prompted new warnings about the dangers of the pandemic. More than 35,000 new coronavirus cases were identified across the country on Tuesday, according to a New York Times databas e, the highest single-day total since late April and the third-highest total of any day of the pandemic.
States are discouraging people from gathering in public and even reimposing some limits on activity. New York, New Jersey and Connecticut said on Wednesday that they would begin requiring out-of-state visitors entering their states to quarantine for two weeks upon arrival if they were coming from one of the country’s new hot spots.
The risk to investors is that a resumption of limits on travel, shopping or other activities that might further the spread of the virus will take a toll on corporate profits and the economy. For now, no state government has imposed the kind of limits that were in place in April and May but that could change as cases mount and hospitals reach capacity.
Houston’s intensive-care units are filled to 97 percent of capacity, Mayor Sylvester Turner told the City Council on Wednesday, with Covid-19 patients accounting for more than one-quarter of all patients in intensive care. Apple later said it would close its stores in the city as a precaution.
Underscoring concern over the impact of the virus, the International Monetary Fund on Wednesday revised its forecast for global economic growth sharply lower. The I.M.F. now expects the global economy to shrink by 4.9 percent, compared with a 3 percent prediction in April. The recovery will also be slower than earlier expected, the fund said.
The decline on Wednesday followed back-to-back gains on Wall Street that had lifted the Nasdaq composite to a record high. Led by large technology stocks like Apple and Amazon, the Nasdaq has outpaced the broader market in recent days, but it was also sharply lower on Wednesday.
A top White House economist will leave amid the recession.
Tomas J. Philipson, a top economic adviser to President Trump, plans to leave the administration at the end of the month, a White House official said on Wednesday.
Mr. Philipson has served for the past year as the acting chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and has been a member of the council since 2017. His departure leaves the Trump administration without one of its key economic experts as it tries to contain the coronavirus pandemic and emerge from a deep recession.
He “will be returning to his tenured role at the University of Chicago in the fall,” Judd Deere, a White House spokesman, said.
Mr. Philipson succeeded Kevin Hassett as the chairman of the council, and is one of the few top administration officials, along with Peter Navarro, who holds a Ph.D. in economics.. Mr. Hassett returned to the administration in an advisory role this year, but he is also departing in the coming weeks.
The White House did not name a replacement.
Mr. Philipson said in a brief interview that his departure, which was reported earlier by Politico , had been in the works for a year. The University of Chicago had already extended his leave of absence and he needed to return to preserve his tenure status.
He said he was pleased to have had a role in shaping the administration’s tax and trade policies.
“If those policies are in place and the American people are smart about mitigating this disease, it will come back to where we were, which was obviously a great place in February,” Mr. Philipson said of the economy.
The lack of a top White House economist comes as the administration predicts a far rosier economic path than most independent economists have projected.
I.M.F. predicts deeper global downturn even as economies reopen.
The International Monetary Fund said Wednesday that the global economy faced an even deeper downturn than it previously projected as the coronavirus pandemic continued to sow uncertainty and businesses around the world struggled to shake off the virus.
In an update to its World Economic Outlook, the I.M.F. said it expected the global economy to shrink 4.9 percent this year, a sharper contraction than the 3 percent it predicted in April .
The fund noted that, even as businesses began to reopen, voluntary social distancing and enhanced workplace safety standards were weighing on economic activity. Moreover, the “scarring” of the labor force from mass job cuts and business closures means that the world economy will recover much more slowly, with the I.M.F. projecting 5.4 percent global growth in 2021, far below its pre-pandemic projections.
The I.M.F. now projects that the U.S. economy will shrink 8 percent this year before expanding 4.5 percent next year. Economies in the eurozone are projected to shrink 10.2 percent this year and expand 6 percent next year. The economy of China, where the virus originated and which imposed draconian containment measures, is expected to expand 1 percent this year and 8.2 percent in 2021.
The auto industry is rebounding, and that could help the economy.
Fiat Chrysler’s factory in Windsor, Ontario, last month. Instead of a “doomsday scenario,” sales of new vehicles are “pretty encouraging,” an analyst at Edmunds said.Credit...Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, via Reuters
Auto factories are churning out trucks and sport utility vehicles , with many of the plants nearly back to pre-pandemic production levels. Automakers have reported no major outbreaks, although some workers have tested positive. Perhaps most important, vehicle sales have perked up more than many industry executives had expected.
Auto sales will be down sharply this year, more than in any year since at least 2009; AlixPartners, a consulting firm, expects sales of new vehicles to fall about 19 percent this year, to 13.7 million. Yet automakers and car dealers say they are feeling optimistic because sales of new cars to individuals and families, the industry’s main customer base, have surged.
A rebound in the auto industry would probably help the economy. It is the nation’s largest manufacturing sector and employs roughly 1.5 million people in manufacturing, sales and service.
“There’s pent-up demand,” said Doug Waikem, owner of six new-car franchises in Massillon, Ohio. “There are people who were ready to buy, and then the virus hit. They put it on hold, but some are starting to come back.”
Auto manufacturers have lured buyers back to dealerships with generous financial incentives. For a time, several companies, including General Motors, Ford Motor and Fiat Chrysler, were offering zero-interest loans for 84 months on most or all of their vehicles. Most automakers have phased out those offers, but interest-free loans for up to 72 months are still available on many models.
Before new surge in virus cases, gasoline demand was recovering.
A motorist fills up at a truck stop in Odessa, Texas, in April.Credit...Tamir Kalifa for The New York Times
Demand for gasoline is a proxy for economic activity, and the recent surge in coronavirus cases in states like Arizona, Florida and Texas could stem a rise in gas prices.
In Texas, the second-most populous state after California, prices could fall sharply after Gov. Greg Abbott on Tuesday urged people to stay at home to reduce the spread of the virus.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
Demand for gasoline has recovered more than half of the drop it suffered when the coronavirus spread widely in April and many states and cities ordered people to stay at home and businesses to shut down, IHS Markit, a consulting and research firm said on Wednesday.
A survey of 15,000 gasoline stations by IHS taken before the new rise in cases found that use of gasoline was down about 22 percent in the second week of June compared with the same week a year ago. That’s a stark improvement over the second week of April, when gas purchases were down nearly 50 percent.
So far this year, gasoline sales have fallen the most in the Northeast, where the pandemic spread widely in March and April, causing tens of thousands of deaths. Demand is down by about a third in Massachusetts. By comparison, sales are down about 26 percent in California.
The average price for regular gasoline nationwide on Wednesday was $2.16 a gallon, down from $2.66 a year earlier, according to AAA. Prices at the pump have been rising in recent weeks. Oil prices remain roughly a third below at the start of the year.
“We can see a new preference for driving your car instead of public transportation or a short-range flight, and people do want to get out,” said Tom Kloza, global head of energy analysis at IHS’s Oil Price Information Service. “But that will be offset by less commuting and more working from home, the cancellation of sporting events, still-high unemployment levels and possibly a second wave of the virus in the autumn.”
After criticism, India may allow some international flights.
Entering the international airport in Bangalore, India, this month.Credit...Manjunath Kiran/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
India is coming under increased pressure to open its airspace to international carriers after the United States and some European nations accused it of discriminatory practices under the garb of “repatriations” flights.
The U.S. Department of Transportation said on Monday that the Indian charter flights — organized by the government to bring Indian nationals home amid global travel restrictions — go beyond “true repatriations.” It accused India’s national carrier, Air India, of selling tickets in the open market, even while New Delhi officials keep U.S. airlines from flying to India. Future chartered flights, U.S. officials said, would require Washington’s approval.
The Indian government suspended international air travel operations on March 22 after imposing a nationwide lockdown to curb the spread of the coronavirus. On many occasions, it failed to greenlight chartered flights operated by U.S. carriers.
India’s ministry of civil aviation said in a tweet on Tuesday that it was considering easing those restrictions to allow flights from U.S., French, British and German carriers.
‘The future looks bleak’: The pandemic ravages medical tourism.
To accommodate patients recuperating from elective surgery, Baptist Hospital of Miami razed a hotel to make way for a Hilton Miami Dadeland.Credit...Angel Valentin for The New York Times
Over the past several years, hospitals began to play innkeeper to open the door to more elective surgery, which is the lifeblood of their revenue.
They developed hotels near their operating rooms where patients, who often came from overseas for specialized treatments, could recover comfortably. Expanding into the hospitality business also allowed health care providers to avoid the high costs of being hosts themselves.
But as with so much else, the coronavirus pandemic has devastated medical tourism. To allow doctors to focus on emergencies, hospitals have canceled hip replacements and tummy tucks, while flight bans have grounded many foreign visitors.
“Unfortunately, the future looks bleak,” said Trey Hulsey, a co-founder of Hayakoum , a three-year-old service that handles travel arrangements for patients from the Middle East bound for hospitals in Boston, Houston and Philadelphia. “It’s just been one blow after another.”
Catch up: Here’s what else is happening.
Apple said it closed seven of its stores in the Houston area because of rising coronavirus cases in the region. The move on Wednesday followed its closure of 11 stores in Arizona, Florida, South Carolina and North Carolina because of the virus. Apple had closed nearly all of its roughly 500 stores worldwide months ago, but had opened most in the United States in recent weeks after cases declined.
Swissport, a provider of airport cargo handling and ground services, said Wednesday it would eliminate about half of its jobs in Britain. Over all, more than 4,500 workers out of 8,500 would be made redundant, the company said. Swissport said it is dealing with a 75 percent drop in revenue because of the pandemic.
GNC, the vitamin and supplement chain with about 5,000 locations around the world, filed for bankruptcy protection on Tuesday. The company said it would speed up plans to close as many as 1,200 stores and pursue a sale.
Spirit Aerosystems, a key Boeing supplier, said in a securities filing that Boeing had slashed an order for fuselage parts because of the effect the pandemic has had on global aviation. Boeing now wants only 72 shipsets, down from 125. (The aerospace giant had already cut its order from 216 earlier this year.)
Reporting was contributed by Brooks Barnes, Neal E. Boudette, Clifford Krauss, Jack Nicas, Matt Phillips, Alan Rappeport, Mohammed Hadi, Tammy LaGorce, C.J. Hughes, Carlos Tejada, Sameer Yasir, and Niraj Chokshi.
