Shares of Macy's are down 3.4% and trading at $16.11 per share after Standard & Poor's cut its credit rating for the retailer. Dow Jones reported that Macy's rating is now BB+, which is considered junk status, down from a BBB- rating. Macy's announced earlier this month that it would close 125 stores over the next three years, and its stock is down more than 30% over the past year. — Pound
Leon Cooperman said Bernie Sanders is a bigger threat to markets than coronavirus, and he is not alone. Bank of America Global Fund Manager Survey says the U.S. Presidential Election is the biggest threat to markets.
Bank of America Global Fund Manager Survey: Biggest risks
12:06 pm: Markets at midday: Apple's coronavirus warning hits stocks, Dow down 260 points
Around midday ET, the major averages were broadly lower after Apple warned its quarterly revenue may not meet its guidance as the coronavirus outbreak hinders the tech giant's supply chain. The Dow traded about 260 points lower, or 0.9%. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq were down 0.7% and 0.5%, respectively. —Imbert
Shares of food company Conagra cratered more than 8% after it revised its 2020 outlook due to "consumption softness" and weaker holiday restaurant traffic than last year during the fiscal third quarter. Conagra now estimates flat to 0.5% sales growth, compared to the prior estimate of 1% to 1.5% growth. Conagra said it expects adjusted EPS of $2.00 to $2.07, down from the previous $2.07 to $2.17 earnings per share range. – Fitzgerald
The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost more than 260 points, hitting its session low, in midday trading as fears about the Chinese coronavirus caused worried investors to dump some more stock. Apple dropped nearly 2.5% after the iPhone maker said it was unlikely to meet its March-quarter sales guidance as the coronavirus outbreak was pressuring its supply chain. – Fitzgerald
The S&P 500 utilities sector is heading for another record high close, as investors look for the benefit of both higher yielding stocks and a safety play. The S&P 500 Utilities sector is poised to close at a record as long as it closes above 356.33. XLU, The Utilities Select Sector SPDR Fund ETF was up 0.6% Tuesday and is up 9.6% year-to-date. XLU hit a new intraday high of $70.96, and if it closes at its current level just below that, would also be a record closing high. Utilities have benefited from investors looking for yield, and investors have been rushing into the sector, just as they have to corporate bonds which have seen record inflows. —Domm
Dallas Fed President Robert Kaplan said the central bank should leave rates where they are this year. In an essay released Tuesday morning, the central bank official also said U.S. growth likely will be "solid" this year . But he also said he is mindful of risks to the forecast, particularly from coronavirus. His expectation of no rate moves is at odds with the market, which expects at least one cut by September and possibly another before the end of the year. —Cox
Gold futures jumped more than 1%, breaking above $1,600 per ounce for the first time sine Jan. 8. The precious metal's rise happened as investors lightened their equity exposure amid coronavirus worries. —Imbert, Francolla
Jaguar Land Rover only has enough auto parts from China to continue production in Britain for the next two weeks because of the impact of the coronavirus on its supply chains, the company's CEO said Tuesday. Britain's largest automaker, which has three factories in the U.K., has had to fly in parts from China in suitcases. Jaguar Land Rover is not currently experiencing sales in China and it is unclear when they will resume. However, the firm's Chinese factory is slated to re-open next week. —Miller
Legg Mason rocketed more than 24% on the week's first day of trading after Franklin Resources announced it offered to acquire Legg for $50 per share in cash. The announced deal, which has put Legg Mason stock on track for its best day since 2008, would combine two of the largest so-called active managers in the U.S. and create a $1.5 trillion investment juggernaut. Legg Mason board member and noted activist investor Nelson Peltz hailed the deal as "compelling." — Franck
Shares of streaming video giant Netflix rose about 2% in early trading, setting a new 52-week high at $388 per share. The stock is still below its all-time highs of more than $420 per share in 2018. MoffettNathanson said in a note to clients n Tuesday that it was hard to justify the current valuation of Netflix using cash flow, but said the stock "continues to work as a 10-year dream" with investors expecting it to be the next Amazon . The firm raised its price target on the stock to $290 per share from $210. —Pound
10:23 am: 'Chernobyl-like' response by China means 'worst is yet to come' for coronavirus, Raymond James says
As the coronavirus outbreak rages on, Raymond James said China's delayed response is inciting comparisons to the Soviet Union's response to the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, and that things could get worse in terms of the economic and market impact. China's "slow reaction and continued unanswered questions appear to be sowing real concerns among the Chinese people," the firm said, adding that it has been "receiving questions on whether or not this will be a 'Chernobyl-like' event for China — the comparison being the impact of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant disaster on the fall of the Soviet Union." While the stock market has recovered initial losses from the coronavirus-induced sell-off, Raymond James said it was a "liquidity rally" and that the market is " underappreciating the potential dangers ." —Stevens
CNBC's Jim Cramer said Tuesday he thought Apple 's stock would be down further after the iPhone maker announced it would not meet its quarterly revenue forecast due to the coronavirus outbreak. The stock was down around $7.50, or more than 2%, but Cramer said he believed it would be closer to $10 or 3.1%. "I am surprised it's not down more because it's not just supply, it's demand," Cramer said on "Squawk Box." - Stankiewicz
As of Tuesday morning, a total of 73,400 cases of the coronavirus have been confirmed and the death toll from the epidemic has risen to 1,874 . Concerns are rising that the coronavirus stemming from China could escalate further. Former FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said Japan appears to be "on the cusp of a large outbreak." French Health Minister Olivier Veran has reportedly cautioned there is a "credible risk" that the virus could escalate into a global pandemic. —Li
9:35 am: Dow drops at the open, but making back losses quickly
The Dow opened about 160 points lower on Tuesday, but was quickly making back those losses and was last down about 100 points. The benchmark was headed for its third consecutive day of losses, after Apple said its revenue will miss estimates due to the coronavirus. The S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite dipped 0.2% and 0.3%, respectively. The warnings from Apple dented market sentiment as investors remain on edge about a potential economic fallout from the epidemic. Apple dropped more than 2%, the biggest loser in the 30-stock Dow.—Li
Shares of Tesla have risen more than 4% in premarket trading after analysts at Morgan Stanley and Bernstein raised their price targets on the stock. Both new targets are below where the stock closed on Friday, but Morgan Stanley's Adam Jonas said the bull case scenario for the company is $1,200 per share, up from $650 per share. That bull case is about 50% above where the stock closed last week. —Pound
Shares of Walmart ticked 1.4% higher in premarket trading on Tuesday despite missing analyst estimates for its fiscal fourth-quarter earnings . The retailer saw weak demand for toys, apparel and video games during the holiday season. Walmart also issued a 2020 outlook that came up short of expectations as the world's largest retailer anticipates e-commerce growth will slow. Initially, shares of Walmart were down 1% in extended trading but have since recovered. A bright spot for Walmart was its e-commerce sales during the quarter were up 35%, fueled by its best growth yet for Walmart.com and strength in grocery. —Fitzgerald
Shares of Kroger jumped more than 6% in premarket trading on Tuesday after Berkshire Hathaway revealed it owned 18.9 million shares of the grocery chain at the end of the fourth quarter. The investment is worth $549 million at that time. Warren Buffett's conglomerate on Friday disclosed the new stake in a 13-F filing, which documents holdings as of end of December. —Li
IPhone suppliers are getting hit hard after Apple said it does not expect to hit its quarterly revenue forecast due to lower iPhone supply globally and lower Chinese demand as a result of the coronavirus. Qorvo, a radio frequency chip supplier for Apple, fell nearly 3% in premarket trading on Tuesday. Chip company Skyworks Solutions fell 3.5% and Lam Research ticked 3.6% lower. Other chip suppliers like Broadcom , Micron and Intel , fell 2.2%, 2.7% and 1.4%, respectively. Semiconductor companies Nvidia and Xilinx dropped 1.3% and 2% in premarket trading. —Fitzgerald
U.S. stock futures pointed to a lower open on Wall Street after tech giant Apple warned it may not meet its quarterly revenue guidance due to the coronavirus. Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were down more than 150 points while S&P 500 and Nasdaq-100 futures pointed to losses of at least 0.4%. Apple shares, meanwhile fell more than 2% in the premarket. —Imbert
