Stock Prices Updates, Earnings Releases and Schedules, and Welfare Initiatives - Analyst Notes on Home Depot, 21st Century Fox, Norfolk, Starbucks and CVS Caremark
Editor Note: For more information about this release, please scroll to bottom.
Today, Analysts Review released its analysts' notes regarding The Home Depot, Inc (NYSE: HD ), Twenty-First Century Fox, Inc. (NASDAQ: FOXA ), Norfolk Southern Corp. (NYSE: NSC ), Starbucks Corporation (NASDAQ: SBUX ) and CVS Caremark Corporation (NYSE: CVS ). Private wealth members receive these notes ahead of publication. To reserve complementary membership, limited openings are available at: http://www.analystsreview.com/1683-100free .
On April 23, 2014, the stock of The Home Depot, Inc. (Home Depot) snapped its four-day long winning streak and ended with a decline of 1.44% at $78.52. The decline in Home Depot's stock coincided with a latest home sales data released by the U.S. Commerce Department. As per the data, sales of new single-family homes in U.S. declined 14.5% to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 384,000 units in March 2014. During the session, the Company's shares opened at $79.87 and fluctuated in the range of $78.44 - $80.05. Home Depot traded 7.50 million shares during the day, higher than its 30-day average trading volume of 6.90 million shares. Over the past 12 months, the shares of the Company increased 7.15%, as compared to the NYSE Composite, which increased 15.69% during the same period. The full analyst notes on Home Depot are available to download free of charge at:
Twenty-First Century Fox, Inc. (21st Century Fox) posted on its Events Calendar that it will release its Q3 FY 2014 financial results on May 7, 2014. According to Bloomberg, the consensus EPS estimate for Q3 FY 2014 is $0.35. In the preceding quarter, the Company had reported an adjusted diluted EPS of $0.33, which was lower than the Bloomberg's consensus analyst estimates by a cent. The Company's operating income before depreciation and amortization in Q2 FY 2014 declined 4.4% YoY to $1.5 billion, mainly as a result of lower contributions from the Company's Filmed Entertainment segment, as well as from the Television and DBS segments. The full analyst notes on 21st Century Fox are available to download free of charge at:
On April 23, 2014, Norfolk Southern Corp. (Norfolk) reported its financial results for Q1 2014. The Company posted 1.8% YoY decline in total railway operating revenues to $2.7 billion as extreme winter weather across the U.S. rail network affected operations. Shipment volumes during the quarter fell 1% as increased crude and liquefied petroleum gas shipments were offset by declines in automotive, metals/construction, and paper/forest shipments. The net income for the quarter came in at $368.0 million, or $1.17 per diluted share, as compared to $450.0 million, or $1.41 per diluted share in Q1 2013. Norfolk CEO, Wick Moorman said, "we are seeing a rebound in shipments across all of our business." The full analyst notes on Norfolk are available to download free of charge at:
On April 17, 2014, Starbucks Corporation (Starbucks) announced that it has been recognized as one of the 2014 "Best Workplaces in Canada," based on employee feedback and research compiled by an independent firm that evaluates workplace culture. The Company informed that Starbucks Canada's rank improved to 17th this year from 18th in 2013, and it is the highest ranking publicly-held retailer on the list which comprises 50 large and multinational companies. According to the survey results, 86% of Starbucks partners (employees) across Canada feel Starbucks is a great place to work. The full analyst notes on Starbucks are available to download free of charge at:
On April 24, 2014, CVS Caremark Corporation (CVS) announced its collaboration with The Partnership at Drugfree.org to create an innovative community donation program to enable local police departments help their communities safely dispose of unwanted medications, including controlled substances. CVS/pharmacy, the retail division of CVS Caremark, will award up to 1,000 receptacles to police departments through an application process that will launch on May 1, 2014. "As part of our on-going commitment to combat prescription drug abuse, we have participated in events for many years with law enforcement to help safely dispose of expired, unused or unwanted medication," said Josh Flum, Senior Vice President of Retail Pharmacy at CVS. The Company informed that CVS/pharmacy is the only retail pharmacy sponsor of The Partnership at Drugfree.org's Medicine Abuse Project, which is a multi-year initiative aimed at preventing a half-million teenagers from abusing prescription medication by the year 2017. The full analyst notes on CVS Caremark are available to download free of charge at:
We do things differently. Our goal is to provide the best content to our exclusive membership. We are constantly hiring researchers, writers, editors and analysts to add to our team and become better than yesterday. If being a part of a fast growing community with an edge in today's market sounds interesting to you, then sign-up today and experience the full benefits of membership.
1. This is not company news. We are an independent source and our views do not reflect the companies mentioned.
2. Information in this release is fact checked and produced on a best efforts basis and reviewed by Namrata Maheshwari, a CFA charterholder. However, we are only human and are prone to make mistakes. If you notice any errors or omissions, please notify us below.
3. This information is submitted as a net-positive to companies mentioned, to increase awareness for mentioned companies to our subscriber base and the investing public.
4. If you wish to have your company covered in more detail by our team, or wish to learn more about our services, please contact us at pubco [at] http://www.analystsreview.com .
5. For any urgent concerns or inquiries, please contact us at compliance [at] http://www.analystsreview.com .
6. Are you a public company? Would you like to see similar coverage on your company? Send us a full investors' package to research [at] http://www.analystsreview.com for consideration.
Content is researched, written and reviewed on a best-effort basis. This document, article or report is prepared and authored by Analysts Review. An outsourced research services provider represented by Namrata Maheshwari, CFA, has only reviewed the information provided by Analysts Review in this article or report according to the procedures outlined by Analysts Review. Analysts Review is not entitled to veto or interfere in the application of such procedures by the outsourced provider to the articles, documents or reports, as the case may be.
Analysts Review makes no warranty, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or completeness or fitness for a purpose (investment or otherwise), of the information provided in this document. This information is not to be construed as personal financial advice. Readers are encouraged to consult their personal financial advisor before making any decisions to buy, sell or hold any securities mentioned herein.
Analysts Review is not responsible for any error which may be occasioned at the time of printing of this document or any error, mistake or shortcoming. No liability is accepted by Analysts Review whatsoever for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from the use of this document. Analysts Review expressly disclaims any fiduciary responsibility or liability for any consequences, financial or otherwise arising from any reliance placed on the information in this document. Analysts Review does not (1) guarantee the accuracy, timeliness, completeness or correct sequencing of the information, or (2) warrant any results from use of the information. The included information is subject to change without notice.
CFA® and Chartered Financial Analyst® are registered trademarks owned by CFA Institute.
