This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
The Nasdaq Is Flying High. Everyone Else Has Major Problems.
Barron’s and MarketWatch journalists provide a morning briefing on what you need to know about investing, business and markets to be successful in the day ahead. Sign up for the newsletter here .
Big tech is producing big returns—but everyone else still has big problems.
      incredibly, is in the green for the year after jumping 1.4% Thursday. The Index is up 0.08% in 2020 as of Thursday’s closing price. Not bad considering the damage Covid-19 has done to the global economy.
But all is not as rosy as it seems. The average return for the roughly 2,700 stocks in the Nasdaq is negative 13% this year. What’s more, almost three-quarters of the stocks in the index are down so far this year.
      is a market capitalization-weighted index. The larger companies count for more. The 10 largest companies in the Nasdaq, which include behemoths such as Microsoft (ticker: MSFT), Apple (AAPL) and Amazon.com (AMZN), represent about 44% of the total index market value . The top ten stocks are up about 12% year to date on average. In other words, the Nasdaq is very top-heavy . Investors holding the index probably don’t care.
Maybe they should. While more gains are on tap for Friday, the S&P 500 is still down double digits in 2020 . It’s far more reflective of the stock market and the economy.
It still has a way to go to catch big tech.
Congressional Democrats will release a “Franklin Rooseveltian-type” recovery package soon, Sen. Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D, N.Y.), said Thursday .
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D, Calif.) said earlier this week that the next relief package could include $500 billion for state governments, as much as $300 billion for cities, more money for testing and hospitals, and possibly more direct payments to Americans.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R, Ky.) has opposed additional relief measures such as emergency federal funding for states and cities but did support the most recent round of funding for small business loans
“It’s going to be expensive.” — Pelosi on the size of the Democrats’ next relief package.
What’s Next: So far, there have been effectively three lead negotiators determining the content of the coronavirus relief packages: Pelosi, Schumer and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. The leader of the House Progressive Caucus, Rep. Pramila Jayapal (D, Wa.), said this week in an interview with Vox that the Pelosi-Mnuchin-Schumer negotiations make it hard for the left to advance their goals. That means the fate of this effort lives or dies on whether that trio can negotiate on this next deal as they have on other relief packages.
3.2 million Americans lost their jobs last week and investors were unfazed by the continued carnage. Stocks rose and the Nasdaq Composite Index ended flat for the year so far with a 31% gain in the last six weeks. Why? Well, the bad news has been baked in for a while now.
The number of weekly initial jobless claims is at historically horrific levels, but it has also been steadily declining since 6.9 million workers lost their jobs in the week ending April 4.
The Bank of England indicated Thursday that it will provide more economic support, while central banks in Norway and the Czech Republic cut interest rates.
What’s Next: More already priced-in job losses are on the way. The April jobs number will show that 22 million Americans lost their jobs in April, economists expect.
Taiwan, a country of 23 million people, never went into lockdown and has had only 500 cases of Covid-19 and six deaths. Its economy is still tanking.
Taiwan may have done an excellent job of insulating itself from the health crisis of the coronavirus pandemic, but its export-heavy economy has taken a big hit as other countries seize up.
Manufacturers in the country saw the biggest drop in new orders since the financial crisis, a survey covering April showed.
“The bigger story is that Taiwanese consumers have slashed their spending despite the seemingly robust domestic situation, and they started doing it before the global economy went into free fall in mid-March.”–Matthew C. Klein, Barron’s reporter.
What’s Next: What’s happening in Taiwan is a good indication to the U.S. and Europe that even once the outbreak itself has been tamed – and that point is a long way off – there will still be a massive amount of government support needed to get the economy humming again. In other words, staying open, nevermind reopening, isn’t as much of an economic windfall as one might assume.
Nintendo (NTDOY) was the latest videogame firm to confirm what everyone already knew: there’s a lot of people at home playing videogames. The Japanese gaming giant’s March quarter results beat expectations, and the stock approached a one-year high.
Nintendo said Animal Crossing: New Horizons, which launched March 20, was the fastest selling title through six weeks on its Nintendo Switch console. It’s been especially popular with 20-and-30 somethings, and women, and has led to sales of its new consoles.
Earlier this week, both Activision Blizzard (ATVI) and Electronic Arts (EA) crushed expectations, though these videogame stocks went in opposite directions. EA stock pulled back a bit on an outlook analysts called conservative, while Activision soared to its highest levels since 2018.
What’s Next: What this all means for these companies depends on whether or not this uptick in gaming will be short-lived or if it’s indicative of a long-term shift in consumer behavior. In the meantime, investors will look to Take-Two Interactive Software ’s (TTWO) March quarter results on May 20.
Eurozone finance ministers will meet again Friday to try to agree on a coordinated fiscal boost to counter the coronavirus shock. Consensus is that the separate national policies, as significant as they have been, do not provide an adequate response to a crisis that exacerbates the differences between member states.
Ministers will discuss a loan facility managed by the eurozone bailout fund—which few countries seem eager to tap.
They will reflect on this week’s dire European Union economic forecast, showing that the speed and strength of the postvirus recovery will vary greatly between the 27 member states.
They may discuss a common reaction to the shock decision of the German Constitutional Court, which found this week that the European Central Bank had exceeded its powers with its bond-buying program.
What’s Next: The eurozone is once again divided between the fiscally prudent and the advocates of more “solidarity.” Ministers will avoid debating the joining recovery facility that EU leaders have pledged to set up–while disagreeing on its size, the way it will be financed, and how it will intervene. Without it, most analysts and economists reckon, the EU’s response to the crisis will fall short.
The Nasdaq Is Flying High. Everyone Else Has Major Problems.
