So while they could all go lower if news gets worse in the short  term, you have to ask yourself what do you think their business will  look like 12-24 months down the road? If the answer is that they will  recover and likely do more business in future years (than last year),  there may be opportunity in coming days and weeks to add prudently for  the long term (and not worry about short term fluctuations).
If we can see cases peaking in the next 3-6 weeks and the stimulus  package is large enough to hold people over ($1-2T), we may be nearing a  bottom (in the stock market) right now. No one knows for sure. Right  now the market has already discounted a considerable amount of economic  contraction.
If the virus goes on beyond what we have seen in China (in time), it  is possible we could drop significantly more, but that is a lower  probability. There is no way to perfectly handicap this (until you know  what the case curve/duration looks like), but regardless of what the  general market does in coming weeks, I see opportunity on a company by  company basis now and am nibbling each down day and sitting tight each  green day.
Here is what is needed for a big turnaround:
1. $1T+ Fiscal Stimulus package passed (to start). It will probably be $2T when all is said and done in coming months.
2. An anti-viral/treatment approved for severe cases. There are a few  possibilities we have covered in past notes and on Twitter.
3. New cases peak in the US.
4. Ideally, OPEC+ reverses their decision and cuts production. They are  not doing themselves any favors right now. This would stabilize credit  markets quickly.
5. Vaccine needed ideally by Fall.
Now onto the shorter term view for the General Market:
This week Bank of America put out its monthly Global Fund Manager  Survey. If you havent read my summary, you can find it below. The  most important point (in my view) was looking at the last time managers  were this underweight financials/banks (July 2016) and what happened  next:
This weeks AAII Sentiment Survey result ( Video Explanation )  Bullish Percent rose to 34.35% from 29.74% last week. Bearish Percent  ticked down to 51.15% from 51.31% last week. Neutrality dropped from  18.95% last week to 14.50% this week. While bearishness is at an  elevated level, Bullishness is still a bit high to call complete  capitulation. My sense is yesterdays price movement was not fully  reflected in this survey as most participants submit their survey  throughout the week.
The CNN Fear and Greed Index rose from 4 last week to 5 this week.  We are at an extreme in sentiment on this measure. You can learn how  this indicator is calculated and how it works here: ( Video Explanation )
And finally, this week the NAAIM (National Association of Active Investment Managers Index) ( Video Explanation Here ) dropped from 29.03% equity exposure last week, to 16.59% this week.
Our message for this week is similar to last week:
We are selectively and slowly adding to those stocks/sectors which  are nearing valuation levels that we would define as pricing in at/near  the worst case scenario.
Most stocks do not yet meet this measure (as the worst case is  unlikely to materialize), but for those that do we are adding and will  continue to do so as opportunity presents itself in coming days and  weeks.
