Updated June 4, 2020 8:20 am ET / Original June 4, 2020 8:09 am ET
The rally has paused despite the ECB pouring more money into its pandemic-related stimulus plans and an urging from President Trump to look at stocks now.
The president tweeted about his confidence in the U.S. economy and stock market Wednesday night. And European central bankers extended bond buying till at least 2022. Still, stock futures are in the red and overseas shares are mostly lower Thursday morning.
Dow Jones Industrial Average futures are off 20 points. S&P 500 futures have fallen 8 points. Nasdaq Composite futures are off 10 points. Next up for U.S. investors Thursday: jobless claims, to be released around 8:30 a.m. eastern time.
Overseas, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index is up 0.2%. But Europe’s FTSE 100 and Germany’s DAX are down 0.3% and 0.7%, respectively in Thursday trading, even following the ECB’s announcement.
Still, despite the minor pullback, the recent stock market rally has been impressive. The S&P, for instance, has gained back 77% of all its losses from the February high. The Index sits just 271 points below a new high watermark.
And the stocks hardest by the Covid-19 pandemic are the ones doing the best lately. Casino stocks rose about 8% Wednesday. And most are higher again Thursday despite the weakness in stock futures. Las Vegas Sands (ticker: LVS) stock is up 1.9% in premarket trading. Wynn Resorts (WYNN) shares have gained 1.7%. MGM Resorts (MGM) shares are 5.5% higher Thursday morning.
Citigroup is now recommended investors buy another beaten up travel and entertainment stock: SeaWorld (SEAS). Analyst Jason Bazinet upgraded the stock, raising his price target from $9 to $24 on Thursday. SeaWorld stock is up 175% off the March lows, but down 50% from its 52-week high. Shares are up 1.5% in premarket trading.
Oil prices, on the other hand, are down . Benchmark crude prices are off about 1.5% in Thursday trading. Oil-related shares are reacting. Occidental Petroleum (OXY) stock, for instance, is off about 2.6% in premarket trading. Halliburton (HAL) shares are down 1.9%. Exxon Mobil (XOM) shares have fallen about 0.6%.
Despite Thursday’s drop, oil futures remain up about 80% over the past month.
Boeing shares continue to bounce back as well on, essentially, no news. Shares rose 13% Wednesday after hedge fund Third Point disclosed a stake in the company. But Third Point bought Boeing debt and not Boeing stock. Still, shares rallied with other beaten up travel-related stocks. The stock is up another 2.6% in premarket trading.
Airline shares, like Boeing, are up again Thursday after rising Wednesday. American Airlines (AAL) stock, for instance, is up 3.5% in premarket trading after rising 5.6% Wednesday. Southwest Airlines (LUV) stock is up 2.7% Thursday morning after also rising 5.6% Wednesday.
With so many stocks up it might be surprising futures are lower. Oil is down and so are some technology names.
Cloudera (CLDR) is down almost 12% in premarket trading after the company gave disappointing sales guidance Wednesday night.
Microsoft (MSFT) and Apple (AAPL) are down about 0.3% in premarket trading. Those are small moves, but they are two of the biggest companies in the U.S. stock market. A 0.3% move still wipes out more than $8 billion in market value on a combined basis.
The Apple and Microsoft declines amount to about 7% of the overall decline in S&P 500 futures Thursday.
The rally has paused despite the ECB pouring more money into its pandemic-related stimulus plans and an urging from President Trump to look at stocks now.
