Stock futures are falling once again on coronavirus fears.
9:45 p.m. U.S. stock futures are in free fall Sunday evening as the market wrestles with the spread of coronavirus in the U.S. and slumping oil prices .
Dow Jones Industrial Average futures have fallen 1124 points, or 4.4%, while S&P 500 futures have slumped 4.8% and Nasdaq Composite futures have also dropped 4.8%. The 10-year Treasury yield has fallen 0.214 percentage point to 0.493%.
Is that really a surprise? The weekend has brought a lockdown in Northern Italy , a state of emergency in New York state , and the continued spread of coronavirus. At this point, the only thing that’s uncertain for the economy is the size of the hit, not whether there will be one. The market was probably going to selloff no matter what.
But what’s did surprise the market was the collapse of a deal between Saudi Arabia and Russia to limit oil production. With Russia refusing to go along, Saudi Arabia announced that it plans to open the spigots to drill, baby, drill. That could cause major problems for U.S. oil drillers. Oil closed just above $40 a barrel on Friday, and is down 25% to $30.83 in futures trading.
“The Energy market has already been in free fall as markets adjusted for the reemergence of a global supply glut and the feared demand destruction that would be associated with a potential global recession,” writes JonesTrading’s Michael O’Rourke. “Due to Energy’s shrunken weighting in the index, the ramifications are more likely to be felt in the Banks and rapidly deteriorating loan quality.”
And in the high-yield bond market, says Bay Crest Partners’ Jonathan Krinsky. “Energy is roughly a 10% weighting in the High Yield ETF, which certainly won’t help the recent decline,” he writes. The iShares iBoxx $ High Yield Corporate Bond ETF (HYG) has dropped 2.9% during the past month of trading.
It is a really bad time for Russia and Saudi Arabia to battle over oil prices. Energy companies were already feeling the pain as oil fell to reflect an economic slowdown. Now they have to cope with Saudi Arabia undercutting prices. And it seems like few, if any, were expecting such an outcome.
“OPEC’s move is somewhat surprising as typically in demand related shocks OPEC is coordinated and swift, we can see this in the large and effective response to the financial crisis,” writes SunTrust analyst Neal Dingmann. “It is supply related shocks, such as ’14-16, where OPEC cannot reach an agreement because market share is at risk. As COVID-19 is a demand shock both us and the market are surprised the cut not only fell apart, but perhaps OPEC+ has fallen apart as well.”
And, of course, coronavirus lingers. As the market continues to panic, the U.S. government has not. Washington has yet to consider much in the way of stimulus. Larry Kudlow, director of the National Economic Council, said that helping hard-hit industries and small businesses in specific areas was likely, but that a big stimulus package “never works.” That lack of panic, says Evercore ISI’s Dennis DeBusschere, raises the odds that something goes very wrong for the market. “Unfortunately, when everyone except the U.S. government is panicking, market tail risk increases, feeding the unusually high level of volatility,” he writes.
And to think the U.S. stock market isn’t even really open for trading.
