The Stock Market Got Crushed Last Week. Why Investors Shouldn’t Worry.
Updated June 16, 2020 / Original June 12, 2020
Bears finally got the pullback they’ve been waiting for ever since the stock market’s blistering rally got under way in late March. But investors didn’t learn anything in the past five days that should have shaken their conviction in a market rally led by economically sensitive stocks.
That might seem at odds with recent action. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 1505.44 points, or 5.6%, to 25,605.54 this past week, its worst weekly performance since the third week in March, when circuit breakers were triggered multiple times. It would have been worse except that the benchmark followed a Thursday drop of 1,862 points, or 6.9%, with a Friday rebound that almost lost steam before stocks surged into the close. After rising to three straight record highs, the Nasdaq Composite closed the week down 2.3%, at 9588.81, while the S&P 500 lost 4.8%, to 3041.31, and the Russell 2000 tumbled 7.9%, to 1387.68.
What caused the rally to sputter this past week? Nothing particularly new or unexpected. On Wednesday, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell emphasized the long, slow path back to previous levels of employment and economic activity, in contrast to the market’s lightning-fast recovery. Shocking.
Coronavirus cases, meanwhile, are increasing in more U.S. states and other countries. But Covid-19 case numbers were highly likely to rise after reopenings got under way in all 50 states and mass gatherings and demonstrations took place in many cities.
Still, coming after a more than 40% surge since late March—and with many of the market’s most coronavirus-sensitive companies more than doubling from their troughs in just weeks—conditions were overbought and ripe for a slide, and the past week’s reminders presented the catalyst.
A catalyst for a pullback, not something more serious. That’s because the factors that boosted the market in recent weeks are still almost entirely in place: a flood of liquidity from the Fed, what’s expected to be better incoming economic data, and consumers and corporations adjusting to life and business in a coronavirus world. Together, they point to improving corporate earnings and justify high valuation multiples.
As for coronavirus, the Covid-19 case data will get plenty of attention in the coming weeks and will be a source of choppy trading on particularly good or bad days. But U.S. knowledge, capabilities, and priorities are very different going into the second wave than they were back in February and March, and the potential economic consequences are much less dire.
“I think the way we deal with the second wave will be very different than the way we dealt with the first wave,” says Mike Wilson, chief U.S. equity strategist at Morgan Stanley. “From an economic standpoint, it shouldn’t be nearly as troubling.”
And it doesn’t justify piling back into defensive stocks and industries in anticipation of a deeper recession ahead. Wilson recommended scooping up deeply discounted but high-quality names with early-cycle exposure in late March. It was a good call: Those groups have been among the market’s best performers in the rally that followed. Morgan Stanley’s house view is for a continued fast recovery in the back half of the year, and Wilson this past week advised clients to take on more cyclical exposure, upgrading industrials and materials sectors to overweight. He’s untroubled by Thursday’s sudden drop.
“A pullback or consolidation would be a good development,” Wilson says. “Our strategy would be to move into these more cyclical areas as this correction happens.”
Inexpensive, cyclically levered stocks Wilson identified this past week included General Motors (ticker: GM), Citizens Financial Group (CFG), and LyondellBasell Industries (LYB).
A greater risk to the recovery than second-wave induced lockdowns may be that Congress fails to extend funding for the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program or boost unemployment benefits before its summer recess. Alongside the liquidity and low interest rates offered by the Fed, investors are counting on those fiscal measures to remain in place long into the recovery. A bill will eventually come, even if it takes sizable market declines to make a deal happen.
Uncertainties in the longer-term outlook shouldn’t be minimized, and the tail risks are significant. Nor will the market’s recent sugar high last forever. Eventually, the shine of month-over-month improvements in the economic data from severely depressed levels in March or April will wear off, and the focus will turn to getting back to precoronavirus levels. That could shift the narrative in a more pessimistic direction and pause the rally until Main Street catches up with Wall Street. Just not yet.
“Right now we’re so consumed by the reopening news,” says Jonathan Golub, chief U.S. equity strategist at Credit Suisse. “I think that we’ll find that the jump to 80%, 90% of normal is going to be reasonably quick, but then that last mile is going to be more difficult, and that will eventually get people’s attention. But right now the market is focusing on this sequential improvement, and as long as that’s what’s happening, small-caps will beat large, value will beat growth, and cyclicals will do better.”
The Stock Market Got Crushed Last Week. Why Investors Shouldn’t Worry.
Bears finally got the pullback they’ve been waiting for ever since the stock market’s blistering rally got under way in late March.
