$600 Federal Unemployment Checks To Be Extended?
The daily chart of the S&P 500 shows Thursday’s early drop below the 200 day and then Friday’s strong close as a daily doji buy signal was triggered (see arrow). The daily chart still shows a descending triangle formation (lines a and b). A daily close above 2718 would be an upside breakout while a close below 2553 would project lower prices. The S&P 500 is still down 7.3% from the January high.
The S&P 500 advance/decline line is still well above support at line d, and more importantly the March-April lows. Prior to the sharp market declines in the summer of 2015 and in early 2016, the A/D lines were in well-defined downtrends after forming a weekly negative divergence in May 2015.
The daily A/D line moved back above its WMA on Friday but still needs a strong close above the downtrend, line c, to indicate that the market’s correction is over. This pattern is still consistent with the view ( The Good And Bad News For Investors ) that the stock market is just pausing before a new uptrend.
The wide swings last week, down 0.82% Monday and 0.72% Wednesday plus a 1.28% gain Friday in the S&P 500 has frustrated investors. So far in 2018, the S&P has had more than 41 daily moves of more than 1%. This action has increased the frustration of both investors and traders.
The bullish sentiment tracked by the American Association of Individual Investors has continued to decline since peaking at 59.75% on January 4. Last week, the bullish percent was at 28.4% not far above the March 8 low of 26.40%. Investment newsletter writers have also become less positive on the stock market since the bullishness peaked in January at 66.7%. For the past six weeks, less than 50% of these advisors have been bullish with just 43.6% in the latest survey.
For the week, the Dow Industrials and S&P 500 were down around 0.20% while the small-cap Russell 2000 was up 0.6%. The Nasdaq 100 was up 1.90% on Friday and for the week. The NYSE A/D ratio was positive as 1574 stocks advanced and 1493 declined.
The weekly chart of the NYSE Composite shows a broad trading over the past ten weeks with resistance at 12,774 (line a) and support at 12,107 (line b). The flat 20-week EMA is at 12,610 and an upward resolution of the trading range has targets at 13,300-13,500.
The weekly NYSE A/D line moved a bit higher and is just slightly above the downtrend, line c.  For the weekly A/D line to turn negative, it needs to drop below its WMA and then the support at line d.  A violation of the March low is needed to confirm a new downtrend. The daily NYSE A/D line moved back above its WMA on Friday.
The iShares Russell 2000 (IWM) again tested its 20-week EMA last week before closing higher. The weekly chart formation, lines a and b, is more bullish than the chart of the NYSE Composite. A strong close above $160 has initial upside targets in the $170-$172 area.
The weekly relative performance broke its downtrend, line c, in March. This was a sign that IWM was going to outperform the S&P 500 making it a favorite of Viper ETF clients. The RS has improved further since March as it shows a bullish zig-zag formation and made a new high last week. The weekly Russell 2000 A/D line is above its WMA and the daily also closed the week positive.
The weekly Nasdaq 100 and Dow Industrial A/D lines are still below their WMAs. They need a strong close this week to turn positive. The weekly RS analysis on the PowerShares QQQ Trust (QQQ is positive which is a sign that the QQQ should be ready to outperform the SPY. The RS analysis is negative on DIA so the large-cap stocks should still lag.
The yield on the 10-year T-Note, despite the economic data and monthly jobs report, did close lower for the week. The yield closed back within the breakout level and it would take a drop below 2.840% to suggest the recent upside breakout was false.
Last week’s data started off with the Chicago PMI, which came in as expected while Tuesday’s ISM Manufacturing Index was a bit lower. The daily chart shows that the positive trend in the Chicago PMI is still intact. The PMI manufacturing came in as expected.
The ISM Non-Manufacturing Index came in at 56.8 which was below the consensus estimate of 58.4. It would take a reading below the July low of 53.4 to break the positive trend. This week the calendar is fairly light with the PPI report on May 9 and the CPI on May 10.
On Friday, we get the Consumer Sentiment which is estimated to come in at 99. The long-term chart from dhsort.com shows a clear positive trend. There is major support from 2016 and 2017 at 87.20 so a monthly reading below this level is likely to complete a top.
The consumer plays an important role in the economy and as I mentioned last month , the Consumer Discretionary Select (XLY) still looks very positive basis the monthly chart. The pullback from the January high at $109.02 has been quite normal as it stopped well above support at line a.
With the April close, the RS has made a new all-time high signaling that will continue to lead the S&P 500 higher as it moved above its WMA last November. The weekly OBV is also positive and turned up with the higher closer in April.
In choppy markets, it is a good idea to look at the monthly charts as they can illuminate the daily market noise. There are a number of large-cap stocks that are oversold based on the monthly starc band analysis ( The Five Most Oversold Dow Stocks ). This is typical action near a stock market low as investors dump even their high dividend stocks before the market forms a bottom..
The strong close Friday shifted the momentum slightly in favor of the bulls but it was not enough to indicate that an important low is in place. From a technical standpoint, I still think the stock market will breakout to the upside from its recent trading range. A strong close this week would further support the bullish case.
Until the A/D lines complete their corrections, another wave of selling is still possible, but like last Thursday’s early selling, I expect it to be well supported. Investors should stick with their plan and not get caught up in emotional selling. Investors should remain patient and wait to do aggressive new buying until there clear signs that the correction is over.
The stock market outlook and the A/D line analysis are updated twice a week in both the Viper ETF and Viper Hot Stocks reports.  Both include specific recommendations and the reports are only $34.95 each per month.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
