Everything’s gone sideways —and that might be good news for the stock market.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 811.81 points, or 3.2%, to 25,827.36, while the S&P 500 gained 4%, to 3130.01, and the Nasdaq Composite climbed 4.6%, to 10,207.63, to close the week at an all-time high.
That sure doesn’t look like sideways. But nothing happens in a vacuum, and the market’s good week followed a pretty bad one, which was preceded by a good one, which was preceded by a bad one. In fact, the S&P 500 has advanced just 1.6% since June 2, a reflection of the competing forces buffeting markets right now.
On the negative side of the ledger, Covid-19 is still rising—a record 52,000 new cases were reported in one 24-hour period this past week, and not just because of more testing. And states continue to roll back or delay their reopenings, which will push back the recovery’s timeline.
On the positive side: The Federal Reserve is pumping money into the economy, the data have been better than expected— Friday’s June payrolls report , which showed 4.8 million jobs being added, is just the latest example— a Covid vaccine is being developed , and there’s still a good chance that Congress passes some sort of stimulus bill . Depending on the day, news on any one of these fronts could send the market higher or lower.
“The uncertainty regarding this pandemic just fired up again, as infection rates continue to climb in key U.S. regions,” writes Satya Paradhuma, director of research at Cirrus Research. “In many ways, we will continue to witness a market that is ‘Covid-on, Covid-off.’”
Having a plan go sideways is not usually a good thing, but it can be for a market that had come too far, too fast. That’s because it can take some of the extremes out of the market just as easily as a big decline. For instance, the S&P 500’s 14-day relative strength index—a measure of whether an asset is overbought or oversold—has fallen from overbought on June 8 to something approaching neutral at the end of this past week.
“The market is giving us a correction through time, not price,” says John Kolovos, chief technical market strategist at Macro Risk Advisors.
And history suggests that the stock market could continue to rally over the next few weeks. That’s because it tends to rally strongly from June 26 through July 11, Kolovos says, noting that the S&P 500 has averaged a 6.3% rise during that period. If it follows suit this year, the index could hit a new all-time high.
After that, the market tends to weaken, particularly in an election year. To avoid that, the market’s rally will need to broaden out from big tech stocks to everything else. “We need to see fewer stocks going sideways for it to be sustainable,” Kolovos says.
Could earnings season , which starts in two weeks, be the catalyst that helps stocks escape their seasonal pattern? Hans Mikkelsen, credit strategist at BofA Securities, observes that the Citigroup Economic Surprise Index, which hit a record low in April, has surged to its highest level ever as number after number comes in better than expected. The same thing could happen when earnings season begins in earnest in two weeks.
European Stocks Could Be Ready for a Comeback. Where Investors Can Find Signs of a Recovery.
“Clearly investors expect to see horrific numbers overall…but why would the better than expected economic outcome not also flow through to at least better than feared corporate earnings?” Mikkelsen asks. “At the very least companies should be eager to guide the positive trends they are seeing for [the second half].”
We might already have gotten a peek at what things could look like when FedEx (ticker: FDX) reported earnings this past week. The express shipper reported an adjusted profit of $2.53 a share on revenue of $17.4 billion, easily topping the Street consensus of $1.57 a share on sales of $16.5 billion. At that, FedEx stock, which had been down 7% on the year, jumped 12%. And the company didn’t even provide guidance.
Don’t be surprised if you hear more of the same once earnings season gets under way, writes Chris Harvey, head of equity strategy at Wells Fargo Securities. It also has him worried that investors will take some potentially big earnings beats as a sign that business is improving faster than it really is. That could set up stocks for a big rally that could end in tears. “Today, we fear a summertime melt-up (a rally of 10% or more) is an increasing possibility,” he writes.
Maybe sideways isn’t so bad after all.
The Dow Gained 812 Points This Week. Why Investors Should Fear the Wrong Kind of Rally.
Everything’s gone sideways—and that might be good news for the stock market.
