BOSTON--( BUSINESS WIRE )--First paragraph, second and third sentences of release dated December 19, 2019, should read: "The fund will also pay a short-term capital gain distribution of $0.24 per share and a long-term capital gain distribution of $2.90 per share. The dividend and distributions will be paid on December 26, 2019 to shareholders of record at the close of business on December 23, 2019."
Fidelity Investments® announced today that the Fidelity® Nasdaq Composite Index® Tracking Stock Fund (NASDAQ: ONEQ) will pay a quarterly dividend of $0.88 per share from net investment income. The fund will also pay a short-term capital gain distribution of $0.24 per share and a long-term capital gain distribution of $2.90 per share. The dividend and distributions will be paid on December 26, 2019 to shareholders of record at the close of business on December 23, 2019. The ex-dividend date is December 20, 2019.
Fidelity’s mission is to inspire better futures and deliver better outcomes for the customers and businesses we serve. With assets under administration of $8.2 trillion, including discretionary assets of $3.1 trillion as of November 30, 2019, we focus on meeting the unique needs of a diverse set of customers: helping more than 30 million people invest their own life savings, 22,000 businesses manage employee benefit programs, as well as providing more than 13,500 financial advisory firms with investment and technology solutions to invest their own clients’ money. Privately held for more than 70 years, Fidelity employs more than 40,000 associates who are focused on the long-term success of our customers. For more information about Fidelity Investments, visit https://www.fidelity.com/about .
Before investing, consider the ETF’s investment objectives, risks, charges, and expenses. Contact Fidelity for a prospectus or, if available, a summary prospectus containing this information. Read it carefully.
ETFs may trade at a discount to their NAV and are subject to the market fluctuations of their underlying investments.
Past performance is no guarantee of future results.
Current and future portfolio holdings are subject to risk.
Differences between the index and the ETF's portfolio, as well as costs and expenses, may cause differences in performance.
The ETF is managed by Fidelity Management & Research Company. NASDAQ is the listing market; licensor of the index and provides marketing services for the ETF.
Consistent with its investment objective, the ETF may hire or terminate money managers at any time without prior shareholder approval. ETF shares are not individually redeemable from the fund. Shares, other than Creation Units, may be sold only through a broker and may be subject to brokerage commissions.
NASDAQ®, NASDAQ Composite®, and NASDAQ Composite Index® are registered trademarks of The NASDAQ OMX Group, Inc. (which with its Affiliates are the “Corporations”) and are licensed for use by Fidelity. The product(s) have not been passed on by the Corporations as to their legality or suitability. The product(s) are not issued, endorsed, or sold by the Corporations.
Fidelity, Fidelity Investments, Fidelity Investments and the Pyramid Design logo and ONEQ are registered service marks of FMR LLC.
