Read more: Dave Portnoy, the poster child of the day-trading boom, told us why he thinks Warren Buffett is 'past his prime' and was wrong to ditch airline stocks
Investors hoping for a smooth economic recovery got a welcome reading from IHS Markit's index of purchasing managers. The metric rose to 46.8 in June from 37 the previous month, the organization reported Tuesday morning. Though the index's highest level since March, it still sits just below the threshold of 50 that indicates whether an economy is growing or shrinking.
Surging tech names led indexes higher and pushed the Nasdaq composite to an intraday record. Apple stock hit an all-time high after revealing new software and plans to build its own computer chips at its Worldwide Developer Conference. Microsoft , Alphabet , and Facebook notched healthy gains as well.
Bank stocks closely followed the tech rally, with JPMorgan , Bank of America , and Citigroup all climbing.
Wirecard shares spiked as much as 45% following reports that former CEO Markus Braun was arrested on suspicion of false accounting. The German fintech company slid 56% at intraday lows on Monday after saying that $2 billion worth of missing cash likely didn't exist.
Futures contracts for major indexes initially on Monday evening after the White House trade adviser Peter Navarro told Fox News the US's trade agreement with China was "over." He cited "the lack of trust we now have in the Chinese Communist Party" and blamed the country for the coronavirus pandemic. Dow futures tanked roughly 400 points following Navarro's interview.
The trade adviser quickly walked back his comments, saying they were taken "wildly out of context" and "had nothing at all to do with the phase-one trade deal." President Donald Trump said in a tweet late Monday that the agreement was "fully intact." The comments helped erase futures-market losses, and the gains carried over into regular trading.
Oil erased gains after rising about 2% in early trading. West Texas Intermediate crude slid as much as 1.7%, to $39.76. Brent crude , the international benchmark, fell 2%, to $42.21, at intraday lows.
Read more: Dennis Lynch and Kristian Heugh run the best large-company stock funds of the last 10 years. The legendary investors break down the 5 principles that guide their quest for long-term growth.
Tuesday's upswing followed a less impactful session to start the week. The Dow rose 154 points on Monday as investors turned their focus to economic-reopening progress from risks of another surge in COVID-19 infections.
The popular stay-at-home plays Netflix, Zoom, and Peloton all hit record highs in the prior session as investors viewed rising coronavirus case counts as a harbinger of longer lockdowns. Gold reached its highest level in nearly eight years .
Now read more markets coverage from Markets Insider and Business Insider:
