"Lobbying is positively related to accounting and market measures of financial performance" on average, the paper continues.
The researchers discovered this by looking at lobbying spending by public companies "mainly" over the period 1998-2005 using data from Compustat. The firms that lobbied heavily raked in an additional 5.5% in stock returns "over the three years following portfolio formation," the report says.
Separately, I analyzed how the top lobbying spenders performed. The results were similar.
In 2013, the top publicly traded firms that lobbied were as follows: Northrop Grumman, Comcast, General Electric, AT&T, Alphabet, Boeing, Lockheed Martin, United Technologies, Verizon Communications and Exxon Mobil. The information was accessed via the OpenSecrets.org website .
I then looked at the performance of each stock over the next three years (2014 through 2016), constructed a portfolio with equal weights of each stock and looked at the combined gains. Without dividends, they rallied approximately 30% over the three-year period.
I chose the NYSE Composite Index as a benchmark to compare the results. The S&P 500 consists mostly of massive corporations that tend to spend more on lobbying than the average company, such as many of those in the composite index.
The result: $10,000 invested in the model portfolio would have outperformed $10,000 held in the index by more than 20 percentage points.
In 2016, the list of top lobbiers was similar. In comes Southern Company, Dow Chemical (which has now merged with DuPont) and FedEx. Out go Verizon, United Technologies, GE and Boeing. So those might be some to consider. Alternatively, wait until the data is complete for 2017, and take a look at that group.
Simon Constable | Author | Broadcaster | Journalist | Commentator | Speaker. Author of The Wall Street Journal's 'In Translation' column. Fellow at the Johns Hopkins
Simon Constable | Author | Broadcaster | Journalist | Commentator | Speaker. Author of The Wall Street Journal's 'In Translation' column. Fellow at the Johns Hopkins Institute for Applied Economics, Global Health and the Study of Business Enterprise. Former staffer for General Motors Treasurer's Office. MBA from Darden Graduate School of Business at The University of Virginia. MA New York University. MA (Hons) University of St. Andrews, Scotland. Co-author of the award-winning book The WSJ Guide to the 50 Economic Indicators that Really Matter. Have written for Middle East Eye, TheStreet.com, The South China Morning Post, Barron's, Dow Jones Newswires, MarketWatch.
