3 China Pro Digital Assets?
Firstly, Lee noted that the strength in the traditional equities market is likely to provide Bitcoin with some jet fuel heading into 2020.
For those unaware, last week the S&P 500 set an all-time high at 3,150, and the index has gained some 25% in the past year alone — likely one of the strongest years on record for the stock market. These gains have been reflected across the American stock market, meaning for the Dow Jones and the NYSE Composite indices as well.
Fundstrat believes that this strength in equities should set the stage for risk-tolerant investors to start siphoning capital back into Bitcoin and other markets deemed “risky” by classical investors. Just look at the chart below published by the firm earlier this year, which shows that there is a trend forming between strong performances in the price of Bitcoin and the S&P 500 index.
Secondly, Lee looked to the fact that the block reward reduction, also known as the “halving” or “halvening” in reference to the fact that Bitcoin’s inflation gets cut in half during these events, is coming up in six months’ time.
While prominent miners like Marco Streng and Jihan Wu are skeptical that this event will have any positive impact on the market, a price model co-opted by a German bank suggests that the halving will boost Bitcoin higher. Munich-based financial institution Bayerische Landesbank noted that once Bitcoin’s block reward reduction is cut in half next year, the cryptocurrency will have a fair valuation of $90,000 per coin, implying that “the forthcoming halving effect has hardly been priced into the current Bitcoin price of approximately USD 8,000.”
Lastly, Lee drew attention to the China narrative around blockchain and cryptocurrencies. While he did admit that the country has taken a harsh stance towards Bitcoin thus far, he noted that the authorities in China remain pro-digital assets because they are pro-blockchain.
He didn’t elaborate much on that point, but it was made seemingly in reference to the idea that the adoption of blockchain technologies should naturally lead people to Bitcoin and other decentralized digital assets.
