American Water Works three-year chart shows excellent investor support.
Turning to the broad market, it’s a lot harder to find strong positives, based on the charts. The best you can say is the S&P 500 and other broad indexes didn’t break down in August, and could be seen to be holding the floor over the 200-day moving averages. Do you want to be encouraged by this week’s overall rise? Sure, why not. Don't think too much about Friday’s holiday weekend volume making an insipid, failed attempt to push over the 50-day moving averages. That the week didn't end negatively, with all the extra time for bad news (and tweets) the holiday provides, is mildly positive.
August wasn't very encouraging for bulk of major equity indexes.
But weekly charts show the end of the month was largely a push for most broad indexes, with most showing inside bars – that is, all the trading action occurred within the high-low range of the prior week. That means bulls and bears weren't feeling aggressive. That will change.
If you’re just looking at August’s trends, signals are mixed – by Dow Theory the Transports and Industrials are confirming a downtrend now, but the broader NYSE Composite and Wilshire 5000 seemed to be firming above their 200-day moving averages lately.
It’s the end of summer though, and everyone loves summer, so let's think positively. Since the late 1980s August is on average the worst month of the trading year. And look at the longer charts, from the end of May to the end of August, the markets are basically up – as they are for the year – and the chartist's rule is the trend is intact until it isn't. So enjoy your long weekend, the market tends to go higher on the Tuesday after Labor Day, so says The Stock Trader’s Almanac .
I’ve called Carl Icahn more  than I can remember, split a bottle of wine with Gordon Getty three times and been cursed at by Leon Cooperman more than once. I’ve been
I’ve called Carl Icahn more  than I can remember, split a bottle of wine with Gordon Getty three times and been cursed at by Leon Cooperman more than once. I’ve been writing about investors, markets and economics through three booms and two busts for Forbes, Businessweek, and The Wall Street Journal, among dozens of other outlets. I'm a technical analyst (CFTe) and conduct proprietary research on markets, environmental-focused equities and large individual investors. I'm also Senior Editor at FitchInk, a thought-leadership and editorial shop that collaborates with leading executives and companies.
