Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
The sentiment data in 2020 so far has been mixed. The Bullish% from the American Association of Individual Investors survey did not go below 29.7% as the stock market was plunging made its March low. Until last week, that is, when it dropped 10 percentage-points to 24.9%. The Bullish% is typically much lower when the stock market reaches a low, and low Bullish% numbers often correlate with market lows.
On December 13, 2018, the Bullish% dropped to 20.9% from 37.9% the week before, (point 1). At the market lows in early October 2019 (point 2), it had a low of 20.3%. By January 25, 2020, it had risen to 45.6% which I did not think was a positive sign . The Bearish%, which I have found historically to be a less reliable market indicator, often hits high numbers around when we see market peaks. The Bearish% hit 52.1% on March 26, and after dropping to 42.8% on April 16, it has risen back to 50.0% last week.
Another popular measure of sentiment from Investors Intelligence measures the sentiment among investment newsletter writers. The sentiment among this group was was quite bearish in late March , but they have become less bearish in April. While bearishness has decreased, it is still well above the low levels seen prior to the market’s decline.
The strong close on Friday did seem to reassure investors as well as market commentators of the market's strength. However, the weekly performance table shows that only the SPDR Gold Shares (GLD) and iShares Russell 2000 (IWM) closed the week higher.
The Dow Jones Utility Average ($UTIL) was the weakest, down 3.5%, while the Dow Jones Industrials ($INDU) lost 1.9%. Even the market-leading Nasdaq 100 ($NDX) was lower last week. It could face a test from earnings this week.
As I reminded investors last week , Microsoft﻿, Apple﻿, Amazon﻿, Facebook, and Alphabet make up over 40% of the NDX. All of these companies report earnings this week. I expect earnings to be low, the question is how low? A middling earnings report could be positive for prices, but a particularly bad (or unconvincing) report may make it hard for investors to look past the economic abyss caused by the pandemic. NDX is now positive year-to-date, and it would likely take a decline below last week’s low of $203.63 to suggest that the rebound from the March lows was over.
In my study of bear market rallies and the advance/decline analysis , the NYSE Composite data has always been the most important. For the week, 1211 issues were advancing on the NYSE and 1825 declining. This was consistent with the 1.7% decline in the NYSE Composite.
The weekly chart shows that the NYSE Composite has failed so far to overcome the 50% resistance at 11,424, and also formed a doji last week.. As a reminder, a close above the key 61.8% resistance at 12,075 is needed to signal a change in the major trend.
The NYSE-All Advance/Decline line is still below its slightly declining weighted moving average (WMA). However, it would take a decline below the recent lows to indicate a further drop to new lows by the major averages.
The weekly starc- band is currently at 8575, which is 22% below Friday’s close. During the March decline, the NYSE dropped significantly below the starc- band, putting it deep into oversold territory. Its current position illustrates how far it has recovered.
The Technology Sector Select (XLK) rallied 2.12% on Friday but still closed the week down 0.71%. The daily chart shows what appears to be a rising wedge formation (lines a and b), which is typical of a rebound in a downtrend. The rising wedge is bearish pattern that begins with a wide trading range that contracts and narrows as the prices move higher. The resistance (line a) is currently just above $90. A close below Tuesday’s low at $83.64 would complete the formation to the downside.
The rally in XLK has been accompanied by declining volume (line c) which is not a sign of strength. The volume on Friday was one-sixth of the level seen at the March 23 low. The daily on-balance volume (OBV) is holding above its WMA, but is lagging the price action: it is well below the resistance from the first part of March. To support a negative outlook, the volume should increase on a drop in prices that breaks support.
Like last week, it is still my view that the rebound from the March low is setting the stage for another decline. The current rebound could last even a few weeks longer. Last week’s sharp pullback allows the rally to last longer. Therefore, I would continue to recommend that you use trailing stops on long positions and reduce your equity exposure. This will help you protect yourself from a more serious market decline.
In my Viper ETF Report and the Viper Hot Stocks Report , I update subscribers with my market analysis at least twice a week, and more often when the markets are volatile. I give specific advice on the long and short side of the market, and I will be watching any market rebound closely.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
