Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
There was continued discourse last week on the role of the new traders, like those who use Robinhood.com, on the current market. While a number of high-profile market veterans warned that these new traders couldn’t stay profitable, others claimed that such comments were just sour grapes. Time will tell.
After the prior week’s lower close, the focus last week was on the advance/decline data , which did hold up well last week. For the week, there were 1729 issues advancing on the NYSE, and just 1328 declining, so this is still a positive for the week ahead.
The Invesco QQQ Trust (QQQ) has had a fairly wide range over the past three weeks. Initial support is at $231.47 (last week's low), with further support at the rising 20-week exponential moving average (EMA) of $219.56. Initial resistance is at $247.82 (the all-time high, reached during the week of June 8), with further resistance at the weekly starc+ band at $266.23. Friday's high was $247, so I will be watching this week to see if the market moves higher.
The Nasdaq 100 Advance/Decline (A/D) line closed at a new high again last week. This continues to show a positive trend, as it is well above its weighted moving average (WMA). Ahead of the 3-month decline during the fall of 2018, it took several weeks of selling to drop the A/D line below its WMA. The weekly on-balance volume (OBV) reversed to positive last week as it closed back above its WMA.
The daily chart for the NYSE Composite shows the lower close on Friday. The Nasdaq Composite was the only major average to close up for the day. The NYSE close was just barely above the 20-day EMA, with next support at 11,500 (line a). The trading volume increased on Friday, suggesting there was significant selling.
The NYSE All Issues A/D line made a new high on June 8 (see arrow). It turned lower on Friday. Its next support is at its WMA, with further support at the uptrend (line b). While the NYSE All-Issues A/D line has surpassed its high from February, the NYSE Stocks-Only A/D Line has not (line c), showing a divergence. The Stocks-Only A/D line is still above its WMA, with more important support now at the uptrend (line d).
There are no accurate sentiment numbers for the new traders, as no system exists to survey them, and the more traditional sentiment numbers are mixed. The latest numbers from Investors Intelligence indicated that the high bullish readings had eased a bit.
The NAAIM Exposure Index, shown above, reflects how active money managers are positioned in the market. Although NAAIM insists that this index is not a forward-looking indicator, I have repeatedly commented on how it frequently diverges at market highs and lows, as noted in December 2018 (line c) and at the early 2020 (line d) highs. The Index is still rising and shows a positive trend, though it is approaching the highs from early in the year.
The Bullish% readings from the American Association of Individual Investors (AAII) have not acted in typical fashion so far in 2020, as I have pointed out previously . Last week, the Bullish% dropped 9.9 points to 24.4%, while the Bearish% rose 9.7 points to 47.8%. Despite the gains in the market from the March lows, these Bearish% numbers are still quite high. Whether this is a positive indicator or merely a reflection of the influx of unsurveyed (generally bullish) individual investors to the market remains to be seen.
The economic news last week was negative, but better than last month, which gave the market some encouragement. For example, the Philadelphia Manufacturing Index was -43.1 last month, and this month came in at 27.5, while the consensus was expecting -20. The Leading Economic Index was up 2.8%, after dropping 6.1% last month. As with the monthly jobs report it, will take several months of improving data to change the downward trends.
There are a number of new economic reports in the week ahead, but the focus for the market is likely to be on the dramatic increase in COVID-19 cases last week for some states. Hopefully, that will not continue, but if it does, it could impact many of the recovery stocks. It is clearly a mixed market, as some ETFs and stocks look good, while others do not. My advice: be selective and manage the risk.
In my Viper ETF Report and the Viper Hot Stocks Report , I update subscribers with market analysis twice per week, along with specific buy and sell advice. Each report is just $34.95 per month. New subscribers also receive six free trading lessons, a $49 value.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
