(GS) was down 8.6% on Friday, with volume almost three times greater than the daily average. The close was below the 20-week EMA and right on the support (line a). The next good support is in the $175-$180 area, with more important support at $164, which was the May low.
The weekly relative performance (RS) has dropped back below its WMA, indicating that Goldman Sachs is no longer outperforming the S&P 500. A drop below the support (line b) would be more negative. The weekly OBV dropped below its WMA a week ago, which should have been a warning of this past week’s decline.
A single stock is unlikely to predict overall market health, but can weakness in one sector drag the whole market lower?
The Financial Sector Select (XLF) had a March low of $17.38, and four weeks ago had a high of $26.66. XLF has now closed lower two out of the last three weeks. The uptrend from the lows (line a) is now being tested, with next support in the $21.50 area. In May, the low was $19.96.
The weekly RS was declined over the past four weeks, but is still above its 21-week EMA. The OBV looks weaker as it dropped back below its WMA, and failed to move back above former support, which is now resistance (line b). The closing weekly technical studies suggest lower prices next week.
If you look at the long term charts of XLF, you will notice that it peaked in May of 2007 at $23.55. The comparison chart from 2007-2008 shows that when the S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average peaked in October 2007 (line 1) the XLF only had a high of $22.50, a bearish divergence from the overall market. By the low in mid-January of 2008, XLF had dropped to a low at $15.21.
The chart shows that XLK (in green) peaked a few weeks after the SPY or the other major averages. The Health Care Select (XLV) (in purple) peaked with the overall market but then started to decline more sharply in early 2008.
During the bear market rally that peaked in late May of 2008 (line 2), the XLK led the market higher, but the Spyder Trust (SPY) also had a nice rebound before it dropped sharply in June. Until the March 2009 low (line 3), the XLF led the market lower. The SPY bottomed in March 2009. Leading up to this drop, the XLV and XLK did not decline nearly as sharply and rebounded stronger after the March bottom. Though the rebound in 2020 has been much stronger than the one in 2008, one should not be complacent.
The economic data again last week was negative, but many of the reports came in better than expected. The Q1 GDP was expected to come in at -5% and it did. Durable Goods beat estimates by over 5%. Consumer sentiment (at 78.1) was also better than expected while Consumer Spending was a bit weaker.
There is a full calendar this week with Chicago PMI and Consumer Confidence on Tuesday and the ADP employment report, ISM Manufacturing Report, and the FOMC minutes on Wednesday. With Friday’s holiday, we get the monthly jobs report and the unemployment rate on Thursday.
The yield on the 10 Year T-Note Index closed lower last week at 0.636%. The rebound four weeks ago failed at a high yield of 0.957%, which is now the key level of resistance to watch. There is converging resistance (lines a and b) at 1.283-1.397%. The weekly Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD) and MACD-Histogram turned positive four weeks ago but yields have not moved higher. Another decline in yields over the next two weeks could reverse the positive signals.
I have not been optimistic on the outlook for COVID-19 over the past month, and last week’s new case data raises more concerns. I hope to be wrong, but those who have nice profits on the long side should use stops and watch their positions closely.
Last week it was clearly a mixed market but after last week’s action the overall market is looking more vulnerable as the possibility of a deeper decline has increased.
In my Viper ETF Report and the Viper Hot Stocks Report , I update subscribers with market analysis twice per week, along with specific buy and sell advice. Each report is just $34.95 per month. New subscribers also receive six free trading lessons, a $49 value.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
