Written by Kelli McGrane, MS, RD on February 19, 2020 — Medically reviewed by Katherine Marengo LDN, R.D.
If you buy something through a link on this page, we may earn a small commission. How this works.
The ketogenic, or keto, diet is a very low carb, high fat diet that’s associated with several health benefits, including weight loss (
For those following this diet, protein bars can be a convenient, grab-and-go option when you need a quick meal or filling snack. However, finding a keto-friendly bar can be difficult because most protein bars are either too high in carbs or too low in fat.
Plus, even protein bars that meet the right criteria aren’t always healthy options, as they often contain large amounts of artificial ingredients, additives, and preservatives.
Still, if you look carefully, you can find protein bars that are both keto-friendly and nutritious. Alternatively, you can make them on your own.
Here are 10 healthy keto-friendly protein bars.
Specifically formulated for the keto diet, these protein bars come in five flavors, including cinnamon roll, salted caramel, and chocolate chip cookie dough.
Perfect Keto designs its bars to provide just 2–3 net carbs per bar, along with around 17 grams of fat and 11 grams of protein.
Keto-friendly bars like these regularly contain fiber and sugar alcohols , which your body can’t fully digest and absorb. Therefore, subtracting the grams of fiber and sugar alcohols from the total carbs gives you the number of net (digestible) carbs.
You’ll often see the number of net carbs highlighted on the packaging — though this value is likely lower than the number of total carbs listed among the nutritional information.
Perfect Keto bars have a relatively short ingredient list, which includes almond butter, tapioca fiber, cocoa butter, cashews, medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) oil, grass-fed collagen, and stevia.
While more research is needed, the fatty acids found in MCT oil may improve exercise performance and promote weight loss by reducing body fat (
