A good protein powder can help speed your metabolism and build muscle.
Protein is an essential part of the diet, and especially important for building muscle. How much you need depends on your activity level, diet overall, and more.
There's a huge variety of protein powders you can buy, from simple whey-based supplements to flavored plant-based varieties with added nutrients.
While different powders suit different people's wants and needs, one general rule of thumb is to steer clear of too much sugar , and to also be wary of artificial sweeteners.
Don't get all of your nutritional needs from shakes and supplements , which aren't well regulated. It's best to use them to add protein to an otherwise healthy diet of plenty of whole foods.
Shopping for protein powders can be exhausting even for a seasoned fitness enthusiast. The choices are endless: Whey or plant protein? Added nutrients or protein-only? Chocolate peanut butter or key lime pie?
But first, ask yourself: Do you even need a protein powder at all?
Most people, especially Americans, get plenty of protein from their diets without a supplement. It only takes 0.7 to 0.8 grams per pound of body weight for sedentary people to meet their daily recommended intakes. That's 87 to 100 grams of daily protein for a 125-pound person; a roasted chicken breast already gets you more than halfway there.
For athletes and very active people, though, a good protein powder taken correctly can help speed metabolism and build muscle, personal trainer Noam Tamir told Insider. When choosing one, there are some overarching principles to keep in mind.
First, make sure it doesn't have too much sugar. Some brands have more than 20 grams per serving , which is about what's in a typical scoop of ice cream. And the sugar it does have should ideally be natural, or substitutes like monk fruit or stevia, rather than artificial, which research suggests can pose problems in the long term.
Second, keep an eye on the serving size. Tamir said most people can't digest more than 30 grams of protein in a single serving, so avoid overloading a single shake. Instead, add shakes to a diet that already has plenty of whole food proteins. For athletes, Tamir said it's important to get protein throughout the day at regular intervals, combined with healthy carbs and fats.
Finally, he said, don't fall for the myth that your post-workout shake has to be pure protein — some carbs and other nutrients can help you recover faster.
Here are some popular, widely available protein powders and how they stack up in nutritional content.
The brand is top-rated on Amazon.
The Gold Standard is a top-rated product on Amazon and elsewhere and comes in a huge variety of flavors like banana creme, chocolate peanut butter, and key lime pie.
It also has other nutrients like branch-chain amino acids, or BCAAs, which can improve recovery and support muscle-building .
The brand does have artificial sweeteners. Sucralose is a calorie-free substance chemically extracted from sugar and 400 to 700 times sweeter than sugar. Research is mixed on whether it has side effects in humans — it may spike blood sugar and insulin levels or cause digestive problems in some cases, but it's regarded as safe for most people.
Acesulfame, the other sweetener in this and some other protein powders, is 200 times sweeter than sugar and isn't broken down in the body, so just passes out through the urine. The FDA considers it safe in reasonable amounts. You'd have to drink more than 20 cans of diet soda a day to exceed the recommended daily limit, according to Medical News Today .
Whey is easily absorbed in the body.
