We include products we think are useful for our readers. If you buy through links on this page, we may earn a small commission. Here’s our process.
Countless options of peanut butter are available on grocery store shelves today, but not all of them are created equal when it comes to healthiness.
Certain types are rich in unsaturated fats, protein, and fiber with minimal additives, while others are high in added sugar and ingredients that make them less healthy.
You may wonder what the healthiest choices are when it comes to peanut butter.
This article explains how to choose a healthy peanut butter and lists 6 of the healthiest options.
What makes a healthy peanut butter?
A good rule of thumb for choosing a healthy peanut butter is to look for one with the fewest ingredients.
Peanut butter is a relatively unprocessed food that only requires one ingredient — peanuts. They’re typically roasted and ground into a paste to make the final product.
However, one-ingredient peanut butter can be difficult to find unless you grind it yourself. Most commercial peanut butters contain at least peanuts and salt — and oftentimes a slew of other ingredients.
Less healthy products may contain added sugar and partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, which offer extra calories and potentially adverse health effects. For example, eating too much added sugar or hydrogenated fats may increase your risk of heart disease (
Even some natural and organic peanut butters include these unhealthy ingredients, making it important to read the ingredient panel .
The healthiest commercial peanut butters contain minimal ingredients, starting with peanuts and sometimes salt. Less healthy varieties often contain hydrogenated vegetable oils and added sugar.
Below are 6 healthy traditional peanut butter brands, in no particular order.
This brand offers creamy and crunchy peanut butter, both of which contain only one ingredient.
Shop for creamy and crunchy versions of Crazy Richard’s peanut butter online.
2. 365 Everyday Value Organic Peanut Butter, Unsweetened & No Salt
Note that this brand also has a creamy, unsweetened variety that contains palm oil and sea salt .
Shop for 365 Everyday Value Organic Peanut Butter online.
3. Trader Joe’s Creamy No Salt Organic Peanut Butter, Valencia
Note that this brand offers several peanut butter products, including no-stir peanut butter spreads that contain powdered sugar . Some of the other Valencia peanut butters also contain added salt.
Both the creamy and crunchy unsalted varieties of this product only contain peanuts.
Shop for both the unsalted creamy and crunchy versions online.
When choosing this brand, look for peanut butter that has the organic label and specifically states “stir & enjoy.” Several other products from this brand contain palm oil and sugar, including some labeled “natural” and “organic no-stir.”
Ingredients: 100% organic dry roasted peanuts, salt
Be sure to search for the “stir & enjoy” variety if you want to avoid palm oil and other ingredients.
This brand offers both dark and light roasted varieties that come in creamy or crunchy versions and contain minimal ingredients. You may want to avoid “no-stir” varieties, as these contain palm oil.
Shop for Santa Cruz Organic Peanut Butter online.
6 healthy peanut butters are listed above. They contain minimal ingredients and are made without extra additives that offer no health benefits.
Palm oil has a neutral flavor, and its main purpose is to prevent the natural separation of oils in the product. Although palm oil isn’t a hydrogenated trans fat, there may be other concerns associated with its use and consumption.
There are also some indirect public health effects of palm oil. Clearing forests for palm oil production causes air pollution that increases instances of skin, eye, and respiratory disease among nearby populations. It also releases greenhouse gases and destroys the habitats of at-risk species (
Peanut butters that contain palm oil may not be quite as healthy as those that only contain peanuts and salt, but here are some options if you prefer a no-stir variety.
Ingredients: Dry roasted organic peanuts, organic expeller pressed palm oil, sea salt
These peanut butters use a small amount of palm oil, which may be worth your consideration, but still offer many health benefits.
Palm oil is used as the second ingredient in several healthier peanut butter brands. Although research is mixed around the heart-health effects of palm oil, its production has indirect consequences that may be worth considering.
Powdered peanut butter is a newer category. It’s made by removing most of the natural oils from peanuts — a process called defatting — and then grinding the peanuts into a powder. You can then rehydrate the powder with water.
This results in a peanut butter with fewer calories, fat, and carbs, despite a small amount of added sugar in some products. However, powdered peanut butter also offers a bit less protein and a lot less unsaturated fat than traditional peanut butter.
Here are two powdered peanut butter brands that can be a healthy part of your diet.
Powdered peanut butter can still be a healthy option despite having a slightly different nutritional profile than traditional peanut butter.
Powdered peanut butters can be a healthy option if you’re looking for a peanut butter with fewer calories. However, they also have lower amounts of other healthy nutrients like protein or unsaturated fat, and some contain a small amount of added sugar.
Some peanut butter varieties are healthier than others.
Look for peanut butter that contains minimal ingredients, ideally just peanuts and possibly salt. Avoid peanut butter that contains added sugar or hydrogenated vegetable oils.
Peanut butters that contain palm oil and powdered peanut butters can still be a part of a healthy diet, but they come with some other health considerations when choosing which peanut butter is best for you.
Be sure to look at the ingredient list and nutrition panel on the peanut butter jar to identify exactly what it contains.
Whichever peanut butter you choose, remember to eat it in moderation as part of an overall balanced diet that’s full of nutritious whole foods.
Last medically reviewed on  May 15, 2020
Written by Lauren Panoff, MPH, RD on May 15, 2020 — Medically reviewed by Kathy W. Warwick, R.D., CDE
