6 sugar stocks jump over 20% in two months. Are they a good bet?
Earlier in March, the government announced a soft loan of Rs 12,900 crore for sugar mills to create ethanol capacity.
Last Updated at March 20, 2019 08:26 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
As many as six stocks from the sugar sector, including names such as Dhampur Sugar Mills, Avadh Sugar & Energy and Uttam Sugar Mills have climbed over 20 per cent in the last two months, thanks to an array of government initiatives to boost the sector. Earlier in March, the government announced a soft loan of Rs 12,900 crore for sugar mills to create ethanol capacity.
In addition, the government said a separate soft loan of Rs 2,600 crore will be provided to molasses-based standalone distilleries to augment capacity and set up new units. A soft loan is a loan that is given at a ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
