While Nancy’s makes sweetened soy yogurt as well, this version has 9 grams of added sugar in the same serving size.
You can find Nancy’s soy yogurt at several supermarkets and grocery stores.
Nancy’s plain unsweetened soy yogurt is made from organic soybeans, a good source of plant-based protein. It also contains live active cultures.
Although vegan yogurts are increasingly easy to find in the store, you can also make your own using just a few simple ingredients. Two recipes are detailed below.
Blend coconut milk and vanilla until smooth. Open the probiotic capsule(s) and gently mix in. Allow it to thicken in the refrigerator and store for up to 5 days.
Blend all ingredients, except the probiotic capsule(s), until smooth. Then sprinkle in the contents of the capsule(s) and gently stir. Let it thicken in the fridge and keep for up to 5 days.
It’s easy to make your own vegan yogurt with just a few ingredients. You’ll want to let your mixture cool and thicken in the fridge before eating it.
Vegan yogurts can vary significantly in ingredients and quality, making it vital to know what to look for when shopping.
To choose the best vegan yogurt for your needs, keep these tips in mind:
Avoid added sugar by choosing unsweetened yogurts. You can add your own sweetener, such as fruit or maple syrup , if you desire.
Keep an eye out for vegan labels to ensure that your yogurt doesn’t harbor any animal products.
Choose a variety with a minimal number of ingredients. You don’t need much more than a plant milk base, live and active cultures, and natural flavorings or thickening agents.
Consider nutrient content. For example, if you want an extra boost of protein or vitamin B12, check the label for these added nutrients.
When shopping for vegan yogurt, it’s important to read product labels and select varieties without added sugar. You may also want to choose those that have minimal ingredients and have been certified as vegan.
Vegan yogurt made from plant-based sources, such as peas, soy, coconut, cashews, and almonds, can be a healthy addition to your diet.
The best ones tend to contain no added sugar and plenty of protein, as well as live and active cultures.
The options in this list are sure to satisfy your cravings for a wholesome, creamy snack .
Last medically reviewed on  March 12, 2020
Written by Lauren Panoff, MPH, RD on March 12, 2020 — Medically reviewed by Jillian Kubala, MS, RD
