Oh my gosh. I’m really so excited to get this chance to talk to you in the middle of a pandemic.
Yeah. It’s a once in a lifetime.
I’m in Corralitos, California. So we’re just between Santa Cruz and Watsonville — so kind of up on a hillside. And from the front of our house, you can see Watsonville and some of the ocean.
Wow. So you’re looking out over — do you see trees? Do you see houses? What do you see?
Well, we’re up in Redwoods, and so we see that. And then if you look far enough out, there’s berry fields. And then beyond that, kind of dimly, there’s the city of Watsonville. So it’s really beautiful. And you’d never know there was a problem.
Yeah I was staying off media so much, and then I got back on it. And I just was kind of stunned by the numbers that they’re talking about now. And I just can’t imagine 100,000 people. That’s just literally beyond my capacity to imagine it. And it’s such a weird disconnect to have that in your head and your heart and then look outside and everything looks, from this perspective, normal. It’s really strange.
Yeah. There is this sense we’ve been lucky not to be sick, at least yet. But beyond us, there are really painful and hard and difficult things happening to a lot of people around the globe. And that, to me, I have to say, has been terrifying. And it’s been distracting. And I’m curious how you’ve been responding to that emotionally.
Well, I think in some ways, I don’t know, it’s always happening. There is always misery. But I also think I’ve noticed about myself that in times like this, my mind wants to have answers for everything. It wants to have a take on things to give myself comfort. I think of it like when you slip on the ice and in the split second before you’re about to hit the ground, that’s really having no take. You’re just out of control and the pavement’s rushing up. So I think sometimes you just go, yeah, we’re in that moment. We can pretend we can stop time and have a take on hitting the pavement or being mindful as we hit the pavement. But in fact, it’s really unknown what’s happening. And I think, especially for writers, us type A people, it’s kind of difficult to be in a state where you just say I really don’t know what’s going on I have no control over it and no say over it and actually, very little influence at this point. That’s a strange set of thoughts for anybody to have. But I think maybe for those of us who interpret for a living, it’s especially both confusing and important, I think, to say, yeah, we don’t know. We have to keep our sensory apparatus as open as we can so we don’t miss any actual data. And to do that in the face of one’s own anxiety is kind of difficult.
It is. And as you’re talking, you’re reminding me, you told me about an email you wrote to your graduate students at Syracuse University, and I’m wondering if you could read to me what you wrote to them.
Oh. Sure. Sure. No, I’d be happy to. Yeah, it just goes like this. Dear, S.U. writers — jeez, what a hard and depressing and scary time, so much suffering and anxiety everywhere. I saw this bee happily buzzing around a flower yesterday and felt like, “Moron! If you only knew.” But it also occurs to me that this is when the world needs our eyes and ears and minds. This has never happened before here — at least not since 1918. We are, and especially you are, the generation that is going to have to help us make sense of this and recover afterwards. What new forms might you invent to fictionalize an event like this, where all of the drama is happening in private, essentially? Are you keeping records of the emails and texts you’re getting, the thoughts you’re having, the way your hearts and minds are reacting to this strange new way of living? It’s all important. 50 years from now, people the age you are now won’t believe this ever happened or will do the sort of eye roll we all do when someone tells us about something crazy that happened in 1960. What will convince that future kid is what you are able to write about this. And what you’re able to write about it will depend on how much sharp attention you’re paying now and what records you keep, also, I think with how open you can keep your heart. I’m trying to practice feeling something like, ah, so this is happening now. Or hmm, so this, too, is part of life on Earth — did not know that, universe. Thanks so much, stinker. And then I real quick tried to pretend I didn’t just call the universe a stinker. I did a piece once where I went to live incognito in a homeless camp in Fresno for a week. Very intense, but the best thing I heard in there was from this older guy from Guatemala, who was always saying, “Everything is always keep changing.” Truer words were never spoken. It’s only when we expect solidity, non-change, that we get taken by surprise. And we always expect solidity, no matter how well we know better. Well, this is all sounding a little preachy, and let me confess that I’m not taking my own advice — at all. It’s all happening so fast. Paula has what we are hoping is just a bad cold, and I’m doing a lot of inept caregiving. Our dogs can feel that something weird is going on — no walk? Again? But I guess what I’m trying to say is that the world is like a sleeping tiger, and we tend to live our lives there on its back. We’re much smaller than the tiger, obviously. We’re like Barbies and Kens on the back of a tiger. Now and then, that tiger wakes up, and that is terrifying. Sometimes it wakes up when someone we love dies or someone breaks our heart or there’s a pandemic. But this is far from the first time that tiger has come awake. He she has been doing it since the beginning of time and will never stop doing it. And always, there have been writers to observe it and later make some sort of sense of it — or at least bear witness to it. It’s good for the world for a writer to bear witness, and it’s good for the writer too, especially if she can bear witness with love and humor and, despite it all, some fondness for the world, just as it is manifesting — warts and all. All of this to say, there’s still work to be done, and now more than ever. There is a beautiful story about the Russian poet Anna Akhmatova. Her husband was shot and her son arrested during the Stalinist purges. One day, she was standing outside the prison with hundreds of other women in similar situations. It’s Russian cold, and they have to go there every day, wait for hours in this big, open yard, then get the answer that today and every day, there will be no news. But every day, they keep coming back. A woman, recognizing her as the famous poet, says, poet, can you write this? And Akhmatova thinks about it for a second and goes, yes. I wish you all the best during this crazy period. Someday soon, things will be back to some sort of normal, and it will be easier to be happy again. I believe this, and I hope it for each one of you. I look forward to seeing you all again and working with you, and even in time, with sufficient PPE, give you a handshake or a hug. Please feel free to email anytime for any reason, George.
George, that’s so beautiful. I mean, I know it’s been now a couple decades, really — has it been that long since I was your student?
But I feel like you wrote that to me. And I love this — how do you say her name — Akhmotiv —
Akhmatova. I love how Akhmatova says — or the person standing with her says, poet, can you write this? And she says, I can. And I think, obviously, that is our job as writers, and it’s the job of the artist to write that moment. It has been through all time, and it will be through all time. And I think that that also translates outside of the arts. It translates to, really, every human on the planet who has something to contribute about the story of us. And I think that that’s what’s so powerful about that moment of that understanding that, yes, we can bear witness, as you say. We don’t have to be a novelist. We don’t have to be a poet. We can do that even as a person.
Yeah. And also you get the feeling that she — I think you’re actually right. I think she says, I can. I don’t have the text in front of me. But the beauty of that is to say, I hear her saying, I think I can. I think I can try. And that idea that if you’re going to describe a moment like that, you’d really have to sort of keep moving the fences out. That’s a beautiful story, because she includes the woman who’s interrogating her. If she had just stopped at describing the weather in the jail, somehow it’s not the full reality. So I think that, for me, is a beautiful challenge is to keep saying everything that you think or feel or perceive, even if it seems totally trivial, might be part of the larger picture. It might be that in 100 years — or not 100 years, but say when we’re old people, you look back and it might be some totally trivial detail that actually encapsulates the whole thing. But you won’t know until you get there. And to know, you have to record it along the way, I guess.
So this idea — one thing I’m struck by that both of us keep sort of circling around and saying, this control. And I think both of us as writers who have invented characters and made them do things, we know that, actually, this idea that we can control really anything is just an absolute illusion. And yet, it’s incredibly hard for us to wrap our minds around, right? How are you absorbing that reality that you don’t know if you’re going to be able to go hang out with your friends in a month. You don’t know if you’re going to be able to do that in six months. We don’t really know when we can all make plans again. So I’m wondering, what sense do you make of that?
Well, for me what’s interesting is I was really enjoying canceling things. Even before the pandemic, I was just like, I’m going to say no to everything. And I was getting a little bit ecstatic about that — that I could just be a family person and sit in my room and write. And I’m like, that’s what I really want to do anyway. So in a way, it’s weird, I’m still kind of in the place where, for most things, the canceling of plans doesn’t really make me very anxious. Except the one weird thing is I can’t see my parents or my kids. And that bothers me, because they’re both in different cities — my kids aren’t. So that’s bad. But actually, I think it just caught me at a funny moment where I’m happy to stay home. And then I think for me, the control thing has to do with it’s a personality disorder that I have. I found a way, I think, in my work to use it kind of beneficially. In that little world, you’re absolutely responsible for controlling every line. I think that’s what I’m finding out. I don’t know if that resonates with what happens when you write.
Well, and I think too, there is this sense of — I don’t know, there’s something about paying attention too. When you’re writing, you’re so focused. And that has been one of the primary challenges for me is distraction, I find that it’s very hard to focus unless I become absorbed in something. And writing surely does that. But what about other stuff? Are you baking bread and taking up new things? Or are you and Paula just laying low?
Well, I mean, Paula has been a little sick. So I’ve been kind of the inept caregiver, as I said in that letter. And that’s been going on about eight or nine days. And so I really was working pretty well. But now I had a story in The New Yorker, so I closed that and did some of the peripheral stuff. But I’ve just been kind of cooking and cleaning in my comical American male way. So the thing I’m starting to notice — just micro notice — is I think I’m a little reliant on that state of concentration that you’re talking about. That when you go into a story, what it feels like to me as I’m just obsessing over the small details of the text. I’m starting to think that that’s some kind of neurological state that’s akin to, but not exactly equal to, meditation. And it really makes me happy in a kind of not euphoric, but it makes me solid. It makes me a little more positive as a person. But having found out the writing in that state of mind increases my happiness, then it’s kind of my responsibility to get into that more — as much as I can.
Yeah. Yeah. And we’re doing some prayers during this. And yeah, so that’s been part of our lives for a long time and a very reliable one. And that’s one of the things about this moment that is interesting is that the anxiety that we’re talking about is basically people saying, I want things to be the way they were. I want to live. I want to not be sick. I want to not have to worry about getting somebody else sick. I want to go to a bar. But really, what occurs to me is, why? What was it that you want to do once you are free again? And for most of us — I think for me, it’s just, I want to assume my old habits. Why? Because they assuage my anxiety, essentially. And so it does present a little bit of a moment to look afresh it what we do with our energy when we’re healthy. And I know this is a trivial example — we live kind of about half an hour out of town. So it’s kind of a big trip to go into the store. But we go just about every day, I would say — just out of habit. Well this last period, we haven’t been in two weeks. And we’re eating better probably, you know? So it does make me think so many of the ways that we live are kind of just lazy and habitual from that small example to the larger things. So I’m trying to be optimistic and think that maybe each of us having a little enforced spring break and if we’re healthy, god willing, it might make us look a little differently at the American life that we all live — the innate laziness and violence of it and the habitual part of it — that most of us just accepted and try to make the best of it. So maybe a little bit of a breather for the world to go, wait a minute. What are we doing? That would be nice. We’ll see.
I think you’re really right. I think you might remember that I grew up in rural Minnesota without running water or electricity or indoor plumbing. And my mom was really this incredibly kind of self-sufficient person and my stepfather, incredibly self-sufficient, grew a lot of our food. And she preserved and canned and pickled everything. She baked bread. She knew how to do everything in the domestic realm. And I refused to learn any of that, because I wanted to. Because I didn’t want to be a domestic goddess. I wanted to be a great American writer. And I wanted to sort of mark my space in a place that wasn’t traditionally sort of defined for women. But, boy, have I thought about my mom so much in these last couple of weeks where I am not getting dinner from the grocery store kind of deli counter. And I have these old books of my mom’s — Stocking Up and these kind of food preservation books. And I’m opening them for the first time. And so that’s been kind of interesting. And you’re right, it’s been a little bit of a corrective, because I don’t necessarily want to be somebody who has to spend two hours making dinner every night. But it’s kind of been good for me to have to stretch in that direction.
Yeah, that’s a beautiful story. It’s almost like your family kind of enacted the last 80 years of American history in one generation, where at some point, people could do all that stuff. And then I remember as a kid in Chicago, it was so cool to get Jello or to go to Burger King. It just seemed like canning your own food was so last century. But yeah, no, that’s a beautiful — that’s a beautiful idea.
