Simply Wall St April 23, 2020
Those holding Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries ( NSE:DALMIASUG ) shares must be pleased that the share price has rebounded 33% in the last thirty days. But unfortunately, the stock is still down by 50% over a quarter. But shareholders may not all be feeling jubilant, since the share price is still down 44% in the last year.
Assuming no other changes, a sharply higher share price makes a stock less attractive to potential buyers. In the long term, share prices tend to follow earnings per share, but in the short term prices bounce around in response to short term factors (which are not always obvious). So some would prefer to hold off buying when there is a lot of optimism towards a stock. Perhaps the simplest way to get a read on investors’ expectations of a business is to look at its Price to Earnings Ratio (PE Ratio). A high P/E ratio means that investors have a high expectation about future growth, while a low P/E ratio means they have low expectations about future growth.
How Does Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s P/E Ratio Compare To Its Peers?
We can tell from its P/E ratio of 2.89 that sentiment around Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries isn’t particularly high. The image below shows that Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries has a lower P/E than the average (11.7) P/E for companies in the food industry.
This suggests that market participants think Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries will underperform other companies in its industry. Many investors like to buy stocks when the market is pessimistic about their prospects. If you consider the stock interesting, further research is recommended. For example, I often monitor director buying and selling .
When earnings fall, the ‘E’ decreases, over time. That means unless the share price falls, the P/E will increase in a few years. So while a stock may look cheap based on past earnings, it could be expensive based on future earnings.
Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s earnings per share grew by 7.6% in the last twelve months. And it has bolstered its earnings per share by 159% per year over the last five years. But earnings per share are down 2.2% per year over the last three years.
The ‘Price’ in P/E reflects the market capitalization of the company. In other words, it does not consider any debt or cash that the company may have on the balance sheet. Theoretically, a business can improve its earnings (and produce a lower P/E in the future) by investing in growth. That means taking on debt (or spending its cash).
Spending on growth might be good or bad a few years later, but the point is that the P/E ratio does not account for the option (or lack thereof).
How Does Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s Debt Impact Its P/E Ratio?
Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries has net debt worth 97% of its market capitalization. This is enough debt that you’d have to make some adjustments before using the P/E ratio to compare it to a company with net cash.
Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries has a P/E of 2.9. That’s below the average in the IN market, which is 10.3. The meaningful debt load is probably contributing to low expectations, even though it has improved earnings recently. What is very clear is that the market has become less pessimistic about Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries over the last month, with the P/E ratio rising from 2.2 back then to 2.9 today. For those who like to invest in turnarounds, that might mean it’s time to put the stock on a watchlist, or research it. But others might consider the opportunity to have passed.
When the market is wrong about a stock, it gives savvy investors an opportunity. If the reality for a company is not as bad as the P/E ratio indicates, then the share price should increase as the market realizes this. So this free report on the analyst consensus forecasts could help you make a master move on this stock.
Of course you might be able to find a better stock than Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries. So you may wish to see this free collection of other companies that have grown earnings strongly.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
