A Rising Share Price Has Us Looking Closely At K.M. Sugar Mills Limited’s (NSE:KMSUGAR) P/E Ratio
Simply Wall St January 2, 2020
K.M. Sugar Mills ( NSE:KMSUGAR ) shareholders are no doubt pleased to see that the share price has had a great month, posting a 31% gain, recovering from prior weakness. Longer term shareholders are no doubt thankful for the recovery in the share price, since it’s pretty much flat for the year, even after the recent pop.
Assuming no other changes, a sharply higher share price makes a stock less attractive to potential buyers. While the market sentiment towards a stock is very changeable, in the long run, the share price will tend to move in the same direction as earnings per share. The implication here is that deep value investors might steer clear when expectations of a company are too high. One way to gauge market expectations of a stock is to look at its Price to Earnings Ratio (PE Ratio). A high P/E ratio means that investors have a high expectation about future growth, while a low P/E ratio means they have low expectations about future growth.
View our latest analysis for K.M. Sugar Mills
Does K.M. Sugar Mills Have A Relatively High Or Low P/E For Its Industry?
We can tell from its P/E ratio of 3.49 that sentiment around K.M. Sugar Mills isn’t particularly high. We can see in the image below that the average P/E (13.5) for companies in the food industry is higher than K.M. Sugar Mills’s P/E.
NSEI:KMSUGAR Price Estimation Relative to Market, January 2nd 2020
Its relatively low P/E ratio indicates that K.M. Sugar Mills shareholders think it will struggle to do as well as other companies in its industry classification. Many investors like to buy stocks when the market is pessimistic about their prospects. It is arguably worth checking if insiders are buying shares , because that might imply they believe the stock is undervalued.
If earnings fall then in the future the ‘E’ will be lower. Therefore, even if you pay a low multiple of earnings now, that multiple will become higher in the future. Then, a higher P/E might scare off shareholders, pushing the share price down.
It’s great to see that K.M. Sugar Mills grew EPS by 18% in the last year. Unfortunately, earnings per share are down 9.1% a year, over 3 years.
Don’t forget that the P/E ratio considers market capitalization. That means it doesn’t take debt or cash into account. The exact same company would hypothetically deserve a higher P/E ratio if it had a strong balance sheet, than if it had a weak one with lots of debt, because a cashed up company can spend on growth.
Such spending might be good or bad, overall, but the key point here is that you need to look at debt to understand the P/E ratio in context.
How Does K.M. Sugar Mills’s Debt Impact Its P/E Ratio?
K.M. Sugar Mills has net debt worth a very significant 259% of its market capitalization. This level of debt justifies a relatively low P/E, so remain cognizant of the debt, if you’re comparing it to other stocks.
The Bottom Line On K.M. Sugar Mills’s P/E Ratio
K.M. Sugar Mills trades on a P/E ratio of 3.5, which is below the IN market average of 13.4. The company may have significant debt, but EPS growth was good last year. If it continues to grow, then the current low P/E may prove to be unjustified. What we know for sure is that investors are becoming less uncomfortable about K.M. Sugar Mills’s prospects, since they have pushed its P/E ratio from 2.7 to 3.5 over the last month. For those who like to invest in turnarounds, that might mean it’s time to put the stock on a watchlist, or research it. But others might consider the opportunity to have passed.
Investors should be looking to buy stocks that the market is wrong about. If the reality for a company is not as bad as the P/E ratio indicates, then the share price should increase as the market realizes this. Although we don’t have analyst forecasts you could get a better understanding of its growth by checking out this more detailed historical graph of earnings, revenue and cash flow.
You might be able to find a better buy than K.M. Sugar Mills. If you want a selection of possible winners, check out this free list of interesting companies that trade on a P/E below 20 (but have proven they can grow earnings).
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
