Excessive sugar and calorie content of ‘out of home’ waffles, pancakes, pretzels and crepes are not labelled sufficiently when compared to similar products in supermarkets, a survey by Action on Sugar reveals.
Although waffles, pancakes, pretzels and crepes are included in the Morning Goods category, Action on Sugar has revealed they all lack details of sugar and calorie content on their labelling.
Morning Goods is part of the 2016 Public Health England sugar reduction strategy that hopes to, by 2020, reduce overall sugar content in products by 20 percent.
Action on Sugar is now calling for the Government to enforce mandatory colour-coded nutrition and calorie labelling on menus in restaurants and street vendors, as well as online, with a goal to help meet the 2020 target.
The survey conducted included 191 products from food-vending establishments. The products consisted of 94 crepes, 12 pancakes, 16 pretzels and 69 waffles (with toppings). Of these, only 70 products provided full nutritional information in store or online.
Some chains such as Creams, Kaspa’s Desserts, The Breakfast Club, Snowflakes Gelato, Wafflemeister, Auntie Anne’s and Mr. pretzels provide no nutritional information on their menus whatsoever, according to the report. Action on Sugar commissioned testing of 35 samples from these chains and discovered excessive rates of sugar, salt and calories.
Other chains such as Harvester, McDonald’s and Marks & Spencer’s Café do include nutritional information on their website, but not all provide this on their in-store menus, the report highlighted.
To provide a comparison, Action on Sugar conducted a survey of the same products (crepes, waffles, pancakes and pretzels) in supermarkets. The survey included 84 products: seven crepes, four pretzels, 22 waffles and 51 pancakes.
The research revealed that the products contained far less calories, sugar and salt. Action on Sugar pointed out that this proves reformulation of these products is possible. The waffle found in the supermarket with the most calories was said to include less than a quarter of the calories of the highest waffle sold out of home.
Registered Nutritionist Dr Kawther Hashem, Campaign Lead at Action on Sugar based at Queen Mary University of London, said: “It is absurd that supermarkets are forced to be as transparent as possible about what they put in their products, from allergens to calories, but when eating out we often have no idea what is in our food and drink. If companies continue to hide their nutrition information, there is little hope for consumers to find the healthier options. The Health Minister, Matt Hancock MP, needs to act now to resolve this unfair situation.”
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed .
New Food is published by:
This website uses cookies to enable, optimise and analyse site operations, as well as to provide personalised content and allow you to connect to social media. By clicking "I agree" you consent to the use of cookies for non-essential functions and the related processing of personal data. You can adjust your cookie and associated data processing preferences at any time via our "Cookie Settings". Please view our Cookie Policy to learn more about the use of cookies on our website.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as "Necessary" are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functional...
Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.
This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Analytics".
This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary".
This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent WordPress Plugin. The cookie is used to remember the user consent for the cookies under the category "Performance".
This cookie is native to PHP applications. The cookie is used to store and identify a users' unique session ID for the purpose of managing user session on the website. The cookie is a session cookies and is deleted when all the browser windows are closed.
The cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data.
This session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls whether you are able to see content which is only available to logged in users.
The cookie is set by CloudFare. The cookie is used to identify individual clients behind a shared IP address and apply security settings on a per-client basis. It does not correspond to any user ID in the web application and does not store any personally identifiable information.
Performance cookies are includes cookies that deliver enhanced functionalities of the website, such as caching. These cookies do not store any personal information.
This cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and, in conjunction with the cookie 'cf_use_ob', is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.
This cookie is set by Cloudflare content delivery network and is used to determine whether it should continue serving “Always Online” until the cookie expires.
This session cookie is served by our membership/subscription system and controls which types of content you are able to access.
This cookie is set by Litespeed Server and allows the server to store settings to help improve performance of the site.
This cookie is set by OneSignal push notifications and is used for storing user preferences in connection with their notification permission status.
Analytics cookies collect information about your use of the content, and in combination with previously collected information, are used to measure, understand, and report on your usage of this website.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn. The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn and is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.
This cookie is set by LinkedIn share Buttons and ad tags.
We embed videos from our official Vimeo channel. When you press play, Vimeo will drop third party cookies to enable the video to play and to see how long a viewer has watched the video. This cookie does not track individuals.
This cookie is set by Spotler and tracks an anonymous visitor ID.
This cookie is set by Spotler and enables it to track the Load Balance Session Queue.
This cookie is set by Spotler to track the Internet Information Services (IIS) session state.
This cookie is set by Spotler and stores the UTM values for the session. UTM values are specific text strings that are appended to URLs that allow Communigator to track the URLs and the UTM values when they get clicked on.
This cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. It stores information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors.
This cookies is set by Google Universal Analytics to throttle the request rate to limit the collection of data on high traffic sites.
This cookie is set by Google Analytics and is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visited in an anonymous form.
