PEAK agricultural lobby group AgForce is likely to add sugar cane as its fourth commodity after the board agreed to accept members from the industry.
The in-principle decision is pending on the outcome of a vote from members of the Burdekin-based Invicta Combined Growers' Organisation, who asked AgForce to add a cane commodity.
It will be the first time AgForce has added a new commodity in 20 years.
AgForce general president Georgie Somerset said that if all conditions were met and ICGO members supported the arrangement, ICGO would transition to become AgForce Cane and its members join as the founding cane cohort.
"The issue was considered very thoroughly, with benefit to our existing members at the forefront of our deliberations," Mrs Somerset said.
"We undertook an honest and comprehensive conversation with members and industry, and are confident that the overwhelming majority of our members support the move and the very real benefits it will afford."
But Mrs Somerset acknowledged the decision was not popular with all members.
Mrs Somerset said the proposal offered the opportunity for a strengthened voice to speak on behalf of agriculture to the community and governments.
But the sugar industry's dominant organisation Canegrowers chairman Paul Schembri dismissed the notion that the move would provide a stronger voice.
"While we are not surprised, it doesn't dismiss how very disappointed we as Canegrowers are in the decision," Mr Schembri said.
"If they want to represent farmers in the sugar industry, that is a matter for them if those growers in that region want to affiliate with AgForce.
"But...we strongly refute this characterisation by AgForce that by setting up a sugar division that is wondrously going to bring the sugar industry together and wondrously unite Queensland agriculture.
"That has to be called out, it is offensive to sensabilities.
"We currently have four organisations representing growers throughout Queensland and this adds a fifth column.
Mrs Somerset said AgForce Cane would be an incorporated commodity board with all the standing and autonomy of the three existing commodity boards for cattle, sheep and wool and grain.
She said following a transition period, AgForce Cane would offer the opportunity for any Queensland cane farmer to join AgForce if they see benefit to themselves and their business.
ICGO chairman Ricky Mio said the board would recommend that their members support the proposal when they take a vote next Thursday.
"The ICGO Board will be recommending to members that they support this proposal as a way of providing them with greater authority and a stronger, more united voice to governments, sugar industry stakeholders, and the community," Mr Mio said.
"If our members support this proposal, there will be an initial transition period to bed down the autonomous AgForce Cane Board and its operations," he said.
