The Florida Department of Agriculture & Consumer Services has fired a consulting firm with ties to the sugar industry.
Ag Commissioner Nicole "Nikki" Fried "has chosen to terminate the contract of MacVicar Consulting," according to a message posted over the weekend on the department's Facebook page.
The department had a $35,000 contract calling for firm President Thomas K. MacVicar and two employees, William Baker and Lennart "Len" Lindahl, to help with "monitoring, understanding and influencing the water-related issues important to agriculture in South Florida."
In particular, the three were to provide expertise as members of the panel working with the Army Corps of Engineers to develop new guidelines for operating Lake Okeechobee.
That drew criticism from environmentalists who have called for the lake elevation to be kept lower than the Corps currently calls for — between 12 feet 6 inches and 15 feet 6 inches — as a way to prevent discharges that can cause massive blue-green algae blooms in the St. Lucie and Caloosahatchee rivers.
The sugar industry has long advocated keeping plenty of water in Lake Okeechobee, claiming allowing it to drop below 11 feet in elevation threatened water supplies for both farmers and municipalities.
Fried’s top priority on Lake O "remains the public health of the surrounding communities," the Facebook post states. "She continues to work diligently towards achieving reduced nutrient impacts to Florida’s waterways, including major revisions to agricultural best management practices."
Fried terminated the contract "because it’s at her discretion to do so," spokesman Franco Ripple told TCPalm in an email.
"It's great news that Commissioner Fried has listened to Floridians who are sick and tired of business as usual and finally decided to do the right thing," U.S. Rep. Brian Mast, who has called for both lower lake levels and firing MacVicar , said in an email.
Mast maintained MacVicar, Baker and Lindahl, who are registered to lobby for sugar farmers by the South Florida Water Management District, would give the industry "special access and influence" on the Lake O panel.
