Animals again found in ’distress’ at Sugar Sweet Farms, police say
ANDOVER TOWNSHIP — A month after appearing in court to face multiple animal cruelty charges, Dennis Sugar, the owner of Sugar Sweet Farms Petting Zoo, was under investigation by local and state authorities Tuesday after his farm animals were found in distress.
Around 2:30 p.m., officers with the Andover Township Police Department responded to the farm, located on Route 206 south, for a complaint about deceased animals on the property, according to Andover Township Police Chief Eric Danielson.
Patrols found a deer carcass that had been there for some time, which was not of concern, but while at the property, officers were informed by the owners of Found in Thyme Sanctuary that there were animals on the property that weren’t being cared for, Danielson said.
While he did not go into detail, Danielson said that officers found “concerns” and notified the Sussex County Prosecutor’s Office and the state Department of Agriculture, who were expected to respond to the farm by 5 p.m. Danielson said Sugar was mandated to get in touch with a veterinarian to care for any animals that appeared to be in distress.
“There is concern there, so we just want to make sure these animals are getting the care that they need,” Danielson said.
Sugar was not facing any charges as of Tuesday afternoon as the investigation was still in the preliminary stages, Danielson said.
At 3:30 p.m. Tuesday, detectives with the county prosecutor’s office and patrols with the Andover Police Department were at the farm interviewing Sugar. Several animals, including pigs, goats and alpacas, were roaming in a fenced-in area.
The owners of the Wantage-based Found in Thyme Sanctuary, Trevor and Stephanie McPherson, were in the process of taking over the lease of the property and working with Sugar in the meantime. On March 4 — nearly two weeks after it was reported he was indicted on several third- and fourth-degree animal cruelty charges — Sugar, 47, announced on his farm’s Facebook page it was in his “best interests” to allow the McPhersons to “take over” his farm.
Stephanie McPherson, following the Facebook announcement, told the New Jersey Herald that when asked by Sugar to take over his farm and the care of his animals, which include alpacas, pigs, goats, bunnies and lambs, she didn’t hesitate.
“The animals in this location need help, and we are here to give that help,” she said.
Tuesday evening via email, McPherson declined to detail the circumstances of the investigation, but said she was still at the property to care for the animals.
“We do not have any information at this time except that we are continuing to give extensive vet care, preparing for pigs to give birth, cleaning the fields and sectioning the animals,” she added.
Sugar, who established Sugar Sweet Farms Petting Zoo in 2013, according to his website, was leasing a roughly 12-acre tract of land in Lafayette and operating a petting zoo that was often busy up until his arrest on Aug. 15. He abruptly left the property and re-opened his petting zoo in Andover on or about Oct. 11.
Andover Police, in a Facebook post two days after news of Sugar’s indictment was reported, said Sugar’s property on Route 206 was being monitored on a near-weekly basis.
In August, authorities, following an animal cruelty complaint, discovered about 30 dead pigs and an additional 14 live pigs that were malnourished on Sugar’s Hampton property, according to an affidavit from Sugar’s arrest. Pigs only had access to contaminated water and had no food, police said.
Days later at his Lafayette property, police said they found several dead piglets, a dead goat, skulls and remains of dead animals and various animals that were found with fractured legs and suffering with mange and parasites.
Tuesday afternoon, the Sugar Sweet Farms Facebook page was active but the page had been deactivated as of Tuesday evening.
Sugar was indicted by a Sussex County grand jury on the following charges stemming from his August arrest: Two counts of third-degree cruelty to animals and two counts of fourth-degree cruelty to animals. He is also facing two disorderly persons offenses for animal cruelty.
During his hearing on Feb. 17, Sugar informed the court he had parted ways with his attorney and was seeking a new one, leading to the case being adjourned to March 16
Sugar, who has a prior criminal history, was rejected entrance into the pretrial intervention program in November.
Lori Comstock can also be reached on Twitter: @LoriComstockNJH, on Facebook: www.Facebook.com/LoriComstockNJH or by phone: 973-383-1194.
