Are Smoothies Good for You?
Smoothies are an increasingly popular wellness trend and frequently marketed as a health food.
These versatile beverages are portable, family-friendly, and modifiable for any taste or dietary preference. Smoothies are easy to prepare yourself, but you can also purchase fresh or bottled ones from specialty cafés and most major grocery stores.
While some types are loaded with veggies and fruit, others pack sugar or other unhealthy ingredients. As such, you may wonder whether they’re a healthy choice.
This article explains everything you need to know about smoothies, including their potential health benefits and downsides, whether they aid weight loss, and tips for making nutritionally balanced versions at home.
Smoothies are thick, creamy beverages usually blended from puréed fruits, vegetables, juices, yogurt, nuts, seeds, and/or dairy or nondairy milk.
The most basic smoothie starts with two essential ingredients — a base and a liquid. From there, you can combine ingredients to your liking.
Many smoothies include frozen produce or ice cubes to give the final product the cool, icy consistency of a milkshake. However, their flavor profiles vary tremendously depending on the ingredients.
Popular ingredients in homemade and store-bought smoothies include:
Most smoothies can be classified into one or two of the following categories — though there’s significant overlap between them:
Fruit smoothies. As the name implies, this kind of smoothie usually features one or more types of fruit blended with fruit juice, water, milk, or ice cream .
Green smoothies. Green smoothies pack leafy green vegetables and fruit blended with water, juice, or milk. They tend to be heavier in veggies than regular smoothies, though they often include a little fruit for sweetness.
Protein smoothies. Protein smoothies usually start with one fruit or vegetable and a liquid, as well as a major protein source like Greek yogurt, cottage cheese, silken tofu, or protein powder .
Because smoothies are so customizable, it’s fairly easy to pack them with nutrients.
Smoothies are made by blending fruit, vegetables, yogurt, and other ingredients to make a thick, creamy beverage.
Many people consume smoothies as a morning meal or afternoon snack. They can be a great way to incorporate more healthy foods into your diet.
Smoothies made primarily from fresh or frozen produce may increase your consumption of fruits and vegetables, which provide a diverse array of essential vitamins, minerals, fiber, and antioxidants.
Together, these nutrients may reduce inflammation , improve digestion, and lower your risk of chronic conditions like heart disease, osteoporosis, obesity, and age-related mental decline (
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that adults eat at least 5 servings (around 400 grams) of fruits and vegetables per day. However, most people fall short of this mark (
If you find you’re not eating enough fruits or veggies, a smoothie can be a delicious way to pack in 2–3 more servings.
Early research suggests that a healthy, thriving community of gut bacteria can help reduce inflammation, promote healthy immune function, and support mental health (
Adequate fiber intake is also linked to a reduced risk of chronic illnesses, such as heart disease and type 2 diabetes (
Yet, many people are not meeting their daily fiber needs — especially those who follow Western diets.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) recommends a daily intake of at least 38 grams of fiber for men and 25 grams for women. Research indicates that most Americans, on average, eat only 16 grams of fiber each day (
With the right ingredients, smoothies can be an excellent way to boost your fiber intake.
Some of the most fiber-rich foods are also common smoothie ingredients, including fruits, vegetables, whole grains (such as soaked oats), nuts, seeds, and legumes (such as white beans).
Smoothies are a convenient way to boost your intake of fruits, vegetables, and several other fiber-rich foods.
The difference between a healthy and unhealthy smoothie largely depends on the quality and quantity of its ingredients.
Added sugar reduces the nutrient density of smoothies. Furthermore, routinely consuming too much added sugar may increase your risk of chronic ailments like heart disease, diabetes, and liver disease (
Commercially prepared smoothies tend to be higher in added sugar than homemade versions, but it ultimately depends on the ingredients used in each recipe.
For instance, Smoothie King’s 20-ounce (590-mL) The Hulk Vanilla Smoothie packs 47 grams of added sugar, which is well above your daily sugar recommendation ( 6 ).
Their Original High Protein Pineapple Smoothie is a much better option, as it provides only 4 grams of added sugar in the same serving size ( 7 ).
Many sugary ingredients are easy to identify, such as granulated sugar, honey, maple syrup, ice cream, sherbet, and agave nectar.
Nonetheless, you should keep in mind that nut butters, protein powder, flavored yogurt, fruit-flavored sauces, and sugar-sweetened juices and nondairy milks are all potential sources of added sugar.
Occasionally indulging in small quantities of added sugar is not likely harmful, but if you drink smoothies frequently, it may be best to limit sugary ingredients as much as possible.
When making smoothies at home, use whole fruits, such as a ripe banana, to add sweetness instead of honey or maple syrup.
When buying premade smoothies, try to limit or avoid added sugar, mainly focusing on smoothies that include whole foods like fruits and veggies.
For bottled smoothies, you can find the added sugar content on the label. For made-to-order ones, check the company website or ask for nutrient information at the counter.
Certain smoothies contain large quantities of added sugar, which can reduce the drink’s overall nutrient density. Excess added sugar intake may increase your risk of disease.
Do smoothies aid weight loss?
Smoothies are frequently marketed as a weight loss tool.
While some people find smoothies an easy way to monitor food portions and stay on top of their weight loss goals, others may not feel as full when they drink their calories rather than eating them.
That said, several small studies demonstrate that smoothies used as meal replacements can be as filling as solid foods, and that drinking calories instead of chewing them doesn’t necessarily lead to overeating when solid foods are consumed later (
