1Population Health Research Centre, National Institute of Public Health, Cuernavaca, Mexico
2Centre for Health Systems Research, National Institute of Public Health, Cuernavaca, Mexico
3Department of Nutrition and Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
4Epidemiological Research and Health Services Unit, Mexican Institute of Social Security, Cuernavaca, Mexico
5Research Centre in Policy, Population and Health, School of Medicine, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico
Objective To examine changes in categories of soft drink consumption in a cohort of Mexican adults, three years after the implementation of the sugar sweetened beverage tax.
Design Open cohort longitudinal analysis.
Setting Three waves of the Health Workers Cohort Study, Mexico, spanning 2004 to 2018.
Participants 1770 people aged 19 years or older with information on drinks consumption available in at least one of the three cohort waves.
Main outcome measure Change in probability of belonging to one of four categories of soft drinks consumption (non, low, medium, high) after the tax was implemented. Heterogeneity of associations by income and education was also assessed.
Results Before the implementation of the tax, more than 50% of the participants were medium and high consumers of soft drinks and less than 10% were in the non-consumer category. After the tax was implemented, 43% of the population was categorised as medium or high consumers and the prevalence of non-consumers increased to 14%. Three years after implementation of the tax on 1 January 2014, the probability of being a non-consumer of soft drinks increased by 4.7 (95% confidence interval 0.3 to 9.1) percentage points and that of being a low consumer increased by 8.3 (0.6 to 16.0) percentage points compared with the pre-tax period. Conversely, the probability of being in the medium and high levels of soft drinks consumption decreased by 6.8 (0.5 to 13.2) percentage points and 6.1 (0.4 to 11.9) percentage points, respectively. No significant heterogeneity of the tax across income levels was observed, but stronger effects of the tax were seen in participants with secondary school education or higher, compared with those with elementary school or less.
Conclusions The Mexican sugar sweetened beverage tax was associated with a reduction in the probability of consuming soft drinks in this cohort of employees from a healthcare provider. The results cannot be extrapolated to the Mexican population, but they suggest that three years after implementation, the tax had helped to increase the proportion of people who do not consume soft drinks while decreasing the proportion of high and medium consumers.
Consumption of added sugars is a primary risk factor for non-communicable diseases. 1 2 Sugar sweetened beverages are a main source of added sugars in the diet. 3 High consumption of such drinks has been linked to obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, metabolic syndrome, and dental caries, as well as to some types of cancer. 4 5 6 7 In 2017 the World Health Organization recommended limiting intake of free sugar to 10% of total energy. 1 To reduce sugar consumption, WHO now recommends the implementation of fiscal policies to increase the price of sugar sweetened beverages. 8 9 Taxes on sugar sweetened beverages have been implemented in many countries, including Mexico, France, Hungary, Norway, South Africa, and the UK, as well as in some US cities such as Berkeley and Philadelphia. 10 11 12 Robust evaluations after the implementation of taxes on sugar sweetened beverages have shown important decreases in purchases or sales of such drinks. 1 13 14 15 16
In Mexico, the consumption of added sugars represented 12.5% of the total energy intake in 2012, of which 70% came from sugar sweetened beverages. 3 17 Owing to the high levels of consumption of these drinks, Mexico has been ranked first in mortality and morbidity attributable to sugar sweetened beverages. 18 19 To begin countering this, the Mexican government implemented a tax of 1 peso (£0.03; €0.04; $0.04) per litre (approximately 10% increase in price) on all non-alcoholic drinks with added sugar starting on 1 January 2014. Two years after implementation of the tax, household purchases of taxed beverages decreased by an average of 7.6%. 20 Larger reductions in purchases of these beverages were documented in urban areas, in households with children and adolescents, in low socioeconomic households, and among high sugar sweetened beverage purchasing households. 20 21 22 However, these studies have relied on purchase data, aggregated at the household level. More evidence about the effect of the tax on individual level consumption and health outcomes is needed. 23 Emerging studies with longer term results on the effect of the tax on consumption of sugar sweetened beverages and health related outcomes will allow us to understand the utility of these interventions at an individual level.
Using two pre-tax waves and one post-tax wave of data on consumption of soft drinks from a Mexican adult cohort, we aimed to estimate the change in categories of soft drink consumption three years after the implementation of the tax on sugar sweetened beverages and to assess the potential effect modification of the tax by income levels.
We conducted longitudinal analysis using data from the Health Workers Cohort Study (HWCS). The HWCS is a prospective open cohort study composed of employees from the Mexican Institute of Social Security (IMSS for its Spanish acronym) and their families in Cuernavaca. IMSS is one of the three main public healthcare institutions in Mexico, providing healthcare to nearly 43 million people (30.1% of the national population). 24 The cohort is occupationally diverse, including medical doctors, nurses and nurse assistants, social workers, management, and administration and cleaning personnel, among others. Compared with the Mexican population, participants in the HWCS were, on average, in the seventh tenth of monthly average household income ($14 100 MXN); by thirds, the average of the low income group in the cohort corresponded to the second tenth of national income, medium income to the sixth, and high income to the top tenth.
The HWCS has had three data collection waves: 2004-06, 2010-13, and 2017-18. The total number of employees at IMSS in the State of Morelos in 2004 was around 6000; of those, 75% (n=4500) were IMSS Cuernavaca employees. Of the total 4500 IMSS employees, the HWCS recruited 2500 people at baseline; the response rate was 77% for wave 2 and 50% for wave 3. Participants completed a self-administered questionnaire, which collected data on demographic characteristics, medical family history, past medical history, lifestyle (diet and physical activity), psychosocial evaluation, quality of life, social support, and cognitive assessment. Detailed information can be found elsewhere. 25
For our analysis, we used data from all three waves of the cohort. We included participants aged 19 years and older with at least one food frequency questionnaire measurement and complete beverage consumption information. 25 From the original 4928 observations, we excluded pregnant women, participants with extreme values of energy intake (<600 Kcal (1 kcal=4.18 kJ) and >6550 Kcal), and those who reported soft drink consumption of 1500 mL or more per day. 26 Our total analytical sample included 1770 people with 3786 observations. Details about the development of the analytical sample can be found in appendix 1 table A1-1.
Our outcome of interest was the change in the probability of belonging to one of four categories of consumption after the tax was implemented. The HWCS self-reported questionnaire assessed diet with a validated semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire of 116 food items, asking about the frequency of food consumption over the previous 12 months. 27 The questionnaire was previously validated in a sample of Mexican women, showing moderately good validity for energy and most nutrients. We used information from the food frequency questions related to consumption of sugar sweetened beverages: “a bottle of cola” and “a bottle of flavored soft drink.” Frequency of consumption was recorded with 10 different options ranging from “never” to “six or more times per day.” The questionnaire assumed that one serving of soft drink equalled 355 mL. We compiled this information and classified the frequency of consumption into four categories, to make our results comparable to previous literature. 28 29 A non-consumer had no soft drink consumption, a low consumer consumed less than one serving a week, a medium consumer consumed at least one serving a week but less than one serving a day, and a high consumer consumed at least one serving a day. The sugar sweetened beverages tax was implemented on 1 January 2014; thus, we created a dichotomous variable for the tax, being 0 for the pre-tax period (2004-13) and 1 for the post-tax period (2017-18).
We included age at baseline centred to the mean as a time invariant variable to control for the age at the beginning of follow-up. Time varying covariates were updated at each wave of data collection. We included a continuous variable for time, which represents the number of years that a person spent in the cohort. We used annual gross domestic product in current USD and yearly inflation (base index on July 2018) reported by the National Institute of Statistics and Geography to adjust for macroeconomic variables. 30 We included dummy variables for education, classified into three groups: elementary school or less, secondary school or high school, and college or higher. Income represents monthly family income as reported in the HWCS questionnaire, divided into three groups by tertiles (low, middle, high). We used thirds of income to identify differential effects by group, to allow for non-linearities, and to be comparable to previous analyses done at the household level. 31 We allowed income to vary by wave as we wanted to see how changes in income categories were associated with changes in the probability of moving to a different consumption category, independently of the tax. We also adjusted for seasonality and changes in demand for beverages due to the weather, by using the monthly temperature in the Celsius scale as reported in Cuernavaca, Morelos, and linking it to the date at which participants completed each questionnaire. Finally, we included an interaction term between age at baseline and time spent in the cohort, to allow for different time trends according to the age at baseline of each participant.
We estimated the mean and standard deviation or the frequency and percentage of each covariate for each wave of data collection. We estimated the prevalence and 95% confidence interval of the sample in the four categories of soft drink consumption, for the three waves of data collection.
For our main analysis, we fitted an ordered logistic correlated random effect regression (OLCRE) model for unbalanced panel data, to evaluate the association of the tax with the probability of remaining in the same category of soft drink consumption. We selected this model because it can simultaneously estimate within individual and between individual effects. Briefly, the OLCRE model estimates coefficients for level 1 variables that vary between and within individuals, as well as level 2 variables that vary only between individuals. 32 See appendix 1 for a detailed description of the model.
To fit the OLCRE model, we used the -ologit- command in Stata, following methods described by Schunck. 33 For this analysis, we focused on the within individual effect ) of the sugar sweetened beverages tax. Complete OLCRE models translated to proportional odds ratios are available in appendix 1. To explore the potential effect modification of the tax on consumption by income and education, we introduced an interaction term between the tax period indicator variable and income category (low, middle, or high) and between tax and education (elementary school or less, secondary school or high school, and college or higher). To facilitate the presentation and interpretation of the models, we used the post-estimation Stata command -margins- to calculate the marginal effects of the tax on the probability of being in one of the categories of soft drinks consumption. We used Stata/SE 14.2 for all analyses.
We relied on an unbalanced panel to estimate the difference in soft drinks consumption before and after implementation of the tax. This could introduce bias in the estimates due to missing data at different waves. To explore the robustness of our findings, we did a complete case analysis as a sensitivity analysis, restricting our analysis to participants with information in all three waves (n=650 for each wave, 50% of full analytical sample). A detailed description of the sample and regression analysis is available in appendix 2.
The research design, questions, and outcomes were developed without participant involvement. Participants were not asked to contribute to interpretation or writing of the results. However, participants with abnormal findings were informed and referred for treatment.
Table 1 shows the characteristics of the sample of HWCS participants at each wave of data collection. The average age during the study period was 47 years, with a slightly older sample at wave 3. In 2010 the male population was 7% higher than in 2004 and 2017 (male prevalence ∼23%). Nearly 50% of our analytical sample was composed of people with a college degree or higher. In 2017 42% of the population was in the high income category; this represents an increase of 9% compared with 2004 and 13% compared with 2010.
Sample characteristics of the Health Workers Cohort Study participants at each wave of data collection. Data are mean (SD) unless stated otherwise
Figure 1 shows the unadjusted distribution of soft drinks consumption before and after implementation of the tax. Before the implementation of the tax, more than 50% of the participants were medium and high consumers (56.9% in 2004 and 55.8% in 2010), and less than 10% were in the non-consumer category (5.1% in 2004 and 6.9% in 2010) of soft drink consumption. After the tax was implemented, 42.9% of the population was categorised as medium or high consumers and the prevalence of non-consumers increased to 13.6%. Before the tax, the prevalence of high consumers was increasing (11.3% in 2004 to 13.1% in 2010); after 2014 the prevalence of high consumers decreased to 8.1%.
Unadjusted distribution of categories of soft drinks consumption among participants in Health Workers Cohort Study between 2004 and 2017. Non-consumer=no soft drink consumption; low consumer=consumed <1 serving/week; medium consumer=consumed 1 serving/week to <1 serving/day; high consumer=consumed ≥1 serving/day
