Balrampur Chini trades near 2-year high in weak mkt; soars 58% in six weeks
The stock of the sweetener company was trading at its highest level since November 2017. In the past six weeks, it has soared 58 per cent from a level of Rs 110.
Last Updated at September 25, 2019 11:35 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of Balrampur Chini Mills (BCML) were trading at nearly two-year high of Rs 174, up 3 per cent, on the BSE on Wednesday on expectations of improved operating performance. In comparison, the S&P BSE Sensex was down 1 per cent or 389 points at 11:00 am.
The stock of the sweetener company was trading at its highest level since November 2017. In the past six weeks, it has soared 58 per cent from a level of Rs 110. Thus far in the month of September, BCML has outpaced the market by surging 30 per cent after rating agency ICRA reaffirmed the long-term rating for Rs 2,441 ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
