PUBLISHED: 12:02 29 October 2019 | UPDATED: 12:02 29 October 2019
Colm McKay, agricultural director at British Sugar, holds a sugar beet and a package of Silver Spoon sugar at its Bury St Edmunds factory  Picture: SU ANDERSON
British Sugar’s longstanding agriculture boss is stepping down – and a new head has been appointed.
To send a link to this page you must be logged in.
Peter Watson, who has been appointed agriculture boss at British Sugar  Picture: BRITISH SUGAR
The company, which operates factories across East Anglia including at Bury St Edmunds, has appointed Peter Watson to replace Colm McKay.
Mr McKay will retire at the end of 2019 after 35 years with the company.
Mr Watson - who takes over in the New Year - has held roles across British Sugar and its sister companies and says he is looking forward to the challenges.
You may also want to watch:
"I'm looking forward to getting started in my new role, working with our 3,000 growers, hauliers and industry partners to continue to drive innovation and progression in our homegrown sugar industry," he said.
British Sugar - a subsidiary of Associated British Foods - is the sole processor of the UK's sugar beet crop and supplies around 50% of UK demand from its four manufacturing plants across East Anglia and the East Midlands under its Silver Spoon brand.
As well as producing sugar, each year, British Sugar's factories produces a wide range of co-products including animal feed, electricity and bioethanol.
The British beet sugar industry works with 7,000 businesses including more than 3,000 growers in mainly rural areas of the country, It also supports around 9,500 jobs throughout the economy.
If you value what this story gives you, please consider supporting the East Anglian Daily Times. Click the link in the orange box below for details.
This newspaper has been a central part of community life for many years, through good times and bad, serving as your advocate and trusted source of local information. Our industry is facing testing times, which is why I’m asking for your support. Every single contribution will help us continue to produce award-winning local journalism that makes a measurable difference to our community.
To send a link to this page you must be logged in.
