Summary White sugar is produced through a purifying process that removes a brown syrup called molasses. On the other hand, brown sugar either undergoes less processing to retain its molasses content or is produced by mixing white sugar with molasses.
White and brown sugar can be used in different ways in baking and cooking.
While they can sometimes be used interchangeably , doing so may affect the color, flavor, or texture of your final product.
The molasses in brown sugar retains moisture, so using it will result in baked goods that are softer yet denser.
For example, cookies made with brown sugar will be more moist and dense, whereas cookies made with white sugar will rise to a greater extent, allowing more air into the dough and resulting in an airier texture.
For this reason, white sugar is used in a number of baked goods that require adequate rising, such as meringues, mousses, soufflés, and fluffy baked goods. In contrast, brown sugar is used for dense baked goods, such as zucchini bread and rich cookies.
Other uses for brown sugar may include rich glazes and sauces, such as barbecue sauce.
The main differences between white and brown sugar are their taste and color.
Swapping white sugar for brown sugar in recipes will affect the color of foods, giving a light-caramel or brown hue.
Contrarily, baking with white sugar will result in a lighter-colored product. Thus, whichever you choose will depend on your desired end result.
Brown and white sugar also have unique flavor profiles. Brown sugar has a deep, caramel or toffee-like flavor due to the added molasses. For this reason, it works well in chocolate cakes and cookies, as well as rich fruit cakes.
On the other hand, white sugar is sweeter, so you can use less of it to attain your desired taste. Its neutral flavor makes it a versatile ingredient in baking, working well in fruit sponges and sweet pastries.
Summary White and brown sugar are used similarly in cooking. However, brown sugar contains molasses, which will affect the taste and color of food.
Whether you choose white or brown sugar comes down to personal preference, as taste and color are the main differences between the two.
Although brown sugar contains more minerals than white sugar, the quantities of these minerals are so minuscule that they won’t provide any health benefits.
Importantly, sugar is thought to be a contributing factor to the obesity epidemic and major cause of diseases, including type 2 diabetes and heart disease (
