What are the risks affecting the US labour market?
Ronald Temple, Head of US Equity at Lazard Asset Management, comments on US non-farm payroll numbers:
While I expect lower unemployment by year-end, near-term risks to the labor market are building: 1) The surge in COVID-19 infections is forcing officials to pause or even reverse reopening processes, 2) Paycheck Protection Program funding for the first recipients is running out, 3) unemployment benefits will be slashed for millions of jobless workers at the end of July, and 4) state and local governments are being forced to continue cutting workers to balance their budgets. If these challenges are not addressed urgently, the recovery could be slower and bumpier than it needs to be.
Neil Williams, Senior Economic Adviser to the international business of Federated Hermes, comments on US jobs numbers:
Taken together, job losses during Covid have been ‘eyewatering’, and far more striking than in other recessions. As we know from 2007-09, the most rapid job losses do not guarantee the sharpest recoveries. The net 15 million payrolls-fall since February and trebling of the unemployment rate surpass anything from the rate-tightening years of the late 1970s/early 80s, and chime with the 1930s. The participation rate at a 45-year low reminds us it’s not just about job losses, but replacing those leaving the labour force for good.
Even if the bulk of these prove temporary, getting the unemployment rate back down close to February’s 3.5% needs a full and immediate rehiring, which under anything less than a ‘V’-shape recovery is optimistic. Sadly, in terms of employment, it may still be the ‘elevator down, but only steps back up’. And it remains to be seen how spendthrift consumers can be, given low earners have understandably been using Federal support for paying bills, rather than discretionary spending.
Janet Mui, investment director at Brewin Dolphin, comments on US job numbers:
This is encouraging news that more people are returning to work as life gradually gets back to normal. This adds to a number of positive economic data such as consumer spending and manufacturing activity survey (ISM index). However, several states have been scaling back or pausing re-openings since late June so some of that impact may not be reflected.
Not all rosy: The number of permanent job losers continued to rise, increasing by 588,000 to 2.9 million in June. The number of people who continues to claim unemployment benefits are still more than 19 million, though new claims are on a downward trend. The development in the labour market is consistent with the Fed’s expectation that activity is on track to recover, but it will take a long time and outlook remains highly uncertain.
We expect extremely accommodative monetary policy to continue in the US. Easy monetary policy along with green-shoots in the economy suggest the stock markets are likely to grind higher.
Charles Hepworth, Investment Director at GAM Investments, on US jobs numbers:
US jobs numbers today continue to defy the worsening Covid-19 case numbers on the ground. They handsomely beat even the most optimistic forecasts with 4.8 million payrolls added in June against expectations of a 3 million increase along with a participation rate that ticked higher over the month. Overall unemployment rate now stands at 11.1%, suggesting an economy getting slowly back to work following the lockdown and the massive spike in unemployment claims.
The pessimist would say that this data is all backward looking and not accounting for the re-lockdowns affecting some states following sharp spikes in Covid-19 cases, so while it may look good, it is not really that informative of the direction of travel from here. Equity markets like it nonetheless, with the broader indices all rallying higher following the data release.
Seema Shah, Chief Strategist, Principal Global Investors, comments on the latest US employment data:
For a second month in a row, non-farm payrolls beat expectations, rising 4.8 million in June. Admittedly, after last month’s shock, analysts will have been prepared for a wide range of results. But today’s number certainly adds to the growing evidence of a strengthening economy in early June. With all state-wide lockdown orders having been suspended by the time of the survey week, a labour market improvement makes sense. These numbers will inevitably take center stage ahead of the Congressional debate on the next round of coronavirus stimulus.
However, the US government cannot claim victory just yet. High-frequency data suggests that the labour market strength had started to wane later in the month, perhaps as households and businesses grew increasingly cautious about the rise in infection rates. Indeed, now, with the closing having been reversed or paused across 40% of the US, July’s job report may paint a much weaker story.
The popular Ultimate Team mode in EA Sports' FIFA video games could potentially be regulated under gambling laws in the UK.
Ultimate Team allows gamers to build their star-studded line-ups, play other users online and spend actual money on purchasing packs for random players.
