Hot chili pepper for garnish, sliced (optional)
Preheat 4-quart pot over medium heat. Saute shallots in coconut oil for about 5 minutes, until lightly browned.
Add garlic and ginger, and saute for about 30 seconds. Stir in cilantro, curry powder, cumin, red pepper flakes, broth, agave and salt.
Add carrots and potatoes. Cover pot and bring to a boil. Once boiling, immediately lower heat to a simmer, and leave lid ajar to let the steam escape. Cook potatoes until tender, for about 5 minutes more.
Once potatoes are tender, add chickpeas, coconut milk and frozen peas. Heat through.
Serve garnished with cilantro and fresh chili.
Pearled barley gives this dish the heartiest texture. It also absorbs all the aromatic flavors and makes for a mean bowl of chili. I love topping my bowl with crushed tortilla chips, avocado, chopped tomatoes and fresh cilantro.
Preheat 4-quart pot over medium-high heat. Saute the onion, green peppers and bay leaves in oil with a pinch of salt for about 10 minutes, until onion is lightly browned.
Add garlic and saute until fragrant, for about 30 seconds. Add chili powder, oregano, cumin, salt and red pepper flakes. Cook to toast spices for about a minute.
Pour in the beer and scrape the bottom of the pan to deglaze. Let it cook for about 2 minutes. Add barley and vegetable broth, give it a good stir.
Cover the pot, leaving lid slightly ajar to let steam escape. Turn the heat up and bring to a gentle boil. Cook until barley is almost tender, stirring occasionally for about 15 minutes.
Add crushed tomatoes and kidney beans. Cover pot and turn heat down to a simmer. Let it cook for about 20 more minutes, stirring occasionally. Barley should be very tender, and the chili thick.
Add lime juice and maple syrup, then taste for salt and seasoning. Remove bay leaves.
Serve with your choice of accouterments.
These scones go perfectly with some tea at brunch, or just as a snack after dinner. (Feel free to just use regular lemons; the flavor will just be a little more tart.)
