“Polyol Sweeteners Market report is to provide accurate and strategic analysis of the Profile Projectors industry. The report closely examines each segment and its sub-segment futures before looking at the 360-degree view of the market mentioned above. Market forecasts will provide deep insight into industry parameters by accessing growth, consumption, upcoming market trends and various price fluctuations.
This has brought along several changes in This report also covers the impact of COVID-19 on the global market.
Polyol Sweetener are organic compounds, typically derived from sugars. They are white, water-soluble solids that can occur naturally or be produced industrially from sugars. They are used widely in the food industry as thickeners and sweeteners. In commercial foodstuffs, sugar alcohols are commonly used in place of table sugar (sucrose), often in combination with high intensity artificial sweeteners to counter the low sweetness.
On the basis of type, the sorbitol segment accounted for the highest market share in 2016. It is primarily used as a sweetener, humectant, flavoring agent, and diuretic dehydrating agent for various applications such as food & beverages, pharmaceuticals, and cosmetics & personal care products. It provides dietary energy and around 60% sweetness as against sugar. Sorbitol is also found naturally in several stone fruits and berries from trees of the genus, Sorbus. It acts as a sugar substitute or food additive that imitates regular sugar in taste.
The polyol sweeteners market in Europe accounted for the largest share, whereas the market in Asia-Pacific is projected to grow at the highest CAGR during the forecast period. The major driver for the growth of this market in the Asia-Pacific region is rise in awareness regarding functionalities & applications of polyol sweeteners.
Polyol Sweeteners Market competition by top manufacturers as follow: , Cargill, Archer Daniels Midland, Dupont, Roquette Freres, Tereos Starch & Sweeteners, Sudzucker, Ingredion, Jungbunzlauer Suisse, Gulshan Polyols, Batory Foods, B Food Science, Dfi
Global Polyol Sweeteners Market research reports growth rates and market value based on market dynamics, growth factors. Complete knowledge is based on the latest innovations in the industry, opportunities and trends. In addition to SWOT analysis by key suppliers, the report contains a comprehensive market analysis and major player’s landscape.
The Type Coverage in the Market are:
