just-food is providing daily updates on how the Covid-19 pandemic is affecting the world's packaged food sector.
Walkers Crisps, the UK snacks business owned by US food and beverages giant PepsiCo , has seen an outbreak of Covid-19 amongst the workforce in its facility in Leicester in the English Midlands.
BMPA chief executive Nick Allen said: "Our member companies work to strict hygiene and safety controls imposed by the Food Standards Authority, Public Health England and the Health and Safety Executive. While working temperatures are necessarily cold in parts of the factory, workers are given the protective clothing and equipment they need to keep them and the food they produce safe.
"These highly-regulated working conditions apply equally to all staff from the skilled butchers in the boning and cutting halls to the support staff who keep the canteens and offices running; it's one standard for everybody."
Earlier this week Unite argued the UK meat sector - and government - must tackle working conditions in the industry, the country's largest trade union has argued, insisting Covid-19 has underlined the issues facing particularly migrant workers.
UK broadcaster the BBC has said that its investigations have revealed that some workers at the Rowan Foods facility in north Wales do not feel safe following a Covid-19 outbreak.
The BBC report quoted one worker at the plant in Wrexham - linked to 237 coronavirus cases - as saying it is impossible to keep social distance.
Its investigations team said it saw evidence of personal protective equipment (PPE) not always being used and recent photos from inside the factory of people standing near each other and not wearing visors.
Rowan Foods, owned by US hot dog manufacturer Oscar Mayer, has said it has introduced screens and visors, amongst other safety measures, to keep workers safe.
The Welsh government has announced new plans to allow pubs, cafes and restaurants with existing outdoor seating to reopen from 13 July.
As long as cases related to the Covid-19 pandemic continue to fall, venues can open in spaces owned by them and those that have licences for it can also reopen. However, indoor services will remain closed, despite pressure from the industry.
Analysts at Deutsche Bank have issued cautious forecasts for major global economies, arguing we face a "long road to recovery".
"The global economy is in a severe recession. We now see global GDP remaining below its pre-virus levels through most of next year," Deutsche Bank analysts wrote. "Although the shock will fall well short of the Great Depression, it will still result in immense rises in unemployment, putting pressure on national treasuries for some time to come."
Looking at the US, Deutsche Bank forecasts the country will "experience a record contraction in Q2, and rebound only slowly beyond that". Deutsche Bank forecasts US GDP will shrink by 7.1% this year, followed by growth of just 2.6% in 2021.
However, the analysts warned: "Broad-based rising case growth in recent weeks raises the risk that the current re-openings could be rolled back, as has happened in Texas.
Eurozone GDP will fall by 12% in 2020, Deutsche Bank forecast, before growing by 5% in 2021.
"The shock is asymmetric," the analysts said, with Germany set to see a decline in GDP of 9%, while France and Italy "perform worse", with falls of 14% each.
Deutsche Bank had a brighter outlook for China. "We have upgraded our 2020 growth forecast for China to 1.1%, and see 8.4% growth in 2021," it said. "Given the robust economic recovery and stronger-than-expected exports, we have lowered our expectations for further stimulus."
China 'suspends imports from Brazil, Netherlands plants'
Beijing has reportedly barred shipments from meat factories in Brazil and the Netherlands said to have been hit by outbreaks of Covid-19.
The news agency said China has declined to name the facilities but, citing sources, Reuters said sites owned by Marfrig and JBS were among the three.
The Guardian, meanwhile, quoting a Dutch government official, said China had banned meat from four factories in the Netherlands.
Beijing had not given a reason for the move but the official said all of the plants had seen Covid-19 outbreaks.
The UK meat sector – and government – must tackle working conditions in the industry, the country's largest trade union has argued, insisting Covid-19 has underlined the issues facing particularly migrant workers.
The union claimed some factories do not provide staff who need to self-isolate company sick pay or any other form of financial support, which it argued "increases the danger of individuals with Covid-19 going into work because they cannot afford to take time off".
Unite also raised concerns about track-and-trace record keeping for agency workers, such as production line staff and cleaners, who it says often work at multiple sites.
"Migrant workers, who often do not speak English and are scared to speak out because they fear losing their jobs, suffer under a relentless system that long predates Covid-19 in which they are treated without dignity or respect," Unite national officer Bev Clarkson said.
"It is imperative that ministers and industry commit to a root and branch reform of the meat processing sector. The dire working conditions, low pay and insecure employment that blight the industry and have now come back to bite the nation's efforts to defeat the coronavirus must be addressed."
just-food has asked the British Meat Processors Association for comment.
Narenda Modi, India's Prime Minister, has announced the extension of the country's food-security programme.
India implemented the scheme – Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana – when the country went into lockdown to try to ensure the poor had adequate food.
Those eligible were to receive 5kg of foodgrains per month. On top of that, each household were provided with 1 kg free whole chana a month.
The scheme had been due to elapse at the end of June but has now been extended until the end of November, Modi said. He added the extension would mean India's government will have spent INR1.5trn on the food packages.
India's GDP is on-track to decline more than 5%, Dutch investment bank ING has forecast.
ING said it sees India's economy contracting by 5.2% in 2020, a revision to its earlier forecast for a drop of 2.1%.
"The five most Covid-19-affected Indian states – Maharashtra, Delhi, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh – make up 43% of India's GDP. Recovery here will hinge on the return of a large number of migrant workers, though not all of them are likely to be reabsorbed back into disrupted supply chains, while weak demand continues to hinder activity," ING economist Prakash Sakpal said.
"Meanwhile, high unemployment should depress spending and prices, though there are no signs of consumer price inflation abating just yet. On the contrary, resurgent food inflation resulting from supply disruption and panic buying, and high fuel prices due to recent hikes in excise duty, are pressuring inflation."
Thailand's economy is expected to be impacted severely by the Covid-19 pandemic, shrinking by at least 5% in 2020 and taking more than two years to return to pre-pandemic levels, according to the World Bank's latest Thailand Economic Monitor, released today.
Covid-19 shocked the Thai economy, especially in the second quarter of 2020, and has led already to widespread job losses, affecting middle-class households and the poor alike.
As Thailand starts to ease mobility restrictions, domestic consumption, Thailand's traditionally strongest driver of growth, may pick up in the second half of 2020 and in 2021, the World Bank said, but economic recovery will be gradual and uncertain.
"The strength of the economic recovery will depend in part on an effective policy response, in particular effective support to vulnerable households and firms," said Birgit Hansl, World Bank country manager for Thailand. "As the recovery phase begins, a key challenge will be how to help people who lost their jobs reconnect with the labour market. Active labour market measures, such as wage-subsidies targeted to individuals in the most vulnerable sectors, and for on-the-job training to promote reemployment should be explored."
Swiss-Irish bakery business Aryzta, which is in the midst of a strategic review amid pressure from shareholders , said the company is adjusting production upward as Covid-19 restrictions begin to ease in a number of markets.
In a trading update issued today (30 June), Aryzta said only one of its plants in Europe remained in pause mode as a result of coronavirus, compared to three at the end of April, with 80% of its production lines now operational.
In North America, where the bakery business has been struggling in recent years, one production facility is still paused versus five on 30 April, with 90% of its production lines operational.
The company added that 22% of staff remain furloughed, down from 30% at the end of April.
However, foodservice and convenience retail are still an impediment to revenue growth due to work-from-home policies and a drop in tourism in Europe, where quick-service restaurants and in-store bakery are "gradually improving".
In North America, "signs of recovery" are concentrated in the QSR and retail channels, while foodservice remains "negatively impacted". Foodservice is still under pressure in Aryzta's rest of the world region, while in Asia Pacific QSR has "rebounded", but Brazil "remains more challenging".
JBS, the Brazil-based meat behemoth, has reportedly been ordered to close one of its domestic factories amid concerns about Covid-19 – a plant that was also shut recently amid worries about infections.
US meat giant Tyson Foods has revealed that 291 employees at its facility in Noel, Missouri, have tested positive for coronavirus.
The company said some 1,142 employees were tested between 17 and 19 June. Of the 291 who tested positive, 249 showed no symptoms of having contracted the virus.
The 291 is in addition to 80 positive cases identified by the Missouri Department of Health & Senior Services or by workers' own health care providers.
To date, Tyson has conducted nearly 40,000 tests throughout the country, covering more than one-third of its US-based employees. Testing at the Noel facility was done in partnership with Matrix Medical, a medical clinical services company.
Tom Brower, senior vice president of health and safety at Tyson Foods, said: "We believe it's imperative that we share our experience addressing this pandemic because safety is not a point of competitive advantage."
Tyson has designated more than 500 team members as social distance monitors in its facilities, amongst other anti-Covid measures.
Scotland-based Browns Food Group is considering making a number of staff redundant following a Covid-19-linked reduction in business from the foodservice and food-to-go channels.
Australian supermarket groups Woolworths and Coles have introduced customer buying limits on some essential items after a spike in Covid-19 cases in the southern state of Victoria led to some panic-buying.
The UK's The Guardian newspaper reported that rationing has been introduced on toilet paper and also food items including pasta, flour, eggs, sugar and mince.
It said Victoria reported its tenth straight day of new cases in double digits on Friday (26 June). Some 30 new cases were reported.
Latvia's Food Union has launched an e-commerce platform for European consumers.
Delivering ice cream, dairy products, pastry and frozen food directly to customers, the service covers Latvia, Lithuania, Romania and Denmark via local distribution operations.
Normunds Stanevics, Food Union Group CEO Europe, said: "Covid-19 has done more to change consumer habits and behaviour than any event in modern history. We're moving rapidly to demonstrate operational agility, create new delivery services, and meet our customers' needs."
The company said its goal is to diversify sales channels while ensuring its products are geographically closer to consumers.
Meat processing business Tulip, owned by US meat giant Pilgrim's Pride , has confirmed an outbreak of Covid-19 among the workforce at one if its UK facilities, involved three workers.
Reports earlier this week mistakenly suggested around a dozen workers had tested positive for the virus at its pork plant in Tipton in England's West Midlands.
In a statement today (26 June), Tulip said it is continuing to work in collaboration with Public Health England (PHE) Midlands, the Health & Safety Executive (HSE), local NHS colleagues and the local Sandwell Council, following confirmation of cases of Covid-19..
The three employees affected, including two from the same household, received positive test results after more than 100 tests were carried out on a sample of the Tulip workforce on 22 June.
All three, together with anyone identified as having had close contact with those who have tested positive, are now isolating at home in line with government guidelines.
Tulip employs more than 640 people at the Tipton site, which is facing closure.
Princes, the UK food group owned by Japanese conglomerate Mitsubishi Corp. , closed a UK facility for 24 hours this week after a Covid-19 outbreak among its workforce.
Ireland-based meat group Kepak has an outbreak of Covid-19 among staff at a factory across the Irish Sea in Wales.
At least 34 employees have tested positive since 25 April, with eight confirmed this month.
Vaughan Gething, Wales' Health Minister, confirmed what he called "a small cluster" at the Kepak site in Merthyr Tydfil.
Asked for comment by just-food on the situation, Kepak referred to a prepared statement. It read: "Kepak Group is designated by the Irish and UK governments as an essential service provider; we aim to ensure that our customers have an adequate and quality supply of food for consumers throughout this Covid-19 pandemic. All our sites remain safely operational.
"At Kepak, the health and safety of our staff, customers and suppliers is our key priority. As such, we are actively engaging with our employee forums, and with the relevant Public Health Agencies to ensure that best practice Covid-19 control measures and procedures are implemented and adhered to across all our sites. Kepak continues to observe all public health protocols during this pandemic."
Operations at a meat plant owned by Asda, the UK's third-largest grocer, have re-started but it has emerged 165 employees have tested positive for Covid-19.
The factory in Kirklees in West Yorkshire, which trades as Kober Ltd, halted production last week after a number of staff were confirmed as having the novel coronavirus.
Output resumed this week but local health officials said today a total of 165 staff have the disease.
"I'd like to thank Kober for acting quickly and working with us and Public Health England to help manage this outbreak," Rachel Spencer-Henshall, director of public health at Kirklees Council, was quoted as saying by broadcaster ITV News.
"They reopened their factory on 23 June on a reduced capacity and only colleagues that have been tested and declared fit to return are on site. We're satisfied with health and safety measures on site which include separation of colleagues on different shifts and as an additional precaution, checking the temperature of colleagues before they enter the site."
A UK trade union has claimed that Cadbury workers in the country are becoming increasingly resentful that they are not being paid the same bonuses for working during the coronavirus pandemic as colleagues in the US and the European Union.
Unite is calling on Cadbury's parent - US snacks and confectionery giant Mondelez International - to level up the playing field and said it is consulting with more than 1,200 employees members at Cadbury sites in the English Midlands and Wales over how to respond to the issue.
Mondelez said it is "disappointed" with the comments.
Unite is calling on Mondelez to follow the example of other major international food manufacturers which have provided extra payments for UK staff who have worked during the lockdown.
Unite national officer Joe Clarke said: "Throughout the crisis, Cadbury's workers have put themselves at risk and shown great flexibility, working longer hours to compensate when the workforce was reduced by as much as 30% because of the lockdown.
"There is growing resentment amongst Cadbury staff that Mondelez workers in the US, France, Belgium and Spain have been given bonuses while their hard work is yet to be recognised. This is particularly galling given Cadbury's strong performance during the crisis, which has been achieved through the hard work of our members."
A Mondelez spokesperson said: "We understand this has been an uncertain time for everyone, including our colleagues and we've been incredibly grateful for their hard work and commitment over the past three months.
"Our number one priority throughout has been their health, safety, and well-being and we have gone beyond many others to proactively put in place extensive measures in this space, many of which have been openly recognised by Unite.
"This includes offering emotional and well-being support, implementing health screenings, temperature checks, social distancing measures and making face masks available at all our factories.
"We have also helped colleagues by offering greater flexibility to support their personal needs, for example paid emergency leave, accommodating shift swapping and flexing of work patterns, as well full pay for those who are shielding themselves or have family members who are required to shield.
"We are therefore disappointed with Unite's comments as they fail to reflect all we are doing to recognise and support our people during this time.
"We're continuing to discuss with union representatives so we can try and resolve any issues as soon as possible, in the best interests of all our colleagues."
Covid-19 has altered customer behaviour around food consumption, survey says
A survey produced by investment bank Wells Fargo suggests that quarantined consumers may not return to pre-lockdown routines, something that could have major implications for foodservice suppliers.
"Our survey work suggests Covid has altered customer choice around food consumption (where, when and how), which is likely to have an impact over the next several quarters (or years) for companies under our coverage as consumers adjust to a new, and hopefully temporary, norm," the bank said
The survey suggests consumers will be willing to return to dining out if states reopen successfully, but food away from home consumption may remain below pre-Covid levels for some time.
"Approximately 70% of respondents indicated they would be comfortable returning to a restaurant with the proper safety precautions and no local spike in cases. However, only one third indicated that visit frequency for restaurant dine-in occasions would return to pre-Covid levels in the foreseeable future, with dinner most impacted," the bank said.
The survey also suggested "grocery store trip consolidation" may be here to stay.
"Once the crisis is over, one third of respondents expect trip consolidation to remain a theme and two thirds indicated that grocery stores are the most likely format to retain their food spending," Wells Fargo, which analyses the performance of major packaged food companies, said.
It suggested the shift to grocery pick-up or delivery is sustainable.
"[Of the] 40% of respondents [who] utilised grocery pick-up or delivery, the vast majority were satisfied with the service and almost 70% of these respondents plan to utilise it even after the crisis ends," Wells Fargo said.
In terms of packaged foods, the survey suggested previously poorly positioned categories will benefit.
"Roughly one third [of respondents] plan to maintain elevated consumption for each of cereal, yogurt, soup, and pasta/mac & cheese," it said.
Germany's GDP won't bounce back to pre-pandemic levels until 2022, economists advising the country's government have warned.
The German Council of Economic Experts (GCEE)  forecasts the country's real GDP will decline by 6.5 % in 2020.
For 2021, the GCEE expects GDP to bounce back, growing again by 4.9%, describing the decline and subsequent recovery as a "pronounced V".
"The weak external environment will put a significant burden on German exports this year," the GCEE cautions. "The global spread of the coronavirus has led to a deep recession of the world economy."
Germany's GDP rose 0.6% in 2019. "Consequently, GDP is unlikely to return to its pre-?pandemic level before 2022," the GCEE explains.
However, the advisers add: "The outlook for further economic development remains subject to considerable uncertainty. In particular, the course of the pandemic is of major importance. A significantly longer phase of weak economic development is expected, if the number of new infections cannot be kept at low levels, for example by smart distancing, if the easing of public health interventions does not continue and if uncertainty of companies and households is not reduced."
Brazilian meat giant JBS has been ordered to test all workers for Covid-19 at a Rio Grande do Sul meat plant, news agency Reuters has reported, quoting labour prosecutors.
It said yesterday's announcement came on the same day that JBS raised the number of meatpacking plants with confirmed cases of  coronavirus to 32.
JBS declined to comment on the decision when contacted by Reuters, saying the Três Passos plant remained open.
The news agency reported that a labour court ruled that JBS should test all workers at the plant in five days, as well as put on paid leave any employees who test positive for Covid-19, for a minimum of 14 days.
There are more than 1.1m infected with Covid-19 in Brazil and 52,000 people have died from the virus.
The UK's latest moves to ease lockdown measures will see restaurants, pubs and bars allowed to open again on 4 July in England, Prime Minister Boris Johnson said.
With public health a devolved issue in the UK, much of Johnson's statement to Parliament centred on measures in England. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland devise their own strategies for Covid-19 lockdowns.
Announcing the moves this afternoon (23 June), Johnson also said the rule stating people need to keep two metres away from each other is being reduced to "one metre plus", where the full two meters is not possible.
From 4 July, people will be allowed to meet with one other household at a time indoors, as long as social distancing is maintained, Johnson added.
This morning, the head of the western German state of North Rhine-Westphalia announced a fresh lockdown for the Gütersloh area, where a factory operated by meat giant Tönnies has seen more than 1,500 staff test positive for Covid-19 (see below link).
Armin Laschet said amenities in Gütersloh such as bars, museums and cinemas would be closed, while picnics and barbecues would also be prohibited. People will only be able to have contact with thei rown household or one person from outside.
More than 1,000 staff from a Tönnies meat plant in Germany have tested positive for Covid-19 and become a factor in a spike in the R, or reproduction, number of the virus in the country.
The outbreak among workers employed at the facility, located in Gütersloh in north-west Germany, was yesterday (22 June) described as "massive" by Chancellor Angela Merkel's chief spokesperson.
Meat processing business Tulip, owned by US meat giant Pilgrim's Pride, has confirmed an outbreak of Covid-19 among the workforce at one if its UK facilities.
The UK government has revealed plans it hopes will ensure the country's food and drink industry and agriculture sector bounce back successfully from the impact of coronavirus, with an emphasis on overseas trade opportunities.
The number of staff who have tested positive for the novel coronavirus has reportedly reached 158.
On Thursday, 2 Sisters decided to close a processing plant in Wales for 14 days because of Covid-19 infections.
The poultry facility in the town of Llangefni, Anglesey, reportedly had 13 confirmed cases a few days ago with another 110 people self-isolating, although 2 Sisters declined to confirm the numbers.
The BBC yesterday (21 June) reported the number of infections had hit 158.
"As of 15:00 BST on Sunday 21 June we have recorded an increase of 83 confirmed positive cases identified over the past 24 hours," the broadcaster quoted Dr Christopher Johnson from the Public Health Wales agency as saying.
"Testing of employees continues, and it is likely that some additional cases will be identified in the coming days.
"The increase in cases is as we anticipated when a focused track and trace programme is implemented, and does not mean that the spread of infection is increasing."
just-food has approached 2 Sisters for comment.
US food and beverages giant PepsiCo has closed a food processing plant in Beijing due to a Covid-19 outbreak.
Reuters reported the decision was taken after "at least one employee" tested positive for coronavirus at the facility which produces Lay's crisps.
China has suspended poultry imports from a plant owned by meat group Tyson Foods that has been hit by a Covid-19 outbreak.
Italian dairy company Parmalat, owned by French peer Lactalis , is to launch an e-commerce offering after what its describes as the "unprecedented growth" of online shopping during the Covid-19 period.
More UK plants "suspected" to have Covid-19 outbreaks, union claims
Three UK meat and prepared-food factories have this week emerged as sites where multiple staff have tested positive for Covid-19 – but trade union Unite claims there are more sites "suspected" to have outbreaks among workers.
Unite told just-food today (19 June) it has had "reports from more than five sites where concerns have been raised" about suspected outbreaks.
The World Bank has warned forecasts suggest the global recession caused by the novel coronavirus will be the deepest since World War II.
There will be biggest proportion of economies experiencing declines in per capita output since 1870, the organisation said.
It also stated the output of emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) is expected to contract in 2020 for the first time in at least 60 years.
The World Bank said the global economy has experienced 14 global recessions since 1870: in 1876, 1885, 1893, 1908, 1914, 1917-21, 1930-32, 1938, 1945-46, 1975, 1982, 1991, 2009, and 2020.
It warned the Covid-19 recession will be the deepest since 1945-46, and more than twice as deep as the recession associated with the 2007-09 global financial crisis.
"The Covid-19 global recession is unique in many respects," the World Bank said. "It will be the most severe since World War II and is expected to trigger per capita GDP contractions in the largest share of economies since 1870. It is also associated with unprecedented weakening in multiple indicators of global activity, such as services and oil demand, as well as declines in per capita income in all EMDE regions."
Our US columnist Victor Martino today (19 June) set out how CPG companies can steer their way through choppy economic waters.
"CPG companies need to create a new playbook to deal with a US market experiencing an economic recession plagued with a whole lot of uncertainty," he wrote.
"CPG companies, particularly the big guys, tend to fare better than many other industries in recessionary periods. But such times require changes to how brands are managed.
"What can CPG companies do to drive brand growth during the coronavirus-induced economic recession? And what can they do to position brands once the economy starts to rebound, which could possibly be as early as this fall?"
Two more food factories in the UK have reportedly been affected by outbreaks of Covid-19 among staff.
Asda, the UK's third-largest food retailer, has confirmed its meat plant in Kirklees in West Yorkshire has stopped operations after employees tested positive.
Meanwhile, Oscar Mayer has said more than 30 workers at its Rowan Foods facility in north Wales have been infected.
2 Sisters Food Group , the UK-based poultry supplier to major supermarkets, has taken the decision to close a processing plant in Wales for 14 days because of Covid-19 infections.
The poultry facility in the town of Llangefni, Anglesey, reportedly had 13 confirmed cases a few days ago with another 110 people self-isolating, although 2 Sisters declined to confirm the numbers.
However, from today (18 June), the company has decided to halt production at the site.
2 Sisters said in a statement: "In light of the current Covid-19 cases at our Llangefni site, we have decided to take the necessary action to clearly demonstrate how seriously we take this issue by doing the right thing.
"The health, safety and wellbeing of our colleagues is ultimately the thing that matters most at our business. We are a responsible company with people at its core. Without our people we are nothing.
2 Sisters said it had worked closely with local health authorities and health and safety bodies, as well as the trade union Unite, in coming to the decision.
Rapelli meats and Noppa's tofu owner Orior said today (18 June) rising sales with retail customers has offset most of the decline with its foodservice customers amid Covid-19 lockdowns.
In a stock-exchange filing ahead of the publication of its first-half results next month, Orior said that growth "will compensate for most of the decline in revenues from the foodservice sector" – although that statement, it said, excludes Casualfood, the division mostly operates in airport terminals, supplying products such as sandwiches, salads, muesli and smoothies.
Orior added: "With the re-opening of restaurants and international borders and the gradual resumption of air travel, business in these important sales channels, which have been heavily impacted by the corona crisis, will slowly recover. The performance of these sales channels during the first few weeks after restrictions were eased was very positive in light of the general environment."
The company will report its first-half numbers on 14 July.
Trade groups representing UK food and drinks manufacturers have joined hands to urge the Government to take action to provide support to those supplying the country's foodservice sector, which has been hit hard by the lockdown.
Whitworths, the UK-based dried foods producer, is launching a direct-to-consumer service for its fruit, nuts and seed products.
The Northamptonshire firm's online store will serve consumers and businesses alike across the UK, including retailers and manufacturers, with no minimum order.
Phil Gowland, Whitworths' commercial director, said: "We are excited to announce our new online shop, allowing us to reach consumers directly with new ideas as well as providing businesses the opportunity to more easily access our bulk branded and raw material products."
He said the online store will play a "huge role" in the company's "new phase" of growth.
Bloomberg, citing an unnamed executive at a "major supplier", has said customs officials in China are testing all imports of meat for the novel coronavirus.
A fresh outbreak of Covid-19 has been linked to a wholesale food market in Beijing.
The new infections are reported to have been traced to a chopping board used by a seller of imported salmon, Bloomberg said.
The unnamed executive told Bloomberg customs officials are carrying out nucleic acid tests on all shipments. Officials have also started testing every consignment within the shipments, instead of taking random samples, the executive added.
Regulators around the world have consistently said that, so far, there is no evidence Covid-19 can be transmitted through food.
Citing Norway's fisheries and seafood minister, Reuters has reported that officials from the country and in China have concluded Norwegian salmon was likely not the source of the fresh outbreak.
Analysts at Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu have been looking at data on the mobility of US citizens and their spending.
Wolf said: "For example, mobility near retail and recreation establishments in April was just 41% below its baseline in the Unites States, whereas in Europe it was anywhere from 52% lower (Germany) to 89% lower (Spain). That did not translate to a softer decline in retail sales in the United States. Indeed, US retail sales fell 16% in April, far worse than the 5% decline in Germany and even the 10% drop in Italy."
Since then, mobility near retail and recreation establishments in the US has improved, Wolf said.
US mobility was 24% lower in the last week of May. German mobility was slightly better at 22% below its baseline, while UK mobility was down 64%, "the worst among the large European countries"," Wolf said.
However, he added: "Judging by the Johnson Redbook weekly retail sales, which posted its worst ever year-over-year decline for the week of June 6, US consumer spending remained weak through the first week of June despite the ongoing improvement in mobility. An unrelated measure of retail activity shows that US foot traffic at retail stores remained depressed while foot traffic in Italy has climbed notably higher."
And Wolf warned there was "a similar theme" in the US restaurant sector. "In the first week of June, restaurant bookings in the US were 79% lower than a year ago. That is considerably worse than the bookings in Germany, which were just 24% lower than a year ago. Recall that mobility in Germany and the United States were strikingly similar at the end of May."
TSC Foods, the UK company behind the Glorious soup brand, has entered consultations with employees over 200 potential redundancies after the UK-based soup manufacturer saw foodservice sales collapse in the midst of the Covid-19 lockdown.
Covid-19 has reared its head at a 2 Sisters Food Group meat-production plant in Wales.
The poultry facility in the town of Llangefni reportedly has 13 confirmed cases among staff, with 110 people self-isolating.
2 Sisters would not confirm numbers but, in a statement, said: "Our key priority now is to continue to provide the safest possible working environment and support all our affected colleagues at Llangefni, as we have been doing for more than two months without one single case.
"The health, safety and wellbeing of every colleague is of paramount importance to us, which is why we have had a series of measures in place for some time including regular and intensive deep cleaning and disinfecting regimes, the wearing of protective visors in production areas and implementing social distancing throughout the factory.
"We continually review and evolve these measures to ensure we have the safest possible working environment; for instance we have recently introduced thermal temperature checks for all colleagues and employed marshalls to ensure social distancing is maintained in high traffic areas."
Japan-based investment bank and brokerage Nomura has made a series of GDP forecasts as the global economy splutters into action amid some easings of Covid-19 lockdowns but faces real pressure from subsequent spikes of the disease.
In Nomura's home market, the bank predicts that, with the novel coronavirus spreading, GDP will keep declining for three quarters through the end of the second quarter, followed by "a gradual recovery".
In Asia more broadly, Nomura expects Covid-19 to "derail" GDP growth, with a 1.3% year-on-year fall in 2020, compared to growth of 5.2% in 2019.
Looking at the US, Nomura said it foresees "a short, but steep, recession" in the first half of 2020 before a gradual recovery aided by fiscal and monetary accommodation. "The unemployment rate will rise sharply, peaking around 20% in Q2, as labor market conditions deteriorate due to Covid-19," Nomura said.
The bank, meanwhile, said it had "axed again" its forecasts for UK GDP and see a recession in H1 – with output falling by more than 15% vs Q4 2019.
A 'sharp but short' recession: Morgan Stanley economists' "confidence" in forecast for V-shaped recovery
Output will return to pre-coronavirus crisis levels by the fourth quarter of 2020, according to Morgan Stanley economists, cited by Bloomberg.
Economists at the Morgan Stanley, led by chief Asia economist Chetan Ahya, said yesterday (14 June) they have "greater confidence" in the banks's "call for a V-shaped recovery, given recent upside surprises in growth data and policy action".
Predicting a "sharp but short" recession, the Morgan Stanley economists said they expect global GDP growth will fall by as much as 8.6% in the second quarter when measured year-on-year but recover to growth of 3% by the first quarter of 2021.
France has changed the alert status of its mainland territory, allowing cafes and restaurants to fully reopen.
As of today, the whole territory – with the exception of the overseas départements of Mayotte and French Guiana where the virus is still actively circulating – passes into the French government's "green zone", which allows in particular a stronger resumption of work, and the reopening of cafes and restaurants in Île-de-France, or the Paris region.
Dès demain, tout le territoire - à l'exception de Mayotte et de la Guyane où le virus circule encore activement - passera dans la « zone verte », ce qui permettra notamment une reprise plus forte du travail, et la réouverture des cafés et restaurants en Île-de-France.
— Emmanuel Macron (@EmmanuelMacron) June 14, 2020
"As soon as tomorrow, we will be able to turn the page on this first chapter across all our territory," Emmanuel Macron, France's President, said in a televised address yesterday evening.
Scotland has decided to pause plans to limit the way foods high in fat, sugar or salt can be promoted in the country.
Joe FitzPatrick, Scotland's minister for public health, said there were no longer plans to introduce the Restricting Food Promotions Bill in this parliament, which ends in May 2021.
"We remain fully committed to restricting the promotion and marketing of foods high in fat, sugar or salt where they are sold to the public and will seek to progress this measure as soon as it is possible to do so," FitzPatrick said. "Pausing the introduction of the bill provides us with an opportunity to take stock, take into account the impact of the Covid-19 lockdown, including on people's diet and healthy weight."
Bakkavor, the UK-based private-label supplier to major supermarkets, said it is starting to see a stabilisation in volumes across its key markets in the UK, the US and China that were all hit to varying degrees by the coronavirus outbreak.
Having seen a "sharp reduction" in volumes in the US and UK in the back-end of March and into April, coming later than the decline in the Chinese market toward the end of January, Bakkavor said all three regions are showing "early signs of recovery".
Still, like-for-like revenues for the five months to the end of May were down around 5%, it said in a trading update to the London Stock Exchange.
The UK remains "volatile", however, amid what the company said is "historically low levels" of shopping visits, with revenues 19% lower in April and down 13% in May.
In China, Bakkavor said its foodservice customers have reopened the "majority of their restaurants and stores" and consumer confidence is starting to return as lockdowns ease.
In the latest note from its analysts covering the US packaged-food market, investment bank AllianceBernstein has sketched out what it sees as the major factors that could affect the performance of some of the major names in the sector.
With the latest US sales data coming out of Nielsen showing some of the major names in the country's packaged-food industry continuing to see sales growth decelerate after the stockpiling-fuelled highs of March/April, thoughts are turning to what could be the prospects for some of the household names in the sector over the longer term.
Looking at the very near term, the AllianceBernstein analysts said today (11 June) they expect the "elevated retail sales growth" seen by US packaged-food manufacturers "to be partially offset by declines in the foodservice channel for those with meaningful exposure".
The analysts said they also expect US food companies to incur increased operating costs during the pandemic, which could partially offset the benefits of volume-led sales gains.
"As we look out to the medium to longer term, we expect a number of puts and takes in terms of the pandemic's longer-term impact on US food companies," they wrote. On the positive side, the listed US food companies the analysts cover could "benefit from improved retailer relationships and a focus on core SKUs from larger brands at the expense of smaller brands".
On the other side of the coin, the AllianceBernstein analysts argue thus: "As this was a health-based crisis, there could be more focus on health and wellness from both consumers and regulators. Consumers could also shift away from heavily-processed packaged food as more people become comfortable with cooking from scratch."
And the wariness among some consumers about "heavily-processed" food that we saw before the pandemic hit will likely return in the longer-term, the analysts suggest.
"We expect the long-term structural pressures to resume for the US-centric food companies as consumers continue to demand less heavily processed, better-for-you food options. While we expect some trade-in from food-away-from-home to food-at-home during a recession, this is likely to be largely offset by a further trade-down from branded to private-label food products. During the financial crisis, Campbell Soup Co. , General Mills , Kellogg and J.M. Smucker generated flat/negative volume growth while private-label gained circa 160 basis points of market share."
Easyfood, the Denmark-based business owned by Norway's Orkla, is to lay off 13 workers as the company adapts to the coronavirus crisis.
The maker of bread-based convenience products said it had to cut production teams down to two from six in March as the virus took hold, and put 57 employees on furlough under the support of the Danish government.
However, while Easyfood is now operating four production teams, its CEO Flemming Paasch said the company will withdraw from the state support scheme, and as a result is letting 13 staff go.
There is "increasing evidence" showing a link between obesity and the severity of illnesses from Covid-19 illness – and deaths, new research published in the UK has claimed.
The German government has eased entry restrictions for seasonal farm workers that were introduced to help stop the spread of coronavirus.
From 16 June until 31 December, seasonal workers from the European Union and the passport-free Schengen zone will be allowed to freely enter Germany by land or air to help harvest crops,
Agriculture minister Julia Kloeckner announced on Wednesday (10 June): "Until the end of the year, farmers can employ additional seasonal workers from abroad.
German farms usually require some 300,000 foreign harvest helpers a year. They mainly come from Poland and Romania.
Under the new guidelines, workers have to keep at least 1.5 metres distance from each other and work in small teams.
The inter-governmental organisation, which has 37 member countries, said in its latest Economic Outlook that the Covid-19 pandemic has triggered the most severe recession in nearly a century and is causing enormous damage to people's health, jobs and well-being.
With "little prospect of a vaccine becoming widely available this year, and faced with unprecedented uncertainty," the OECD has presented two scenarios - one in which the virus is brought under control, and one in which a second global outbreak hits before the end of 2020.
If a second outbreak occurs triggering a return to lockdowns, world economic output is forecast to plummet 7.6% this year, before climbing back 2.8% in 2021. At its peak, unemployment in the OECD economies would be more than double the rate prior to the outbreaks, with little recovery in jobs next year, it said.
If a second wave of infections is avoided, global economic activity is expected to fall by 6% in 2020 and OECD unemployment to climb to 9.2% from 5.4% in 2019.
"The economic impact of strict and relatively lengthy lockdowns in Europe will be particularly harsh. Euro area GDP is expected to plunge by 11.5% this year if a second wave breaks out, and by over 9% even if a second hit is avoided, while GDP in the United States will take a hit of 8.5% and 7.3% respectively, and Japan 7.3% and 6%," it said.
The OECD's predictions make for particularly grim reading for the UK. It thinks the country's economy will contract by 11.5% in the event of a single hit and by 14% if the virus returns.
Brazilian meat titan JBS has received permission from a court in Brazil's state of Rondônia to re-open a beef plant where 266 employees tested positive for Covid-19, according to news agency Reuters.
Quoting locally-based labour prosecutors, Reuters reported the plant was allowed to resume activities on Friday (5 June) after the entire workforce there was tested for coronavirus.
The plant employs 900 people in São Miguel do Guaporé, a town of only 23,000 inhabitants.
Reuters said the labour prosecutor's office criticised the ruling that authorised the plant to reopen on June 4, only days after a 27 May order to close it.
Prosecutors also called on JBS to remove all employees who had contact with sick workers while enforcing at least 1.5 metres of physical distancing on the plant's production lines.
Nomad Foods, the European frozen-food business, has seen unprecedented online demand during the Covid-19 lockdowns as sales growth through the channel almost doubled in April.
US food group Rich Products, pointing to the impact of Covid-19, today (9 June) outlined moves to further restructure its business in the UK, which could lead to 100 staff being made redundant.
"Whilst bakery sales across the grocery and out-of-home market are beginning to rebuild, the sector has been dramatically affected by Covid-19, particularly with the closure of coffee shops and café outlets," a Rich Products spokesperson said.
UK private-label major Bakkavor is considering the future of a fresh food facility at Spalding, Lincolnshire, in the English east Midlands. Hundreds of jobs could be lost as a result.
Chinese dairy giant Mengniu has issued a profit warning, blaming increased costs linked to the Covid-19 outbreak.
South Africa-based RCL Foods has issued a profit warning related to the coronavirus outbreak and the subsequent lockdowns and suspension of its foodservice operations.
Final numbers will be presented around 31 August.
Mars has launched a dedicated online store in India in partnership with delivery platform Swiggy for a range of the US-based firm's confectionery brands.
Kalpesh Parmar, the general manager for Mars Wrigley India, said: "Mars Wrigley is using the digital commerce platform in an innovative way to reach maximum consumers. We believe consumers are looking for occasions to treat themselves and creating moments of joy for everyone in the family while they stay at home. We are ensuring the products that customers value are made available to them with greater ease and in ways that remains protective of public health."
Confectionery maker Hershey also recently joined with Swiggy and its peer Dunzo in India. Nestlé , PepsiCo, Kraft Heinz , Impossible Foods and Beyond Meat have all embraced D2C as an alternative channel to retail over the past few months to bolster revenues amid Covid-19.
Japan-based investment bank and brokerage Nomura has developed a "visual tool" it says helps weigh up the risk of a second wave of Covid-19 as economies re-open.
Nomura has assessed 45 "major economies" and ten US states, dividing each into three classifications: "on track", "warning signs" and "danger zone".
Of the 45 countries, 17 are deemed by Nomura to be "on track", offering "increasing mobility and no sign of a second wave". Fourteen of these countries are in Europe, joined by Australia, South Korea and Thailand.
Those under Nomura's "warning signs" classification include Germany, the Netherlands, Turkey, the UK and the US. Amid increasing mobility, there are, Nomura says, "tentative warning signs".
Fifteen countries are in the bank's "danger zone" and "most at risk" of a second wave of the novel coronavirus, including Brazil, India, Mexico, Saudi Arabia and Sweden.
"The tool is based on the latest available daily data on Google mobility and confirmed Covid-19 cases. While the latter is updated every day, mobility index lags by about one week," Nomura said.
"Our visual tool has yielded a mixed bag of results: 17 countries are on track with respect to reopening economies with no sign of [a] second wave; 13 countries are showing some tentative warning signs and 15 countries in danger zone of being most at risk of a second wave, the latter group largely comprising of emerging market countries."
just-food analysis: Could UK wholesalers' Covid-19 pivots persist?
In late-March, the UK's lockdown meant, overnight, wholesalers' bread-and-butter foodservice market dried-up, forcing them to rethink their businesses. Some jumped straight into supplying the public direct, others sold into supermarkets. On our analysis pages today, David Burrows looks at whether these strategies could stick.
Vion Food Group has resumed production at a factory in the Netherlands that had seen more than 100 staff test positive for Covid-19.
Vion said it had been given the green light by local health officials, who will monitor measures at the site. There will be "daily large-scale cleaning and disinfection" at the Groenlo plant. All employees will have daily health checks, the company added.
In an interview with Reuters, the chief executive of Japanese food and beverage giant Suntory forecast a fifth of the country's bars and restaurants could go out of business due to the pandemic.
"If you ask me how much will return, I'd say roughly, around 80% will be back," Takeshi Niinami, Suntory's CEO and also an economic adviser to the country's government, told the news agency.
Japan, a country with a population of around 127m, has so far avoided a large-scale outbreak of the novel coronavirus. Data published in the Japanese media today showed the country had seen 932 people die from Covid-19. Those who have tested positive number 17,924.
UK savoury snacks maker Addo Food Group is to take on 65 new employees at a plant in England to help it meet increased demand during the Covid-19 outbreak.
Saputo said it will take another "couple of quarters" before the Canada-based dairy firm's foodservice business returns to pre-coronavirus levels as its chief executive noted how he is open to acquisitions in the sector.
Arla Foods said its foodservice sales in the European dairy group's home market of Denmark rose 30% in the past two weeks as canteens, restaurants and cafes began to reopen having been shutdown to curb the spread of Covid-19.
London-based data and analytics company GlobalData suggests prolonged turbulence in the meat industry caused by Covid-19 could be detrimental to consumer confidence.
US jam, peanut butter, relishes and snacks maker J.M. Smucker has reported Q4 sales figures that have been massively boosted by the Covid-19 factor.
Nestlé said operations have resumed at all of its manufacturing facilities and distribution centres in India that had been working at scaled-down capacity due to the Covid-19 outbreak.
It is now in the process of scaling-up operations with "stringent safety practises" in place, Nestlé said in a stock exchange filing.
"Due to the unpredictable and fast-changing Covid-19 situation, it is very difficult to assess the future impact of Covid-19 on business operations and it is expected to evolve over a period of time," Nestlé noted. "However, we are confident about our ability to manage this crisis through our financial stability, our trusted brands, our consumers, our committed employees and our quality of leadership."
Campbell Soup Co. has made a significant upgrade to its financial guidance across key metrics after the US food group experienced "unprecedented broad-based demand" in the third quarter due to coronavirus-linked shopping behaviour.
The global animal-protein industry is "vulnerable to zoonotic outbreaks and guilty of creating them", new research from an international investor group has claimed.
FAIRR, a network of global investors aiming to create awareness over environmental, social and corporate governance (ESG) issues with US$20trn in assets, has said Covid-19 is "a warning of the role modern animal production systems can play in increasing zoonotic disease risk".
The group has called on the animal-protein sector to "tackle lax safety standards for food and workers alike, closely confined animals and overused antibiotics".
US meat giant Tyson Foods has revealed that some 815 workers across two plants in Iowa have tested positive for coronavirus.
At Storm Lake, 2,303 employees were tested and 591 tested positive. Tyson said 75% of those who tested positive showed no symptoms.
Limited production at the facility will resume today (3 June) following a temporary halt during which additional deep cleaning and sanitising was conducted.
Tom Brower, senior vice president of health and safety for Tyson Foods, said: "As in Storm Lake, we are routinely finding high levels of asymptomatic positives when we test widely at our plants and because of that, we can do a public service by sharing the results with the local community."
At its Council Bluffs facility, Tyson tested 1,483 employees and 224 of them tested positive for Covid-19. Some 103 of those have been through their required absence and have now returned to work.
More than half of individuals who tested positive did not show any symptoms.
The Council Bluffs plant is among more than 40 production facilities in the US where Tyson is rolling out testing capabilities with the medical clinical services company Matrix Medical.
Mash Direct, a prepared-vegetable products supplier based in Northern Ireland, sells on both sides of the Irish Sea and across the island of Ireland. COO Jack Hamilton tells Dean Best how the family-owned firm has adapted to Covid-19, with the pandemic affecting parts of the business in different ways.
Northern Ireland-based Mash Direct, a supplier of prepared-vegetable products, does business in its home market, mainland Great Britain and the Irish Republic. The family-owned company turns over north of GBP20m (US$25.1m) a year and, as the Covid-19 pandemic hit, was growing its top and bottom lines.
However, like businesses across the packaged-food industry, big and small, Mash Direct has had to react quickly to the way the novel coronavirus has shaken up the sector. Almost a third of the firm's turnover is generated through the foodservice channel.
Mash Direct did, however, see sales to its grocery-retail customers (which take in major retailers on both sides of the Irish Sea) jump in the early weeks of the lockdowns in the UK and Ireland, while COO Jack Hamilton says the company launched a direct-to-consumer service that may become a permanent part of the business.
Analysts at the US investment bank have been reflecting on the latest data coming out of the US and setting out their forecasts for consumer spending in the country in the second quarter. It makes for sobering reading.
Discussing not just the Covid-19 pandemic, the economic recession and now the political division and racial tension that have hit the US, Dr. David Kelly, chief global strategist at J.P. Morgan Asset Management, wrote: "Recently, the forces pulling us apart have seemed stronger. But just as there are cycles in the economy, so there are cycles in politics and society and there will be many better years ahead than 2020. Still, we can't unfortunately fast forward this movie to those better years and, for investors and those advising them it is still important to understand the nature of the recession into which we have fallen. While this has been a recurring theme in recent months, every few days we get new information which can help us track both of the depth of the downturn and the speed of a potential recovery.
"Last week's numbers on consumer spending, durable goods, inventories and international trade gave us a better understanding of just how far we have fallen. In particular, real consumer spending fell 13.2% in April following a 6.7% March decline. This was worse than expected and, even with a substantial recovery in May and June, we expect real consumer spending to fall an extraordinary 43% annualised in the second quarter. This, combined with weaker trade and inventory data, suggests that real GDP overall could fall by roughly 41% annualised in the second quarter of this year, before rebounding by 18% annualised in the third."
Dr. Kelly sought to emphasise how he believes any real pick-up in the US economy will come when a vaccine for Covid-19 is widely administered.
"It should be emphasised that the apparent strength of this rebound is largely a reflection of the depth of the downturn, particularly in April of this year. Moreover, we continue to expect that the economy will only show true acceleration when a vaccine has been widely distributed," he said. "Because of this, while real GDP could fall 13.7% in absolute terms from its cyclical peak at the end of last year to the second quarter of this year, it may only gain back a quarter of this extraordinary decline in the third quarter and output could still be lower in the fourth quarter of 2021 than in the fourth quarter of 2019."
"China's economy is healing. Indicators point to a U-shaped recovery assuming Covid-19 remains contained," S&P Global Ratings' Chief Asia-Pacific Economist Shaun Roache wrote.
Roache, however, had a caveat that will be of interest to those in FMCG.
"Unsurprisingly, healing is uneven. Large firms are finding their feet faster than small firms, and industry is recovering faster than the service sector. We estimate that just three months after the peak in Covid-19 cases in early February, large industrial firms were back at 95% of normal capacity. Manufacturing output rose by 5% in April compared with a year ago. Not all industries are firing at the same time, however. The technology sector has rebounded, autos have stabilised, and consumer goods are still below 2019 levels."
Brazilian meat heavyweight Marfrig has reportedly agreed to introduce enhanced protection measures against the Covid-19 virus for its meat plant workers.
News agency Reuters said that the company has signed a settlement with labour prosecutors in its home market to make working conditions safer for its employees against a backdrop of the virus spreading in meat plants in recent weeks.
Quoting a statement from the labour prosecutors, Reuters reported that additional protective measures agreed upon include routine testing of workers for coronavirus and introducing a mandatory 1.5 metres in physical distancing between workers at the company's 12 plants in Brazil.
It also said Marfrig is to test all of its 18,000 workers starting today (2 June) as part of efforts to combat the spread of the virus.
And it will immediately remove "symptomatic workers" from its plants for a minimum period of 14 days.
Local food has grown in importance among consumers in Germany since the onset of Covid-19, a government survey has suggested.
In the latest edition of an annual government report into Germany's eating habits, more than four in five of consumers surveyed said it is important food comes from the local region. The importance of the regional origin also depends on the product
Julia Klöckner, Germany's Federal Minister of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection, said: "Local food has become more important. A new awareness of food has arisen - and of the work of those who produce it. This new esteem needs to be maintained."
According to the survey, 39% of those questioned stated that agriculture had become more important for them during the Covid-19 crisis.
Brazil-based meat giant JBS has been given clearance to resume production at a poultry plant closed since 18 May.
According to Reuters, JBS can re-start processing at the facility in Ipumirim, which is located in the southern state of Santa Catarina.
Citing labour officials, the news agency said that, when the company was ordered to close the factory, there had been 86 confirmed cases of Covid-19.
Labour market pressures, weak consumption and a slump in global demand mean bankers at HSBC have said they expect China's GDP to slow to 1.7% this year - down from growth of 6.1% in 2019.
Beijing has reduced interest rates during the Covid-19 crisis, with additional re-lending and rediscount facilities for agriculture and smaller firms.
Banks' reserve-requirement ratio has also been lowered to free up more liquidity into the financial system.
However, Qu Hongbin, chief China economist at HSBC, said an expansion of monetary policy "usually takes time to filter through into the real economy".
"Companies increase investment as credit becomes easier and household spending rises but the transmission into industrial production can take around five months and twice as long for credit conditions to be reflected in nominal GDP," Hongbin said.
He also pointed out how manufacturing firms' first-quarter profits were down by 39% compared to 2019.
Meanwhile, Hongbin added, China's high savings rate makes household spending less sensitive to looser monetary conditions. Stable wages and jobs are bigger drivers of domestic consumption.
"So, the delay in monetary conditions feeding through into the real economy means China's domestic growth recovery is likely to remain slow in the near-term. We thus believe Beijing will step up monetary easing, with credit growth accelerating by lowering interest rates and reserve-requirement ratios even more this year."
The United Nations World Food Programme has warned that an estimated 265 million people could face acute food insecurity by the end of 2020, up from 135 million people before the crisis.
Food producers are facing large losses on perishable and nutritious food as buyers have become limited and traders stop engaging with farmers.
The World Bank has called for collective action to keep food trade flowing between countries.
countries with significant currency depreciation, (driving up the cost of food imports) and countries seeing other commodity prices collapse (reducing their capacity to import food).
France has announced the country's restaurants, cafes and bars will start to re-open on 2 June.
Edouard Philippe, France's Prime Minister, said outlets in certain areas would only be allowed to open terraces.
Restaurants, cafes and bars in what France calls "orange zones" can only open their terraces. Those zones include Ile-de-France, the country's most populous region, which takes in Paris. The French capital is no longer deemed a "red" coronavirus danger zone, according to Philippe. The rating still means Paris is not as free as the majority of French regions, which are designated "green".
Compte tenu de l'évolution de la crise sanitaire, les restaurants, bars et cafés pourront ouvrir dans tous les départements à partir du 2 juin. Dans les départements qui font l'objet d'une vigilance particulière, seules les terrasses pourront ouvrir au 2 juin. #déconfinement
— Edouard Philippe (@EPhilippePM) May 28, 2020
Nous allons surveiller avec une vigilance particulière les départements d'île-de-France, la Guyane et Mayotte, où le virus circule plus qu'ailleurs. Dans ces départements « oranges », le #déconfinement sera, pour 3 semaines, un peu plus prudent que sur le reste du territoire. pic.twitter.com/5bgWownjoF
— Edouard Philippe (@EPhilippePM) May 28, 2020
Standing at the counter remains prohibited.
Employers' union GNI-HCR cautiously welcomed the news.
"Even if for the vast majority of professionals, the time is for relief, everyone knows that only one step has been taken, or is about to be taken, and that the hardest part remains," the union said in a statement.
"First, we will have to reassure our employees that their health will not be affected by their work because measures are taken such as wearing a compulsory mask for everyone and limiting contact with customers. Then our customers, who are impatient to find us but who legitimately do not want to put themselves in danger. To them too, we say, measures are being implemented."
Turkey President Tayyip Erdogan has said Turkey will lift restrictions on intercity travel and allow restaurants, cafes, parks and sports facilities to reopen from Monday (1 Jun as the country eases restrictions imposed to curb the coronavirus outbreak.
Service will be allowed until 10pm, Erdogan said.
Announcing a series of measures to ease Turkey's lockdown, he added: "I wish that the decisions we make will be beneficial for our country and nation. In the new normal order, I am again saying these three concepts: Masks, distance, cleaning ... Let's not neglect these issues. Let's go around with the mask, be sure to pay attention to the physical distance, definitely pay attention to cleanliness, these are our three essentials."
The United Food and Commercial Workers International Union (UFCW) has reported that 44 meat plant employees have died in the US from Covid-19 and is calling calling on the Trump administration and meat companies to do more to protect workers.
UFCW's latest figures reveal more than 3,000 infections among US meatpacking workers.
It estimates that 22 plants have closed at some point in the past two months. These closures have impacted more than 35,000 workers and reduced pork slaughter capacity by 25% and beef slaughter capacity by 10%, it said.
It has written to US agriculture secretary Sonny Perdue and vice president Mike Pence asking for better protection measures to be introduced in meat plants.
UFCW International president Marc Perrone said: "America's food processing and meatpacking workers are in extreme danger, and our nation's food supply faces a direct threat from the coronavirus outbreak. If workers in these plants are as essential as our elected leaders say, then it's about time that our elected leaders provide them with the essential protections they need."
US meat titan Tyson Foods is to temporarily close its Storm Lake pork processing plant in Iowa following a mass outbreak of Covid-19 amongst its employees there, reports suggest.
News agency Reuters reported an Iowa state official as saying 555 employees at the plant tested positive for the virus, about 22% of the workforce.
Reuters further reported Tyson said yesterday (28 May) it will close the facility on a temporary basis as a result.
The free-from cereals and snacks manufacturer, which also supplies fresh milk and milk drinks and plant-based beverages, expects full-year profits to be "materially impacted" by the Covid-19 outbreak as the crisis hit sales in the out-of-home segment.
And the Sydney-listed business also revealed it had made "some redundancies" across the company as a result of the "reshaping of its commercial and organisational structures to reflect the new operational footprint", which is based around Freedom Foods' focus on markets in Australia, China and south-east Asia.
UK healthier food campaign group Action on Sugar and Salt is calling on the country's government to tackle issues relating to obesity, which has been linked as a Covid-19 risk factor.
The government is due to publish a report on how factors including obesity, ethnicity, income and gender can affect the impact of the coronavirus on people's health.
The campaign group has presented an "evidence-based plan" which it said will provide support for those living with obesity, while improving health for all in the long term.
Its plan includes providing guidance for identifying modifiable risk factors  and increasing access and funding for evidence-based weight loss support.
It is also calling for a ban on the advertising and promotion of unhealthy products and for the government to make nutrition labelling mandatory.
Global retail sales of meat-free products are to dip in 2020, affected by Covid-19, before rebounding next year, new research suggests.
Meat-free sales are forecast to hit US$4.7bn this year, down 0.7% on 2019, according to analysis from UK-based data and analytics group GlobalData.
Stripping the impact from Covid-19 from the numbers, meat-free sales were set to grow 6.5%, Carmen Bryan, consumer analyst at GlobalData, said.
However, GlobalData is forecasting retail sales of meat-free products will bounce back, rising more than 8% in 2021.
Bryan said Kellogg's recent decision to delay the launch of its Incogmeato product in the US "makes sense" given the way the market looks to be developing this year.
"Kellogg's decision to delay its new launches will prove wise in the coming years, as 2021 is expected to bring a sharp rebound for the meat substitutes market. By holding out, the company will be able to launch its new faux-burger line in favourable conditions, capitalising on the renewed demand from consumers."
Nestlé has partnered with Deliveroo to provide a range of its confectionery directly to customer's doors in the UK as the Covid-19 crisis makes it difficult for shoppers to get to store.
Brazil's Marfrig Global Foods has 25 cases of Covid-19 at its plant in Várzea Grande in the state of Mato Grosso.
The meat processor said the facility continues to operate, although health and safety protocols have been put in place to protect workers, such as temperature controls and limited access.
Any employees who had contact with the infected workers are in isolation at home.
Meanwhile, any staff suffering from flu symptoms, pregnant women, people with chronic diseases and those over 60 years old have been told to stay away from work.
More than 200 workers at US meat giant Tyson Foods' plant in Sherman, Texas, have tested positive for Covid-19, it is reported.
US broadcaster NBC reported that some employees at the plant had already tested positive for the virus when, just over two weeks ago, the state conducted a large round of tests on more than 1,600 workers over a two-day period.
The results showed that 220 came back positive and three showed to be inconclusive, it said, quoting local county officials.
While not commenting on the number of workers impacted at the plant, Tyson told NBC it had "put in place a host of protective measures that meet or exceed CDC and OSHA guidance".
Brazilian meat behemoth JBS has seen one of its domestic plants closed won following a Covid-19 outbreaks amongst employees there, it is reported.
News agency Reuters said the JBS plant in the state of Rondonia has been closed on the order of a labour court until the company tests all workers there for coronavirus.
A ruling seen by the news agency said that more than 60% of the cases already confirmed in the municipality are inside the company.
JBS did not have an immediate comment, Reuters said.
BRF has said the potential closure of slaughterhouses due the spread of coronavirus at meat production sites would make it impossible to keep output at current levels.
News agency Reuters quoted the Brazilian meat giant's CEO Lorival Nogueira Luz as saying: "We have to be aware that if contagion worsens and authorities see the need to close units it is mathematically impossible to ensure production levels."
There are no BRF plants closed due to the outbreak, but at one point, the company's Lajeado facility in Rio Grande do Sul state had been shut by authorities to contain the spread of the disease among workers.
"We have to be aware that if contagion worsens and authorities see the need to close units it is mathematically impossible to ensure production levels," Luz said.
BRF said this week nearly 340 meatpacking workers at a its Concórdia plant, which employs 5,132 people, had tested positive for the virus and would be submitted to further testing,
Adelie Foods, the UK food-to-go supplier, has appointed administrators after Covid-19 hammered orders at the sandwich and bagel maker, which employs more than 2,000 people.
London-based research and analysis business GlobalData is forecasting that the global meat market will value US$1.3trn by the end of 2020, reflecting a year-on-year decline of 5.3%.
"This is a stark contrast to the expected robust baseline growth the industry was experiencing pre-pandemic. Prior to Covid-19, the global meat industry was expected to grow at an annual rate of 2.6% over 2020 to reach a value of $1.4trn," GlobalData said.
Carmen Bryan, consumer analyst at GlobalData, added: "Meat is a staple food in many cultures worldwide, thus the global downturn is evident of the current uncertainty and supply disruptions many markets are facing. Although production will stabilise in the long-term, a full recovery to a pre-Covid-19 value is unlikely."
An employee at US meat giant Tyson Foods' largest pork processing plant at Waterloo, Iowa, is understood to have died after contracting the Covid-19 virus.
The plant was temporarily shut down in April after a major outbreak of the virus at the facility. It reopened on 7 May.
In a statement sent to CNN, a Tyson spokesperson said: "We are deeply saddened by the loss of any Tyson team member and are keeping the family in our thoughts and prayers at this difficult time."
Meanwhile, Tyson has revealed that 257 of the employees at its poultry facility in Temperanceville, Virginia, have tested positive for coronavirus.
It said that 178 of those cases were discovered following facility-wide testing between 5 May and 7 May while the remaining 79 were tested by local health officials.
Tyson said the majority of those who tested positive had not showed any symptoms of the virus.
Some 1,282 people work at the plant.
Seafood heavyweight Thai Union has confirmed a case of Covid-19 at the plant of its subsidiary European Seafood Investment (ESIP) in Portugal.
The company told The Stock Exchange of Thailand, on which it is listed, that the member of staff had reported feeling unwell on 20 May and immediately reported to the on-site infirmary and was sent home. On Saturday (23 May), a test was performed with positive results.
The employee continues to self-isolate and is currently not displaying severe symptoms of Covid-19 or in any immediate danger, Thai Union said.
As a precautionary measure, it has sent home approximately 200 out of the total 850 workers at the plant. These workers were identified as being in contact with the sick employee.
Peniche-based ESIP remains open and is working closely with all local health and government authorities on measures to ensure no further spread of Covid-19 among the workforce, Thai Union said.
The Thai company owns 100% of ESIP, a manufacturer and exporter of canned sardines and mackerel.
JBS, the Brazilian meatpacking behemoth, is said to be facing a second legal challenge linked to the outbreak of Covid-19 in one of its facilities.
According to a report from news agency Reuters, Brazilian labour prosecutors are suing the company "seeking damages and better work conditions" after an outbreak of the virus at a meat plant in Ipumirim, in the southern state of Santa Catarina.
JBS said in a statement sent to Reuters that it had not received formal notice of the lawsuit and said that it adhered to "strict protocols" against the virus.
In April labour prosecutors field suit after an outbreak of Covid-19 at the company's Passo Fundo unit. Operations at that facility resumed on 21 May after being closed for a month.
The Ipumirim plant was closed after a labour inspection on 18 May.
Dutch meat supplier Vion Food Group has seen output at one of its domestic sites halted – and all staff sent home for a fortnight's quarantine – after dozens of workers tested positive for Covid-19.
Brazilian meat giant BRF is dealing with a large outbreak of the Covid-19 virus amongst its workforce in a domestic plant.
Nearly 340 workers at its Concórdia plant in Santa Catarina state have tested positive for the virus, some 6.6% of the total workforce there of 5,132.
A statement from BRF sent to just-food said the workers have been suspended from duty after being diagnosed.
The company said it has tested all of the workers at the facility, which processes poultry and pork, in recent days with the 93% of workers who tested negative returning to work yesterday (25 May).
All BRF plants in Brazil remain open.
In Denmark, meat-processing cooperative Danish Crown has re-started output at a slaughterhouse where operations were halted last week.
The co-op stopped output at its slaughterhouse the southern Danish town of Skærbæk last Monday (18 May) after an outbreak of Covid-19 among staff at one of the site's customers.
Westcrown, a German venture between Danish Crown and the German meat processor Westfleisch, was a major customer for the facility.
Danish Crown confirmed yesterday operations at the Skærbæk site had resumed.
Brazilian meat giant JBS has reportedly reopened a poultry plant in the state of Rio Grande do Sul that was shutdown by authorities in April because of Covid-19 infections.
Slaughtering at the Passo Fundo site resumed on Wednesday (20 May), JBS said in a statement provided to Reuters, adding that the facility has the capacity to process 320,000 birds a day.
just-food has asked JBS for confirmation.
China is reportedly drawing up plans to secure the supply of food in the midst of the global coronavirus crisis, including strengthening mechanisms against diseases such as African swine fever, which has decimated the country's hog herds.
G. Willi-Food , the Israel-based kosher food supplier, said it posted its highest-ever sales and operating profit in its fiscal first quarter due to increased demand amid the coronavirus outbreak.
Zwi Williger and Joseph Williger, who both hold the joint chairman role, said: "Since a strain of coronavirus surfaced in China at the end of 2019 and reached many other countries worldwide, including Israel, there has been a substantial increase in demand for the company's products, especially in the retail market.
"The company acted to maintain its operational ability and to ensure that sufficient levels of inventory were available in order to meet demand during the Covid-19 pandemic. We intend to continue to maintain sufficient inventory levels and work to further strengthen the company's supply chain, and product portfolio to meet its future demand."
Sales rose 32% to ILS129.1m (US$36.5m), while operating profit climbed 50.9% to ILS19m. However, net profit slumped. It was down 92.5% at ILS1.2m.
In an interview with just-food, Plant Meat, the UK-based meat-alternatives firm trading as (and under the flagship brand of) This speaks of how it has lost a third of its business amid the near-shutdown of the country's foodservice channel but insists it is still "excited" about its prospects in that side of the market.
This (yes, that is the business' and brand's name) is one of a flurry of businesses looking to ride rising consumer interest in plant-based fare. The London-based company, which offers alternatives to chicken and bacon, has listings with UK grocers The Co-op and Waitrose and has more national retailers set to stocking its products this year.
Speaking to Dean Best, This co-founder Andy Shovel said the firm's sales through UK supermarkets doubled in February and March but, of course, saw its foodservice business tumble. "Obviously that's taken such a big knock but on the other hand, retail spiked a lot, so in a strange way we're actually back where we started," Shovel says.
"Generally speaking, I'd say the foodservice pipeline is the most exciting part of our outlook when this thing clears. We had more foodservice inquiries than we could deal with almost. That's the area of business I find really exciting as well because it sets us apart to some degree. We made more traction in foodservice in six months than I think most of the category did to be honest. There aren't that many meat-alternative brands who are co-branding in restaurants like we are."
You can read the full interview, in which Shovel also discusses adapting to the Covid-19 pandemic and the growing competition in UK meat-free, here .
Food and beverage sector M&A activity in the UK in the first four months of this year is down drastically on the same period last year with Covid-19 having a "significant impact" on the deals market.
Tyson Foods has revealed more than 500 workers tested positive for Covid-19 at its poultry plant in Wilkesboro, North Carolina.
The US-based meat giant said the positive cases emerged from a facility-wide testing of 2,244 staff at the site, with 570 giving a confirmed diagnosis. The majority showed no coronavirus symptoms, the company said.
US food major Kraft Heinz has confirmed a "handful" of Covid-19 cases at its manufacturing plant in Kirksville, Missouri, with the infected staff now in quarantine at home on full pay.
The factory produces Oscar Mayer Bologna and Square Ham.
A statement provided to just-food read: "A handful of Kraft Heinz employees in our Kirksville, Missouri, factory have tested positive for coronavirus. We have taken all necessary steps to identify and notify individuals who worked closely with these employees."
Hormel Foods has withdrawn its annual guidance due to Covid-19 uncertainties, despite the US-based meat firm posting "record" second-quarter sales.
Chief executive Jim Snee said in a statement today (21 May): "The Covid-19 pandemic has created industry uncertainty as to whether we will experience further interruptions. Additionally, the foodservice industry is in the very early stages of a recovery, and we are actively monitoring the pace and magnitude of this recovery. As a result of this uncertainty, we are withdrawing our full-year sales and earnings guidance."
Sales for the three months to 28 April rose 3% (6% in organic terms) to US$2.4bn. However, pretax earnings were down 10% at $286m, while net profit fell 8.7% to $277m.
Snee added: "Even though the Covid-19 pandemic has caused a dramatic shift in consumer behaviour, operational disruptions and extreme volatility in raw material markets, we remain financially strong and well-positioned to weather the pandemic."
Dawn Meats said its beef patty plant in County Waterford, Ireland, which supplies fast-food chain McDonald's across Europe, will reopen for business on Monday (25 May).
The family-owned company, which is active in the beef and lamb sectors supplying retail and foodservice channels, said the facility at Carrolls Cross has been idle since 18 March as McDonald's outlets shut down under government orders to contain the spread of coronavirus.
It has been reported that a number of employees of UK meat processing firm Cranswick have died from Covid-19.
Global dairy market volatile and outlook uncertain, says Fonterra
New Zealand dairy giant Fonterra said Covid-19 has affected virtually every country, market and industry and, as a result, the global dairy market is "volatile and the outlook is uncertain".
Miles Hurrell, CEO of the cooperative, the world's largest dairy exporter, said Fonterra is drawing on its "global supply chain and diverse product and customer base to minimise disruptions for our customers and our business".
In a trading update he said: "The work done over the last year to strengthen our balance sheet, and the co-op's ability to respond quickly has helped us manage the Covid-19 situation over the last few months."
He added: "As a New Zealand dairy co-op, exporting 95% of our products, many of the markets we do business in have always been prone to sudden shocks and this can impact where, when and what we sell. However, the global nature of Covid-19 is like nothing we've experienced before. Like other businesses, we will feel the impact of Covid-19 and its flow-on effects but how and to what extent is still uncertain. We are drawing on all our experience in managing market volatility."
US food giant Kellogg has pulled an advertisement for its crisp brand Pringles from the popular 'PE with Joe' YouTube fitness broadcasts.
During the lockdown, UK-based fitness coach Joe Wicks has tailored much of the content on his YouTube channel The Body Coach TV at children to encourage them to stay active while off school.
The daily live videos, broadcast under the 'PE with Joe' banner, started on 23 March and have attracted families around the world.
The campaign group Action on Sugar and Salt accused Kellogg of "irresponsibly advertising" the snack and suggested it had dropped the ad, which appeared in April, "rather than face a formal regulatory investigation into its online advertising practices".
However, Kellogg said airing the ad on the channel had been a genuine mistake.
Brazilian meat giant JBS is to increase production at its plant at Brooks, in the Canadian province of Alberta, local broadcaster CBC has reported.
It said JBS had scaled down to one shift but had not closed the plant after an outbreak of coronavirus amongst its employees.  It will increase its production from one shift to two from today (21 May).
CBC reported that more than 600 workers contracted Covid-19 at the facility and one employee died during the outbreak.
It quoted locally-based JBS spokesman Rob Meijer as saying that moving from one shift back to two will not increase the number of people in the plant at any single time.
"The health and safety of our team members is our top priority. We have been working closely with public health and labour officials each and every day to implement rigorous risk mitigation practices throughout our facility," he told the broadcaster.
German meat processor Westfleisch is resuming production at its plant in Coesfeld which was closed earlier this month after an outbreak of coronavirus, according to new agency Reuters.
It reported that Westfleisch said on Wednesday (20 May) that German authorities monitored a test slaughtering of 1,500 pigs at its Coesfeld facility and approved its working processes and corona hygiene precautions.
From tomorrow (22 May), the company will utilise about 30% of its normal slaughtering capacity of about 9,000 pigs daily and will increase capacity usage in stages.
German plan to shake up meat-factory staffing, health rules
The cabinet of German Chancellor Angela Merkel today (20 May) announced a "work protection programme for the meat industry", raising labour standards in a sector criticised for poor health and safety due to a rash of outbreaks of Covid-19 among temporary migrant workers.
Canadian frozen potato products giant McCain Foods has suspended plans to expand a US plant because of a drop-off in demand from the foodservice channel during the coronavirus crisis.
Bristol Seafood said it paused production at its processing plant in the US state of Maine on Monday (18 May) after the processor found confirmed cases of Covid-19.
The Portland Fish Pier facility is due to reopen during the week after cleaning and "universal testing" for employees, according to its president and chief executive Peter Handy. The number of infections were not disclosed.
Bristol Seafood said that since March, the company "has operated with modified procedures to meaningfully reduce the risk of its team members contracting Covid-19", and had taken all the necessary health and safety protocols.
Greencore, the Ireland-based manufacturer that is one of the largest private-label suppliers in the UK, has seen its sales drop by around 40% in recent weeks amid a coronavirus-linked slump in demand for food-to-go products.
To protect its profits, Greencore has temporarily ceased production at three factories - in Bow, Atherstone and Heathrow - and rationalised production at its facility in Northampton.
Three Covid-19 clusters have been confirmed at slaughterhouses in France, local government officials have confirmed.
As of today (19 May), 132 staff had been officially confirmed as testing positive and one slaughterhouse, Tradival, owned by farming cooperative Groupe Sicarev, had been shut down by local authorities.
Sanderson Farms, the third-largest poultry group in the US, has revealed its orders through the foodservice channel are at two-thirds the level seen before Covid-19 hit that part of its business.
Sales to foodservice customers are the mainstay of Sanderson Farms, the number three poultry processor in the US by sales, behind only Tyson Foods and Pilgrim's Pride.
The European Commission (EC) has sent a letter of formal notice to Bulgaria to make the country's government reverse its guidance to local supermarket groups to prioritise local food products during the coronavirus crisis.
Brazilian meat giant JBS is reportedly planning to take legal measures to reverse an order to shutter one of its domestic plants to stop the spread of coronavirus.
Meanwhile, an eighth worker at the company's plant in Greeley, Colorado, in the US has reportedly died from Covid-19.
BRF, the Brazil-based supplier of meat products and prepared foods, has re-opened a factory closed amid concerns over Covid-19.
The company, which owns brands including Seara and Qualy, said operations at the plant, located in the southern Brazilian city of Lajeado, had resumed after a local court ratified an agreement between the business and state health officials.
Danish Crown, the Denmark-based meat cooperative, has stopped output at a slaughterhouse after an outbreak of Covid-19 among staff at one of the site's customers.
A Melbourne abbatoir has seen an outbreak of 98 positive Covid-19 cases, according to reports.
Australian broadcaster ABC said on Saturday (16 May) that the outbreak at Cedar Meats Australia's facility included two new cases, despite the country starting to ease itself out of lockdown.
Amid South Africa's lockdown, poultry processor Astral Foods has announced a delay in capital expenditure to expand production volumes.
Daan Ferreira, Astral's CFO, said: "The group's major capital programme to expand poultry volumes has been delayed, due to final commissioning not being completed as a result of the lockdown. Other capital expenditure has been slowed down due to the impact of the current lockdown."
The disclosure came alongside Astral's half-year financial results, which covered the six months to 31 March. Revenue increased by 4.3% to ZAR7.1bn (US$384.8m). Operating profit rose 8.5% to ZAR546m.
The Astral board has agreed no interim dividend "would be declared under the present economic circumstances, whilst also considering the extreme uncertainty of the near future created by the seemingly indefinite Covid-19 lockdown", Astral said in a statement.
"The impact of Covid-19 and the protracted lockdown on the welfare of South African citizens and the economy is dire. The unprecedented higher unemployment rate following the hard lockdown, further constraints on consumer disposable income, and financial distress on businesses with a slow recovery expected by most economists, makes for a negative outlook.
"The shutdown of quick service restaurants has exposed Astral to late payments from customers in this market, and due to a lack of supply into this sector under the current lockdown, a product mix change has resulted with a shift to lower margin product lines."
Johnsonville, the US sausage maker, has temporarily closed its plant in Hilton, Kansas, after a Covid-19 outbreak there.
Some five employees tested positive for coronavirus.
Sales of UK cheese variety Stilton have dropped by as much as 30% during the coronavirus crisis.
The Stilton Cheese Makers Association (SCMA), which represents the UK's Stilton producers, said the drop off in demand is a result of the closure of the country's hospitality and events industry and farmers' markets. It has also seen export sales shrink.
It said this drop in sales is also having an impact on British dairy farms. The Stilton cheesemakers use milk from at least 70 farms across Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire in the English Midlands, many of which are fifth generation dairy farmers.
The trade body is urging UK consumers to buy Stilton and other British cheeses to support the industry and prevent producers going out of business.
General Mills chief talks brands, recession, foodservice and M&A - seven things to learn
An analysis piece on the site this afternoon, covering the appearance of General Mills president and CEO Jeff Harmening - down a web cam - at BMO Capital Markets' annual Farm to Market Conference, which, for obvious reasons, was held virtually this year.
General Mills this week lifted its forecasts on a couple of key sales and profit metrics after seeing US pantry-loading boost demand. On Wednesday (13 May), Harmening outlined to investors what the soup-to-yogurt maker was seeing in its domestic market and discussed a range of issues, from the revival of big brands and the slump in foodservice to China's early recovery and the company's thoughts on M&A. In this piece, Dean Best presents the top takeaways.
Flowers Foods, the US bakery business behind brands such as Nature's Own, Wonder and Dave's Killer Bread, has seen its sales boosted by consumers stocking up on bread during the Covid-19 crisis.
Following the release of its Q1, 2020 results, which revealed net sales of US$1.34bn - an increase of 6.8% year-on-year - company CEO Ryals McMullian told analysts "the current situation is certainly unlike anything we've ever seen".
He said that during the peak of demand in March its weekly branded retail sales growth exceeded 70% versus the prior year.
"One major retailer reported that more than two million households tried our brands for the first time during the quarter. That's just one retailer," he said.
In his latest column for just-food, US industry veteran Victor Martino discussed how Big Food's legacy brands are having their day in the sun in the US, boosted by pantry-loading.
"The big question," Victor wrote, "and everybody in the industry is speculating about it is whether the outsized sales gains legacy brands have been experiencing over the last few months are merely a by-product of consumer stockpiling or if the sales surge is signalling a renewed era for big CPG brands. Are big CPG brands back?
"Linked to that," he continued, "is another question: does the current resurgence of legacy brands mean the emerging brands' insurgency against legacy brands over the last 20 years is coming to an end or, at least, is in the process of becoming greatly diminished?"
In his column, Victor argues challenger brands can still – and will – compete with their newly-revived Big Food legacy-brand competitors.
SMEs will emerge from Covid-19 stronger, says UK challenger brand champion Young Foodies
And here in the UK this afternoon, London-based Young Foodies, which operates as a network and a consultancy for around 1,100 food and drink SMEs, argued small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in the food and drink sectors will emerge from the Covid-19 crisis well-prepared to prosper.
Theadora Alexander, co-founder of Young Foodies said although the current picture is "highly fragmented" and some smaller brands have lost self space as retailers have sought to keep the shops stocked with everyday items, she believes the future is rosy.
Bidcorp's Asia foodservice business, Angliss Asia, has described a new online business-to-consumer platform in China as a key growth area for the company.
Speaking as part of hospitality network Arena's webinar series, Angliss Asia CEO Johnny Kang said the platform was developed in response to consumer trends under Covid-19 lockdown. However, as China comes out of quarantine, Kang said the company's B2C operations form "one of our future growth areas".
Moy Park, the Northern Ireland-based poultry processor, has confirmed the death of an employee from Covid-19 at its plant in County Tyrone.
The member of staff worked at the company's facility on Killington Road, Dungannon.
A spokesperson for Moy Park, which is owned by US-based poultry firm Pilgrim's Pride, said: "We are deeply saddened to learn of the death of one of our team members. The terrible impact of the coronavirus pandemic continues to greatly affect everyone's daily lives throughout our community.
"As we have consistently stated, the health, wellbeing and safety of our Moy Park team members is always our most important consideration."
Premium Brands Holdings suspends M&A activity, with at least 20 targets on table
Canada's Premium Brands Holdings, the acquisitive food manufacturer that has built its business on M&A, has its eyes on securing at least another 20 deals.
However, any further closing of pipeline transactions, with five in the "advanced" stage, have been suspended for the time being due to Covid-19, according to a slide presentation at Premium Brands' annual general meeting.
A court in Rio Grande do Sul has ordered BRF, the Brazil-based meat and prepared foods giant, to close one of its factories in a bid to tackle the spread of Covid-19 in the country's southernmost state.
US meat giant Tyson Foods has said 51 employees at its poultry plant in Portland, Maine, have tested positive for coronavirus.
The plant has now re-opened after being closed for deep cleaning.
Hormel Foods said all three of its Jennie-O Turkey Store plants in Minnesota have now reopened, with the Willmar Avenue facility the latest to recommence operations.
Last week, the US-based meat business said its Benson Avenue and Melrose factories, both in Minnesota, had restarted following a voluntary pause due to Covid-19 infections.
As with the Benson Avenue and Melrose manufacturing facilities, Hormel said late yesterday (12 May) that operations at Willmar Avenue have restarted with a "core group of team members", with production to be increased "over the coming days".
Butterball, the US turkey processor, has confirmed one of its staff working at Mount Olive facility in North Carolina, where an unconfirmed number of staff have tested positive for Covid-19, has passed away.
"We can confirm that we were informed on May 7 of the sudden passing of a valued team member from our Mount Olive plant, but have not been informed of the specific cause. We respect the family's privacy during this difficult time and extend our deepest sympathies," a Butterball spokesperson said.
Two weeks ago, local media reports suggested almost 60 staff at the facility had come down with the virus but neither Butterball or officials within the local Duplin County have confirmed numbers.
The Butterball spokesperson added yesterday: "Because this has been a fluid situation, and some individuals have recovered and returned to work, we do not feel a total number is an accurate representation of what is happening on the ground. The plant remains open and operational, and we continue to work closely with the Duplin County Health Department to help us manage any Covid-19 cases."
US agri-food giant Cargill has reportedly seen six of its workers at a plant in Brazil test positive for coronavirus.
According to a statement from Cargill, quoted by news agency Reuters, most of the employees diagnosed with the respiratory disease at its plant in Uberlândia in south east Brazil have already returned to work after receiving medical attention.
Cargill, which processes soybean and corn at the site, said that, thus far, it has had no interruptions in Brazilian operations due to the Covid-19 outbreak.
The Uberlândia facility employs between 1,300 and 1,400 people.
Ireland has seen the number of positive Covid-19 cases within its meat processing plants top 500.
Answering a request from just-food, the Irish Department of Health said as of today (13 May) there have been 12 Covid-19 "clusters" in meat processing plants notified to public health officials.
The British Meat Processors Association (BMPA) is warning that food prices may have to increase because of "spiralling freight costs" during the current Covid-19 crisis.
In a statement issued today, it said there is evidence of a doubling and in some cases nearly tripling of maritime freight costs over the last month from exporters across the food supply chain.
"The current price hikes which have persisted from early March are starting to look like opportunistic exploitation by a small group of large global companies which control that market," it said.
"As early as mid-March, reports were coming in that the congestion in Chinese ports had eased, with terminal operations returning to more normal working conditions. Indeed Shanghai, the world's largest container port by volume had expanded its capacity for handling and storage of refrigerated containers by 40%.
"As exporters of food supplies, we're not asking for special treatment from shippers, but we are asking them to strike an equitable balance on pricing and not exploit an already dire situation."
US meat heavyweight Pilgrim's Pride is said to be facing worker complaints at a Minnesota poultry processing plant linked to an outbreak of Covid-19.
Westfleisch, one of Germany's largest meat processors, has closed its plant at Coesfield, near the western German city of Munster, following a Covid-19 outbreak amongst its workforce.
According to multiple media outlets in Germany, the company has shuttered the plant until further notice, in line with German government emergency lockdown regulations, after scores of employees tested were positive for Covid-19. Reports vary, with the highest figure quoted suggesting 196 workers have become infected with the virus. All agree that the number is above 150.
The company told local news outlets that 13 people have been hospitalised with moderate symptoms, and the rest are isolating with mild symptoms.
Canadian dairy business Saputo is dealing with an outbreak of Covid-19 at its Saskatoon milk plant, according to broadcaster CBC.
It reported that the Saskatchewan Health Authority has revealed that one worker at the plant tested positive for the virus while other employees are self-isolating.
Around 250 people work at the facility.
CBC quoted Saputo spokesperson Sandy Vassiadis as saying the infected employee's last shift was on 27 April.
Everyone considered to have come into direct contact with the infected employee has been instructed to self-isolate and monitor themselves for symptoms of the virus, she said.
Operations at the plant are continuing.
US food and beverage giant PepsiCo has launched two direct-to-consumer websites to meet consumer demand during the coronavirus pandemic.
The Frito Lay crisp brand owner has launched PantryShop.com and Snacks.com, on which US-based shoppers can order an assortment of PepsiCo's food and beverage products.
On PantryShop.com, consumers can order bundles containing PepsiCo's brands such as Quaker, Gatorade, SunChips and Tropicana.
The US agri-food giant will later this week shut a meat-processing facility in Canada, the second time the company has closed a factory in the country.
According to media reports in Canada, the plant in Chambly in Quebec will shut down on Wednesday after an outbreak of Covid-19 among staff. Some 64 employees have the virus.
Last Monday, Cargill reopened a meat plant in the Canadian state of Alberta that was closed down temporarily amid reports hundreds of workers had contracted coronavirus.
Premium Brands Holdings, the Canadian food producer, has pulled its annual guidance due to the "ramifications" of the Covid-19 pandemic.
The Vancouver-based business, with a portfolio stretching across cured meats, snacks and seafood, made the announcement with its first-quarter results to 28 March. Revenue was up 20.4% at CAD935m (US$668.2m); organic sales volumes increased 14.6%; adjusted EBITDA climbed 6.6% to CAD64.3m; and net earnings rose 22% to CAD12.2m.
"The market ramifications of the Covid-19 pandemic had a slightly positive impact on the company's sales and adjusted EBITDA in the first quarter, however, it expects the pandemic to have a significantly negative impact on its results for the year, in general, and the second quarter, in particular," Premium Brands said in the earnings release.
US-based pork supplier Indiana Packers (IPC) has resumed resumed limited operations at its facility in Delphi, after it was shut down last month due to 15 workers coming down with Covid-19.
IPC, which owns the Indiana Kitchen brand, has worked with the Indiana State Department of Health and Carroll County Department of Health to complete Covid-19 testing of 2,267 employees and contractors working at the facility on 1 May.
IPC president and CEO Russ Yearwood said: "This pause in operations and the testing of our employees was absolutely a critical moment in our ongoing effort to create a safe work environment."
He added: "We suspected the testing process would generate an increase in positive cases unknown to us, but this was the point. This voluntary testing event identified those who are positive for the virus."
IPC has carried out deep cleaning and plant-wide sanitisation at the facility. It has also added more physical barriers and hand sanitiser dispensers.
Meanwhile, another meat processor, Sofina Foods, has announced cases of Covid-19 at two of its plants.
Sofina said two of its plants in Ontario had each seen one member of staff contract the virus. The factories are in Mississauga and Burlington.
In a statement on Friday, the company said the workers "are doing well and are self-isolating at home".
The spokesperson added: "In the case of our Burlington plant, the employee had not been at work for a week. Given the sanitation protocols in place at the plant, including regular fogging, we are confident that the areas where the employee went do not pose any contamination concerns."
Last month, Sofina announced one of its employees at its plant in British Columbia had tested positive for Covid-19.
Maple Lodge Farms, one of Canada's largest poultry processors, has announced the death of an employee who tested positive for Covid-19 last month.
"We have been in touch with their family to offer our deepest condolences. We are also dedicated to providing the support and reassurance to help our employees through this incredibly difficult time," a statement dated 7 May and posted on the Maple Lodge Farms reads.
"At the time of this notice, 25 employees have tested positive for Covid-19. We have checked in frequently with these employees to see how they are doing and offer our support."
The statement listed measures Maple Lodge Farms said it had implemented to protect staff, including the suspension of "one-third of our operations" to clean its facility in Ontario and to implement "a plan to increase physical distancing of common areas".
Hormel Foods, the US food manufacturer, has re-opened two plants in Minnesota closed in recent weeks due to COvid-19.
On 24 April, Hormel announced it would halt operations at the site, as well as at another on Willmar Avenue in Willmar . Both are part of Hormel's Jennie-O Turkey Store business.
Steve Lykken, president of Jennie-O Turkey Store, said on Thursday: "We are glad to be reopening this facility and are working on our plans for reopening our other facilities including another location in Willmar and in Melrose, both in Minnesota. We have put the safety of our staff first throughout this pandemic and will continue to do so."
How could Covid-19 change the global food system?
What could be the possible lasting effects of the Covid-19 pandemic on consumer attitudes to food and, more broadly, on the global food system?
In a deep dive published today (7 May) – featuring companies including Mondelez International and General Mills, as well as stakeholders across the financial and NGO communities – our contributing editor Ben Cooper discussed what are pretty big questions but questions many are pondering as we try to look beyond Covid-19.
Consumption patterns and consumer attitudes to food have been disrupted by the Covid-19 crisis, and the food market could be reshaped permanently by the pandemic.
The crisis has brought home how food is far more than just another aspect of people's lives that could be changed by the virus. Even though the fear of food scarcity was relatively fleeting for many in developed countries, it has been enough to alter how people think about and value food, with possibly positive implications for efforts to reduce food waste, improve diets and create more sustainable food supply chains.
Meanwhile, the resilience of current modes of food production and distribution to such disruption is being assessed, with increased localisation and regionalisation finding favour with food manufacturers and consumers alike.
Change will not be sudden, however, as coping with continuing upheaval and a deep recession will be the main priorities during an indeterminate period of stabilisation and recovery. It is only when that phase is over that the lasting effects of Covid-19 on food culture can be fully judged.
You can read Ben's piece – How could Covid-19 change how we think about food? – in full here .
Iglo and Birds Eye owner Nomad Foods today (7 May) lifted its forecasts for annual sales and profitability after strong top-line growth in the first quarter of 2020.
Stéfan Descheemaeker, Nomad Foods' CEO, said the company had seen an "unprecedented level of consumer demand for frozen food, driven by the Covid-19 pandemic".
He added: "This change in consumer behaviour, which began in early March, has continued into the second quarter with in-home consumption the most meaningful driver."
UK private-label major Bakkavor has confirmed that four of its workers have contracted the Covid-19 virus.
US meat heavyweight Smithfield Foods has confirmed that its pork processing facility in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, will re-open today (7 May).
2 Sisters Food Group, the UK-based poultry processor, has confirmed infections of Covid-19 among a number of employees at its plant in Devon, south-west England.
Our correspondent in Moscow, Lena Smirnova, reports on some of the challenges facing food manufacturers operating in the country.
The Covid-19 pandemic, which is yet to hit its peak in Russia, has put increasing pressure on the country's food manufacturers by increasing operational costs at a time when businesses have also been facing a decline in the value of the rouble.
Major food manufacturers continue to operate at or near full capacity despite amid a nationwide lockdown, which is set to expire on 11 May.
Food manufacturers have been exempted from the order but health and safety costs have risen, A bigger pressure on food manufacturers comes from Russia's weakened ruble, which has fallen steeply during the crisis.
Tyson Foods, the US meat major and one of the world's largest, believes the industry will likely quicken its efforts to increase the use of automation in production facilities.
US-based Triumph Foods has seen a mass outbreak of positive Covid-19 cases amongst the workforce at its pork processing plant in St Joseph, Missouri.
US meat giant Tyson Foods is to resume operations at its Waterloo, Iowa, facility - its largest pork processing plant.
In an announcement, Tyson said the plant will re-open following a "comprehensive review" of safety protocols.
Meanwhile, Tyson has also reopened a meat plant in Washington where production was suspended two weeks ago to enable testing of staff for Covid-19.
The beef facility in the city of Pasco run by the Tyson Fresh Meats division resumed "limited production" yesterday (5 May) having been idled on 23 April, according to a statement from the Arkansas-headquartered firm.
Staff who had contracted the virus will only be able to return to work once cleared by health officials, and team members who have not been tested will not be able to return, Tyson said. New health and safety protocols have also been put in place following deep cleaning and sanitisation of the plant.
Premier Foods, the UK-based owner of Batchelors soups and Mr Kipling cakes, has delayed the publication of its preliminary annual results until June.
The company was scheduled to issue numbers for the year to 28 March on 14 May, but to ensure Premier and its auditors have "sufficient time to complete the standard full-year reporting requirements", they will now be published by the end of June, with a more precise date to be confirmed, it said in a filing with the London Stock Exchange today (6 May).
Snacking heavyweight Mondelez International has paused production at its West Hamilton plant in Canada after four employees came down with coronavirus.
US food major Conagra Brands said it intends to resume operations at the factory in Darien, Wisconsin, later this week.
HelloFresh, the Germany-based meal-kit supplier, today (5 May) lifted its forecast for annual sales growth after bumper sales in the first quarter.
The company now expects its revenue to climb by 40-55% on a constant-currency basis in 2020, up from its previous forecast of 22-27%. The business also lifted its forecast on a metric for adjusted margins.
"On top of our already very strong first two months of the year, our meals have attracted significant additional demand in the second half of March, as the global pandemic hit all of our markets in short order," HelloFresh co-founder and CEO Dominik Richter said.
In the first quarter of 2020, HelloFresh said it had what it calls 4.18m "active customers", up from 2.48m in the opening three months of 2019. It booked 14.74m orders, up from 8.88m a year earlier.
With the US meat supply chain being battered by Covid-19, a couple of major retailers have taken action.
Kroger has placed limits on certain branded and own-label meat products.
Meanwhile, at wholesaler Costco , "fresh meat purchases are temporarily limited to a total of three items per member among the beef, pork and poultry products".
Last week, major processor Tyson Foods warned of US meat shortages because of the number of plants shut by the Covid-19 virus.
In statements posted in US media outlets including The New York Times, company chairman John Tyson said the "food supply chain is breaking" as livestock and processing plants are closed because of the virus's spread among workers.
The number of Covid-19 cases at a Tyson Foods meat plant in Tennessee have reportedly increased dramatically.
Fox News, quoting Metro Health officials in Nashville and Davidson County, said 298 cases have been confirmed at the facility in Goodlettsville.
Late last month, other media reports, citing the same officials, reported there were around 90 cases at the meat giant's plant in the city of Goodlettsville, which is located across the Davidson and Sumner counties in Tennessee.
Reports from the US say that meat giants JBS and Smithfield Foods are re-opening plants closed due to the Covid-19 outbreak.
The news follows an executive order from President Trump last week that said plants should stay open to ensure the US meat supply.
Don Miguel Foods, a US-based Mexican foods manufacturer, has re-opened as planned after a two-week shutdown prompted by a local Covid-19 outbreak.
"We have a common enemy, Covid-19, and we must work together to stop its spread both at the workplace and outside of work. We know what we need to do, it's just a matter of everyone taking the steps necessary to keep each other safe," Don Miguel Foods plant manager Ryan Gaynor said.
Don Miguel Foods is a subsidiary of MegaMex Foods, a joint venture between Mexico's Herdez Del Fuerte and Hormel Foods.
Rochelle Foods, a US business owned by Hormel, also re-opened its facility in Illinois yesterday after testing workers for Covid-19 and introducing new safety measures at its plant.
Last week, Hormel subsidiary Fontanini Foods said it was to furlough, or temporarily lay off, 150 workers as Covid-19 takes its toll on the business.
Hormel, meanwhile, has closed another two facilities after a number of employees tested positive for Covid-19.
Tulip Ltd., the UK-based pork processor owned by US meat firm Pilgrim's Pride, confirmed an undisclosed number of employees have tested positive for Covid-19 at "some" facilities, although the company declined to provide specific details on the plants concerned.
Thai Union Group , the seafood titan behind brands including John West and Chicken of the Sea, said today (5 May) its first-quarter sales reached their highest level for three years.
Sales rose 5.9% to THB31.1bn (US$960.5m), driven by "a strong performance" from Thai Union's ambient business.
"Consumers around the world stocked up on shelf-stable products in response to Covid-19," Thai Union.
While sales from ambient products grew more than 16%, Thai Union did point to a 5.1% fall in sales from its "frozen, chilled seafood and related business". The company said that was "largely due to the impact of Covid-19" on its hospitality business.
Greencore, the Ireland-based convenience foods manufacturer, said an employee at its Northampton plant in the UK has tested positive for Covid-19.
The worker is employed at the facility in the Moulton Park area of Northampton, which is located in the English east Midlands.
US meat titan Tyson Foods has warned of pressure on its sales volumes in the second half of its current financial year as gains made through selling to retailers have not offset a loss in business in a foodservice market largely shut down to tackle the Covid-19 outbreak.
Providing forward-looking commentary alongside the financial results for the six months to 28 March, Tyson said each of its divisions had seen a "shift in demand" from the foodservice channel to the retail market.
However, the Jimmy Dean and Hillshire Farm owner warned: "The volume increases in retail have not been sufficient to offset the losses in foodservice and as a result, we expect decreases in volumes in the second half of fiscal 2020.
Aryzta provides update on plant closures, capital spend amid Covid-19
Aryzta has provided an update on the actions the Swiss-Irish bakery business has taken during the coronavirus crisis, including a pause in production at certain plants in Europe and North America, and the suspension of new projects under its turnaround programme.
Rochelle Foods, the US business owned by Hormel Foods, has re-opened its facility in Illinois today after testing workers for Covid-19 and introducing new safety measures at its plant.
The company, which makes a variety of products for foodservice and retail customers, including microwaveable and pre-cooked bacon, foodservice and retail bacon, deli hams and Hormel Compleats microwaveable meals, closed its operation down for 14 days.
It said the vast majority of its employees had tested negative for the virus.
During the pause in operations it carried out a deeo cleaning of high-touch areas, reconfigured common areas and workstations, revised shift scheduling, introduced new guidelines on carpooling and brought in more extensive social distancing measures.
Bill Rice, Rochelle Foods plant manager said: "We have put the safety of our team members first throughout this pandemic and will continue to do so."
Kellogg is pushing back the planned launch of plant-based brand Incogmeato due to the Covid-19 outbreak.
Ireland-based pork supplier Rosderra Irish Meats Group has seen dozens of staff test positive for the novel coronavirus, according to a senior member of the Irish parliament.
Ireland has "six clusters" of Covid-19 in meat plants, government signals
Ireland has "six clusters" of Covid-19 in meat factories, the country's Agriculture Minister has said.
Michael Creed, Ireland's Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, revealed the number of groups of cases in the country's parliament, the Dáil, on Thursday (30 April). He did not disclose their location.
US meat giant Tyson Foods has announced that it is to re-open its Logansport, Indiana, plant next week despite local media reports suggesting nearly 900 workers there have contracted the Covid-19 virus.
Pilgrim's Pride believes investment in automation in its plants has helped the US poultry heavyweight avoid the worst of Covid-19.
Media outlets in the US suggest that local meat giant Tyson Foods has seen nearly 900 workers at one of its plants test positive for Covid-19.
Kraft Heinz's first-quarter results issued this week unsurprisingly reflected the artificial demand from Covid-19, a facet that's unlikely to be sustained beyond the current crisis. Simon Harvey looks at the key takeaways as markets seek evidence the company's "paradigm shift" is working.
Cases of Covid-19 at a US beef plant owned by Brazilian meat giant JBS have reportedly surged since the facility was reopened a week ago.
The Meatless Farm Co. , a UK-based alternative-protein start-up, has launched a direct-to-consumer service ahead of schedule to cater to the increased demand from coronavirus.
Tyson Foods is reportedly set to halt operations at the US meat giant's beef plant in Dakota City, Nebraska, to undertake deep cleaning in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak.
Cargill is to reopen a meat plant in the Canadian state of Alberta next week that was closed down temporarily amid reports hundreds of workers had contracted coronavirus.
The US-based agri-food business said the High River facility will resume operations on Monday, 4 May, after being idle for 14 days, following consultations with Alberta Health Services (AHS) and Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS).
Northern Ireland's agri-food industry could face 10,000 job losses as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, a senior politician in the province has warned.
Potential meat shortages in the US caused by the closure of processing plants due to Covid-19 could usher in marked changes in the country's eating habits, according to UK-headquartered data and analytics firm GlobalData.
Sofina Foods, a Canada-based branded and private-label meat supplier, said one of its employees has tested positive for Covid-19 at its plant in British Columbia.
The privately-owned business, which is headquartered in Markham, Ontario, said today (30 April) the site in question is located at Port Coquitlam, near Vancouver.
Kuljeet Chahal, the plant's manager, said: "The employee lives with relatives who work at a local plant where, recently, several employees tested positive for the virus, including one of the employee's relatives. We have been preparing for this type of incident and quickly sprang into action to assess risks and identify any action needed in addition to the proactive measures we already have in place."
Port Coquitlam produces fresh chicken products and employs more than 400 people, Sofina said.
Ireland-based Kerry Group has pulled its financial guidance due to the implications of coronavirus, which boosted the Richmond sausages owner's retail sales in the first quarter as more people ate at home, but hit foodservice operations.
Butterball, the US turkey processor, has seen an outbreak of positive Covid-19 cases amongst the workforce at one of its plants.
Local media reports suggest nearly 60 workers at the Mount Olive facility in North Carolina, where Butterball is based, have come down with the virus.
Brazilian meat heavyweight JBS is to re-open a US plant closed because of a Covid-19 outbreak, according to reports.
News agency Reuters reports that the company's Worthington, Minnesota, plant is to re-open but to kill up to 13,000 pigs a day for farmers, not to produce meat for consumers.
US farmers have been forced to cull livestock after meat plants where they would normally be sent closed to combat the spread of coronavirus.
Reuters quoted JBS as saying it will need only ten to 20 employees of the 2,000 workers at its Worthington plant to manage the "humane euthanasia" of pigs.
The plant stopped operations on April 20. Until then it processed 20,000 hogs per day.
How will Covid-19 shape D2C platforms?
We've seen some radical changes in the way people shop over the past couple of months in light of the coronavirus pandemic. But how might that influence the manufacturer's approach to direct-to-consumer services? Simon Harvey looks at the life for D2C post-crisis.
Covid-19 outbreak amongst Romanian workers in German meat plant, government says
Around 200 Romanians working at an unnamed German slaughterhouse have tested positive for the coronavirus, Romania's foreign ministry (MFA) has said.
According to the ministry, those infected had all been working at a slaughterhouse in the south western German town of Birkenfeld, where 500 of the 700 employees are Romanian.
"German authorities say 300 employees are confirmed with Covid-19 and are now in quarantine. So far there is no precise data regarding the citizenship of those infected, but the majority (over 200) are Romanian citizens," the ministry said in a statement.
US President Donald Trump has ordered the country's meat processing plants to stay open during the coronavirus crisis.
He is signing an executive order to that effect against a backdrop of plant closures due to Covid-19 outbreaks and warnings about meat shortages in US supermarkets as a result.
Mondelez International has retracted its financial outlook due to a lack of "visibility" into the impact of Covid-19 even as the US-based snacks maker reported a "strong" first quarter.
US food and beverages giant PepsiCo is to invest in products such as cereal brand Quaker that have benefited from people eating at home during the Covid-19 lockdown.
Fazer Group has warned of further coronavirus-related lay-offs as it prepares to start talks with employees at its confectionery plant in the Finnish city of Vantaa.
Blue Apron, the New York-based meal-kit firm, has seen demand for its products increase during lockdown.
CEO Linda Findley Kozlowski, said: "As we move into the second quarter of 2020, we are focused on driving customer retention and establishing longer-term consumer habits out of the heightened demand we have been seeing as a result of the impact of Covid-19."
In order to meet the increased demand, the company is increasing capacity at its fulfilment centres, including hiring new employees and temporarily reducing variety in menu options, which limits the need to change production lines and allows for more time to pack meal kits.
PepsiCo Q1 sales up, pulls guidance due to Covid-19 uncertainties?
PepsiCo has pulled its financial guidance for the year as the US-based food and beverages giant said the coronavirus crisis has thrown up too many uncertainties to accurately predict the outlook.
The Frito-Lay and Walkers crisps owner made the announcement in conjunction with its first-quarter results to 21 March, with revenue up but both operating and net profits down on a reported basis.
Grupo Bimbo , the world's largest bakery business, has indicated it is seeing signs of recovery in China's quick-service-restaurant channel.
Reporting its first-quarter financial results yesterday (27 April), Bimbo's management offered some flavour on developments in China's QSR market.
"We're seeing in China [it's] starting to recover the QSR market, as well as Korea," Bimbo CEO Daniel Servitje said. "We are hopeful that we will start to see a good trend over the coming quarters in terms of how they fast can get back to their previous levels. It's not going to be certainly in Q2 or Q3, the same level as we had in Q1 but we are thinking that we are on the right track as we are starting to see the situation evolve country-by-country."
Asked if Bimbo was seeing QSR restaurants were running at a reported 40% capacity in China, Servitje added: "Well, we have, I will say, a bit higher number than the one that you mentioned about – and we are seeing an upward trend every week since they restarted their economy."
Foodservice accounts for around 10% of Bimbo's sales, Servitje said. Four of the company's factories supplying the QSR market are closed: one each in France, South Africa, Morocco and Kazakhstan. A plant in Wuhan Bimbo shut in February has re-opened, Servitje confirmed yesterday.
In the first quarter, overall Bimbo sales rose 7% to MXN74.4bn (US$3.05bn). Bimbo said its "adjusted" EBITDA was up 11% at MXN8.9bn. Net majority income fell back significantly – from MXN1.32bn a year ago to MXN20m – due to costs linked to pensions.
Cranswick, one of the UK's largest meat processors, has delayed the publication of its annual financial figures, which were due to be unveiled next month.
"Following guidance from the Financial Conduct Authority and the Financial Reporting Council relating to the unprecedented challenges faced by companies and their auditors in preparing financial information and accounts during the Covid-19 pandemic, the group now expects to report its preliminary results for the year ended 31 March 2020 on 23 June 2020, instead of the previously announced date of 19 May 2020," Cranswick said in a stock-exchange filing today.
US-based Fontanini Foods, owned by local heavyweight Hormel Foods, is to furlough, or temporarily lay off, 150 workers as Covid-19 takes its toll on the business.
Confectionery maker Ferrero has closed parts of its chocolate plant in Ontario, Canada, after three employees contracted coronavirus.
The Italy-headquartered business said it shut "two departments" at the facility in the city of Brantford, which makes the Ferrero Rocher brand of treats, until 3 May. It added the affected employees had self-isolated for at least a week before being confirmed as having Covid-19.
Freshways have said the operations director of the UK-based dairy firm is now recovering in hospital after contracting coronavirus.
Smithfield announced the closure of the Sioux Falls factory on 12 April "until further notice" amid what were reported to be dozens of positive cases of Covid-19 among staff. The facility represents 4-5% of total pork production in the US. Reports subsequently claimed the plant had more than 500 Covid-19 cases .
Speaking to US broadcaster Fox News yesterday, Noem said she was hopeful the plant could soon re-open. "I'm hopeful that we can get it opened as soon as possible," Noem said. "They have some mitigation measures to put in place, but I think in a matter of days it could be opened, as long as everybody continues to work together and get it done."
Speaking to just-food yesterday, Keira Lombardo, Smithfield's executive vice president of corporate Affairs and compliance, said the company was in the process of studying a report on the factory issued last week by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. She added: "We will thoroughly and carefully examine the report point by point and respond in full once our assessment is complete."
The food and beverage industries could see greater sales made through e-commerce in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, Nestlé CEO Mark Schneider has suggested.
During the first quarter, Nestlé saw e-commerce sales for its petcare and coffee businesses and, speaking to analysts after the world's largest food maker posted its sales for the opening three months of the year, Schneider suggested the channel could grow in importance for the food and beverage markets.
"This is a key area where we saw true significant increases," Schneider said of Nestlé's Q1. "I think some of that will be here to stay. One of the side-effects of this crisis will be it will be a breakthrough event when it comes to e-commerce for food and beverage.
