Sao Paulo — The sugar cane crush in the key Center-South Brazil region is expected to total 10.58 million mt in the second half of November, a decrease of 28% year on year, an S&P Global Platts survey of analysts showed Monday.
"As many mills have already closed their activities, the crushing number is expected to be the lowest for any fortnight this season," S&P Global Platts Analytics senior sugar analyst Claudiu Covrig said. "We estimate that about 194 units have come to a complete stop by December 1 out of a total of 265 mills operational this season. This compares with just 131 mills that stopped their activities by December 1 last year."
Recoverable sugar per mt of sugar cane, or ATR, is expected to be 139.6 kg/mt, an increase of 15.6% year on year.
The proportion of cane used for sugar production is expected to be 24.99%, down from 31.61% a year earlier. Brazilian producers are expected to continue to favor ethanol production over sugar, given the increased profitability of ethanol production over sugar production.
"As ethanol continued to pay better than sugar by at least 150 points (with domestic ethanol prices rising on low stocks and good domestic demand) and with mills investing during the season in extra capacity to maximize ethanol production we expect the sugar mix to show another drop on the previous fortnight," Covrig said. "We therefore estimate the sugar mix at 25.2% down from 28.3% recorded for H1 November and down 6.3 percentage points on the year."
If sugar prices don't recover next year, "technically the industry in CS Brazil could lower the sugar mix even further and reach a new record low," Covrig said. This might not happen as millers "have already priced a significant quantity of sugar for next season taking advantage of a weak Brazilian real," he added
Analysts estimate total sugar production at 354 million mt in H2 November, a decrease of 34% year on year.
Of the 10 analysts surveyed, two large producers estimated the total cane crush would be between 10 million and 10.5 million mt.
Platts assessed hydrous ethanol ex-mill Ribeirao Preto converted into raw sugar equivalent at 14.86 cents/lb Friday. The March NY11 sugar futures contract settled Friday at 13.18 cents/lb, a 1.68 cents/lb discount to hydrous ethanol in raw sugar equivalent.
Total ethanol output from sugar cane is expected to be 672 million liters, a decrease of 5.6% year on year.
Hydrous ethanol output was expected to be 470 million liters, according to the average of analysts' responses to the survey. This would be a decrease of 5.8% year on year. Anhydrous ethanol output in H2 November was expected to be 202 million liters, a decrease of 5.0% year on year.
Strong consumer demand for hydrous ethanol at the pump has supported hydrous ethanol prices. The ethanol to gasoline price parity at the pump still favors ethanol consumption, especially in the larger states such as Sao Paulo. Platts assessed hydrous ethanol ex-mill Ribeirao Preto at Real 2,445/cu m Monday, 19.85% higher on the year.
-- Edited by James Burgess, newsdesk@spglobal.com
Request a free trial of:
Act quickly and confidently in today's fast-paced sugar markets with our sugar prices, industry analysis and news. Use the request a free trial link to receive copies of Platts Sugar Reports for two weeks.
To continue reading you must login or register with us.
It’s free and easy to do. Please use the button below and we will bring you back here when complete.
