Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries Limited (NSE:DALMIASUG) Passed Our Checks, And It’s About To Pay A ₹2.00 Dividend
Simply Wall St February 21, 2020
Readers hoping to buy Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries Limited ( NSE:DALMIASUG ) for its dividend will need to make their move shortly, as the stock is about to trade ex-dividend. You can purchase shares before the 25th of February in order to receive the dividend, which the company will pay on the 14th of March.
Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s upcoming dividend is ₹2.00 a share, following on from the last 12 months, when the company distributed a total of ₹4.00 per share to shareholders. Calculating the last year’s worth of payments shows that Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries has a trailing yield of 3.6% on the current share price of ₹110.8. Dividends are an important source of income to many shareholders, but the health of the business is crucial to maintaining those dividends. We need to see whether the dividend is covered by earnings and if it’s growing.
Dividends are typically paid out of company income, so if a company pays out more than it earned, its dividend is usually at a higher risk of being cut. Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries paid out just 7.4% of its profit last year, which we think is conservatively low and leaves plenty of margin for unexpected circumstances. Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries paid a dividend despite reporting negative free cash flow last year. That’s typically a bad combination and – if this were more than a one-off – not sustainable.
Have Earnings And Dividends Been Growing?
Companies with consistently growing earnings per share generally make the best dividend stocks, as they usually find it easier to grow dividends per share. If earnings fall far enough, the company could be forced to cut its dividend. That’s why it’s comforting to see Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s earnings have been skyrocketing, up 125% per annum for the past five years.
The main way most investors will assess a company’s dividend prospects is by checking the historical rate of dividend growth. Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries has delivered an average of 2.9% per year annual increase in its dividend, based on the past ten years of dividend payments. Earnings per share have been growing much quicker than dividends, potentially because Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries is keeping back more of its profits to grow the business.
Is Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries an attractive dividend stock, or better left on the shelf? When companies are growing rapidly and retaining a majority of the profits within the business, it’s usually a sign that reinvesting earnings creates more value than paying dividends to shareholders. Perhaps even more importantly – this can sometimes signal management is focused on the long term future of the business. We think this is a pretty attractive combination, and would be interested in investigating Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries more closely.
We wouldn’t recommend just buying the first dividend stock you see, though. Here’s a list of interesting dividend stocks with a greater than 2% yield and an upcoming dividend.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
