Many people with diabetes also experience anxiety, and they may wonder whether there is a link between the two conditions.
Diabetes and anxiety are both among the leading causes of disability in developed countries around the world.
In the United States alone, anxiety affects close to 40 million adults. Diabetes is also common, with about 30.3 million U.S. adults living with this condition.
A 2013 meta-analysis revealed that people with diabetes face a higher likelihood than the general population of experiencing anxiety.
In this article, we outline the reasons for this association. We also describe the symptoms of both diabetes and anxiety, as well as how healthcare professionals diagnose each of these conditions.
A person’s likelihood of anxiety may increase after having several hypoglycemic episodes.
People with diabetes are responsible for managing their blood sugar levels and ensuring that these stay within a healthy range . This task can be challenging and stressful.
Doctors will ask people with diabetes to remain mindful of their blood sugar levels and to engage in routine behaviors, such as:
Planning, checking, and being prepared for a wide range of challenges are all important for effective diabetes management. However, some people may worry excessively about their blood sugar levels or how their disease may progress. These concerns may trigger episodes of anxiety.
The emotional challenges of living with diabetes can also trigger anxiety.
Researchers report that anxiety affects about 40% of people with diabetes. This prevalence is much higher than that in the general U.S. population, where the condition affects 18.1% of people.
People with diabetes are at risk of developing low blood sugar, or hypoglycemia . Some of the symptoms of hypoglycemia are identical to those of anxiety.
Additionally, the results of a 2015 animal study suggest that experiencing several episodes of hypoglycemia can increase the likelihood of anxiety. The reason for this may be that hypoglycemic episodes trigger chemical and metabolic changes that physically affect the part of the brain that plays a role in processing anxiety.
Diabetes and anxiety share several symptoms. The American Diabetes Association and the National Institute of Mental Health both list the following symptoms for hypoglycemia and anxiety, respectively:
