Did Rogers Sugar Inc. (TSE:RSI) Insiders Buy Up More Shares?
Simply Wall St February 7, 2020
We often see insiders buying up shares in companies that perform well over the long term. On the other hand, we’d be remiss not to mention that insider sales have been known to precede tough periods for a business. So we’ll take a look at whether insiders have been buying or selling shares in Rogers Sugar Inc. ( TSE:RSI ).
Most investors know that it is quite permissible for company leaders, such as directors of the board, to buy and sell stock in the company. However, most countries require that the company discloses such transactions to the market.
Insider transactions are not the most important thing when it comes to long-term investing. But it is perfectly logical to keep tabs on what insiders are doing. For example, a Harvard University study found that ‘insider purchases earn abnormal returns of more than 6% per year.
In the last twelve months, the biggest single sale by an insider was when the Independent Chairman of the Board, M. H. Ross, sold CA$208k worth of shares at a price of CA$5.20 per share. So what is clear is that an insider saw fit to sell at around the current price of CA$4.85. We generally don’t like to see insider selling, but the lower the sale price, the more it concerns us. In this case, the big sale took place at around the current price, so it’s not too bad (but it’s still not a positive).
In the last twelve months insiders purchased 79.76k shares for CA$414k. But they sold 47850 for CA$256k. Overall, Rogers Sugar insiders were net buyers last year. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
Rogers Sugar is not the only stock insiders are buying. So take a peek at this free list of growing companies with insider buying.
Over the last quarter, Rogers Sugar insiders have spent a meaningful amount on shares. Overall, 13 insiders shelled out CA$184k for shares in the company — and none sold. This could be interpreted as suggesting a positive outlook.
Does Rogers Sugar Boast High Insider Ownership?
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. I reckon it’s a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. Our data suggests Rogers Sugar insiders own 0.9% of the company, worth about CA$4.4m. We consider this fairly low insider ownership.
So What Do The Rogers Sugar Insider Transactions Indicate?
It’s certainly positive to see the recent insider purchases. And the longer term insider transactions also give us confidence. However, we note that the company didn’t make a profit over the last twelve months, which makes us cautious. On this analysis the only slight negative we see is the fairly low (overall) insider ownership; their transactions suggest that they are quite positive on Rogers Sugar stock. Of course, the future is what matters most. So if you are interested in Rogers Sugar, you should check out this free report on analyst forecasts for the company .
But note: Rogers Sugar may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
