Leanne (pictured) said when she saw the three-ingredient banana bread recipe on Facebook comprising bananas, condensed milk and flour, she wanted to make her own version that wasn't 'all carbs but just as filling'
So how do you make her banana bread?
Firstly, Leanne said you'll need to get your hands on four medium bananas, one tin of sweetened condensed milk, 2.5 cups of self-raising wholemeal flour, three quarters of a cup of honeycomb protein powder and some chia seeds.
The protein powder and self-raising wholemeal flour will help to keep you fuller for longer, while chia seeds are an excellent source of fibre and antioxidants for your diet.
Leanne's banana bread recipe uses protein powder, wholemeal flour and chia seeds for added health benefits (pictured)
3. In a separate small bowl, add the flour, protein powder and chia seeds. Stir to combine. A teaspoon of cinnamon is optional.
4. Pour the dry ingredients into the wet ingredient bowl and stir gently to combine, but be careful not to over mix.
5. Pour the batter into the lined baking tin and press down the half banana on top of the batter.
7. Remove from the oven, allow to cool, slice and store leftovers in an air-tight container in the fridge.
Then, follow Leanne's seven simple steps (above) and store your banana bread in an airtight container in the fridge.
'I love how simple this is - and it's good for you!' one person commented beneath the recipe.
'Need to try this! Overripe bananas are piling up in my fridge and need something healthy to do with them!' another added.
Leanne (pictured) said she is beating boredom eating in isolation by eating more meals than you would expect, but filled with healthy foods
What is a typical day on Leanne's plate and how is she beating boredom eating?
MEAL ONE: High protein Greek yoghurt, wholegrain flaky cereal and fresh berries topped with nuts and seeds. Green tea.
MEAL THREE: High fibre wrap with tinned tuna, cheese, grated carrot, lettuce and tomato. Black or herbal tea without sugar.
MEAL FOUR: Another portion of high protein Greek yoghurt with two tablespoons of homemade granola filled with nuts, seeds and dried cranberries.
MEAL FIVE: Teriyaki salmon with greens and 100 grams of brown rice with herbal tea.
MEAL SIX: Homemade peanut butter protein balls.
The dietitian also shared how you can take control of your eating in coronavirus isolation, and stop binge eating unnecessarily (pictured: why you can't stop eating in isolation)
The dietitian also shared how you can take control of your eating during the coronavirus isolation, and stop binge eating unnecessarily.
What are the reasons why you feel hungrier in isolation?
* Eating due to emotions (stress, loneliness and anxiety)
* Not eating enough protein, fibre or healthy fats
'A lot of the time we mistake non-hungry eating (or what I call head hunger) for true hunger. It's not,' Leanne said.
During the lockdown, she said you might have found yourself eating for reasons that you wouldn't usually - be they stress, loneliness or anxiety.
'Food makes us feel better because we've conditioned ourselves over time to know this,' she said.
While the dietitian acknowledged that the vast majority of people might be working in a different environment and are surrounded by much more food than normal, she also said you need to be strict with yourself but not draconian.
'Restricting foods means you crave them more - it's a known fact, so stop starting a new diet each Monday and start eating well for life,' Leanne said.
'Proper satiety' comes from building decent meals, she added.
You should be aiming for half a plate of vegetables, a quarter of lean protein, a quarter of starchy carbs or wholegrains and a dollop of fat by way of some olive oil or avocado.
Leanne said she is beating the boredom eating by eating more small meals filled with these ideal quantities.
What are the ideal portion sizes for every meal for fat loss?
* CARBOHYDRATES: A quarter of a plate at every meal and as a snack before training.
Elsewhere, Leanne said if you practice good sleep hygiene and aim for at least 7.5-8 hours a night, you will feel instantly better and less hungry.
'It's worth remembering alcohol also makes you feel hungrier,' she said.
'So if you've been knocking back one too many drinks in iso, it might be time to replace the wine with water if you want to get a handle on your cravings.'
To read more from Leanne Ward, you can visit her website here .
