Artificial sweeteners have never fully succeeded in impersonating sugar. Now, a Columbia study in mice has identified a brain mechanism that may explain why.
In a scientific first, researchers have shown that the brain responds not only when sugar touches the tongue but also when it enters the gut. Their discovery of this specialized gut-brain circuit offers new insight into the way the brain and body evolved to seek out sugar. And because artificial sweeteners do not activate this circuit, the study also offers compelling evidence as to why these sweeteners are never quite as satisfying as the real thing.
The findings, reported today in Nature, stand to have a substantial positive impact on public health. Excess sugar intake has been linked to obesity-related conditions such as diabetes, which affects more than 500 million people worldwide. By laying the foundation for new ways to modify this gut-brain circuit, this research offers promising new paths to reducing sugar overconsumption.
When we drink diet soda, or use sweetener in coffee, it may taste similar but our brains can tell the difference. The discovery of this specialized gut-brain circuit that responds to sugar -- and sugar alone -- could pave the way for sweeteners that don't just trick our tongue but also our brain."
Hwei-Ee Tan, the paper's co-first author who completed his doctoral research in the lab of Charles Zuker, Ph.D., at Columbia's Zuckerman Institute
Today's study was led by Dr. Zuker and builds upon decades of work by he and his lab to map the brain's taste system.
When the tongue encounters a taste -- sweet, bitter, salty, sour or umami -- specialized cells on the tongue called taste receptors send hardwired signals to the brain. Artificial sweeteners, such as NutraSweet and Stevia, work by co-opting these hardwired signals. They switch on sweet taste receptors to fool the brain into thinking that sugar has landed on the tongue.
When the sweet taste receptors are deleted in mice, which should have eliminated the animals' desire for anything sweet, the animals still display a preference for sugar. The research team's goal was to was to find out why and how, and to uncover the neural basis for our insatiable desire for sugar.
The Columbia team focused on a brain area called the caudal nucleus of the solitary tract, or cNST. The cNST is tucked inside the brain stem, the most primitive area of the brain.
"We discovered that the cNST lit up with activity when we bypassed the sweet taste receptors on the animals' tongues and delivered sugar directly to the gut," said Alexander Sisti, PhD, the paper's co-first author who also completed his doctoral research in the Zuker lab. "Something was transmitting a signal, indicating the presence of sugar, from the gut to the brain."
