Simply Wall St May 1, 2020
A look at the shareholders of Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar Limited ( NSE:BAJAJHIND ) can tell us which group is most powerful. Institutions will often hold stock in bigger companies, and we expect to see insiders owning a noticeable percentage of the smaller ones. We also tend to see lower insider ownership in companies that were previously publicly owned.
With a market capitalization of ₹5.8b, Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar is a small cap stock, so it might not be well known by many institutional investors. Taking a look at our data on the ownership groups (below), it’s seems that institutions own shares in the company. We can zoom in on the different ownership groups, to learn more about Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar.
What Does The Institutional Ownership Tell Us About Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar?
Many institutions measure their performance against an index that approximates the local market. So they usually pay more attention to companies that are included in major indices.
We can see that Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar does have institutional investors; and they hold 40% of the stock. This implies the analysts working for those institutions have looked at the stock and they like it. But just like anyone else, they could be wrong. When multiple institutions own a stock, there’s always a risk that they are in a ‘crowded trade’. When such a trade goes wrong, multiple parties may compete to sell stock fast. This risk is higher in a company without a history of growth. You can see Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar’s historic earnings and revenue, below, but keep in mind there’s always more to the story.
Hedge funds don’t have many shares in Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar. Our data shows that Punjab National Bank, Asset Management Arm is the largest shareholder with 7.7% of shares outstanding. Bajaj Resources Limited is the second largest shareholder with 7.4% of common stock, followed by ICICI Venture Funds Management Company Limited, holding 5.8% of the stock.
A closer look at our ownership figures suggests that the top 11 shareholders have a combined ownership of 51% implying that no one share holder has a majority.
Researching institutional ownership is a good way to gauge and filter a stock’s expected performance. The same can be achieved by studying analyst sentiments. Our information suggests that there isn’t any analyst coverage of the stock, so it is probably little known.
The definition of company insiders can be subjective, and does vary between jurisdictions. Our data reflects individual insiders, capturing board members at the very least. Management ultimately answers to the board. However, it is not uncommon for managers to be executive board members, especially if they are a founder or the CEO.
Insider ownership is positive when it signals leadership are thinking like the true owners of the company. However, high insider ownership can also give immense power to a small group within the company. This can be negative in some circumstances.
Shareholders would probably be interested to learn that insiders own shares in Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar Limited. In their own names, insiders own ₹157m worth of stock in the ₹5.8b company. This shows at least some alignment, but I usually like to see larger insider holdings. You can click here to see if those insiders have been buying or selling.
With a 35% ownership, the general public have some degree of sway over BAJAJHIND. This size of ownership, while considerable, may not be enough to change company policy if the decision is not in sync with other large shareholders.
With an ownership of 5.8%, private equity firms are in a position to play a role in shaping corporate strategy with a focus on value creation. Sometimes we see private equity stick around for the long term, but generally speaking they have a shorter investment horizon and — as the name suggests — don’t invest in public companies much. After some time they may look to sell and redeploy capital elsewhere.
It seems that Private Companies own 12%, of the BAJAJHIND stock. Private companies may be related parties. Sometimes insiders have an interest in a public company through a holding in a private company, rather than in their own capacity as an individual. While it’s hard to draw any broad stroke conclusions, it is worth noting as an area for further research.
It appears to us that public companies own 4.3% of BAJAJHIND. It’s hard to say for sure, but this suggests they have entwined business interests. This might be a strategic stake, so it’s worth watching this space for changes in ownership.
It’s always worth thinking about the different groups who own shares in a company. But to understand Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar better, we need to consider many other factors. Like risks, for instance. Every company has them, and we’ve spotted 3 warning signs for Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar (of which 1 is a bit concerning!) you should know about.
Of course this may not be the best stock to buy. Therefore, you may wish to see our free collection of interesting prospects boasting favorable financials.
NB: Figures in this article are calculated using data from the last twelve months, which refer to the 12-month period ending on the last date of the month the financial statement is dated. This may not be consistent with full year annual report figures.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
