While there is some controversy over whether sugar should be classified as an addictive substance, its pleasure-inducing effect and its impact on our mood and energy levels is undeniable. Research in animals has also shown that sugar may even be as addictive as cocaine , triggering a flood of feel-good dopamine and imparting a short-lived sense of well-being. From a behavioral standpoint, many of us have been conditioned from a young age to turn to sugar when we need to be soothed.
For someone who has an unhealthy relationship with sugar, Carmel explains, “The brain thinks sugar is your solution when it’s actually part of your problem, and we have a dependency on it that doesn’t allow for your brain to recognize it as a problem.”
She also adds that yo-yo dieters or people who go on sugar detoxes but then revert right back to old habits tax their nervous system and their endocrine system, making it even harder to break the cycle mentally and physically.
Sugar addiction can show up in many ways. In her book, Carmel includes a quiz to help readers identify what their individual struggles are—as she puts it, “what their relationship status” with sugar is and how harmful it is. Knowing where you stand, she explains, is an important first step towards freedom.
Effects may be physical, mental, or emotional. “First of all, there’s the physical  stuff like weight gain, Type 2 Diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Then there’s stuff like eating more than you intend to or feeling shameful or guilty about your eating behavior. Then the real cornerstone of addiction in general is cravings. It’s needing a sweet at the end of the meal or being in your 3:00 meeting and being really focused on the M&Ms at the end or being angry if they don’t have the type of donut you want.”
Understanding your relationship with sugar can help you begin to untangle yourself from those negative patterns. “If people thought about having a relationship with food, they likely wouldn’t be behaving the way they do,” says Carmel.
She adds, “I’m a big believer that knowledge is power. You need to understand the scope of the problem, see what the status of your relationship is and then quantify  the problem. Try writing down what you eat for a week so you can see what areas need focus, and you can see what the big players are, and you can see what the little players are (where sugar is hidden). Doing this in an educated way will bode better results.”
While some people may be able to go cold turkey, it’s also okay to start with small changes. “Something is always better than nothing. If cutting out three things is all you can handle, start there.”
For those who turn to sugar as an emotional crutch, Carmel adds, “We need to take sugar off the table as a coping mechanism.” If you’ve been conditioned to use sugar to cope with stressful or challenging situations, you’ll need to come up with new approaches that actually work for you—as opposed to ones you think you “should” use but find impossible to sustain.
It’s also helpful to surround yourself with supportive people and seek guidance from a healthcare expert if needed.
Once you’ve broken up with sugar and no longer feel burdened by it, it’s not like things will magically be okay for happily ever after. Carmel explains that you need to find your own healthy balance and have strategies to cope with potentially triggering situations and experiences. Breaking up with sugar, she explains, doesn’t necessarily mean you’ll never eat it again. “A healthy relationship means that you get right back on track the minute things go off track or don’t go according to goal.” The idea is to reduce harm and get off this diet mentality of “I made one mistake, game over.”
Learning to trust your inner hunger and fullness cues and being aware of your emotions are also important. “When you really give up sugar, you form a relationship with hunger and satiety so much more easily because your endocrine system isn’t being overly stimulated. When you’re trapped in it, it’s hard to imagine how great that solution feels.”
I’m a registered dietitian, health coach and author who helps busy people streamline their healthy living routine and establish a balanced relationship with food and exercise. My goal is to help make wellness approachable and enjoyable by empowering people to bridge the gap between their ideal and their everyday. I’ve worked in the clinical setting (at New York-Presbyterian Hospital and New York’s Hospital For Special Surgery), private practice, and in corporate wellness. I’m the author of the upcoming Little Book Of Game-Changers: 50 Healthy Habits For Managing Stress & Anxiety and a regular contributor to various media outlets such as SHAPE and mindbodygreen, among others. I like my coffee black and my bourbon neat. Yes, I eat a lot of salad, but no, I’m not a vegetarian.
