My favorite risk/reward silver mining stocks for 2020.
Low valuations versus their upside potential.
Quality properties with long-life mines.
Exceptional leverage to higher silver prices.
One trend that I have noticed while analyzing silver mining stocks for the past 15 years is that they are increasingly disappearing. Silver prices have been low (sub $18) for an extended period of time, making it very difficult to build and operate silver mines. What has become a trend is that silver miners have had no choice but to diversify into gold mining, which has been more profitable.
There are so few pure silver miners left that it is easy to name them. In fact, there are currently only about twenty in the entire world. There are so few pure silver producers, that only five made this list, even though I prefer producers and would like to have listed ten.
This list includes five producers, one near-term producer, and four development projects. What they all have in common are quality properties with long-life mines. Also, I have not included any in high-risk locations or management teams that are sketchy.
I consider these the cream of the crop and all have outstanding upside potential if silver prices blast off. Some of these can be considered pricey, if you are looking for large gains if silver prices double. But if you are expecting the potential for extremely high silver prices, then these are excellent stocks to own.
It's not super early to be buying most of these stocks, so you are not going to have "to the moon" returns. In fact, buying the SIL silver miner ETF will probably do as well with less risk. Or, buying physical silver, could do better than some of these stocks with far less risk (I personally consider owning physical silver a must own asset).
The reason to buy these stocks is to get in the game and get exposure to silver. I personally am not satisfied owning only SIL and physical silver. I also want to own several silver mining stocks. I want exposure just in case silver blasts off to the moon and for the possibility that some of these stocks sell at 30x free cash flow.
There are several reasons why I like silver and the silver miners. Here are a few:
1. Silver is extremely undervalued and unloved. The current GSR (gold/silver ratio) is 84, whereas when silver was considered money, it was 16.
2. Silver is rare. Most of the silver that is mined goes from the mine to some type of fabrication facility. Very little silver goes into a warehouse where inventory stacks up. The amount of silver bullion inventory available for sale is tiny compared to gold bullion (about 1%).
3. Silver is perhaps the most important commodity in the industrial world after copper. About 80% of the silver produced today is used in some form of fabrication. Very little of the silver produced is available for investors on a dollar basis (around $3 to $4 billion).
4. The potential for a silver shortage is very high. What has happened with palladium (a shortage) is likely to also occur with silver. Palladium used to be valued around $300 per oz. Today it is worth more than gold.
5. There are very few pure silver miners. This creates an opportunity as investors will be forced to buy the only ones left.
While silver appears to be trending higher based on its chart, there is always a chance that this is a false breakout. If silver prices drop, the silver miners will be pounded lower. Investors have shown very little patience to hold their positions if silver prices drop. Thus, there is extreme volatility in this sector, and with big upside potential comes big downside risk.
I think we are still in a bear market for silver, and it's not yet time to break out the champagne. Until we break out of the 6-year channel, I will not be confident that a new bull market in silver has begun. So, while many of the silver miners have been breaking out and trending upward (First Majestic, Alexco Resource, Pan American Silver, Silvercorp Metals, Hecla Mining, etc.), the silver price has not yet joined the party.
If you look at the gold chart, it has broken out of its 6-year channel. However, looking at the silver chart below, you can see that we are still in the channel. We need a close above $20 to confirm the breakout, although a weekly close above $18.50 will give me a lot of confidence. Once we get above $18.50, I would say it's game on.
I excluded stocks that I consider pricey, such as Pan American Silver, SilverCrest Metals, Silvercorp Metals, Fresnillo Plc, Buenaventura Mining, New Pacific Metals, and Industrias Penoles. If you want lower returns, consider looking at these for opportunities.
I excluded the smaller producers, such as Impact Silver, Excellon Resources, and Santa Cruz Silver. All three of these could do well if silver prices trend higher.
I excluded certain stocks because of issues that reduce their risk/reward profile. These include Avino Silver & Gold, Americas Gold & Silver, Golden Minerals, Almaden Minerals, Minco Silver, Silver Bear Resources, Prophecy Development, and Discovery Metals. I expect several of these stocks to do well if silver prices trend. They each have issues that prevented them from making the top 10.
