Neils Christensen Monday April 13, 2020 15:53
( Kitco News )  - Gold  prices have pushed to nearly an eight-year high, and this is only the start as  investors should keep an eye on the precious metal's long-term outlook,  according to one gold fund executive.
In a  telephone interview with Kitco News on Monday, Peter Grosskopf, chief  executive officer at Sprott Inc., said that the gold market's future looks  bright as the global economy deals with unprecedented stimulus during a time of  unprecedented uncertainty.
"Investors  should continue to consider gold as a unit of currency or a purchasing power  that can maintain its value against other assets," he said.
Grosskopf's  comments come as gold prices have soared well above its previous long-term  resistance levels at $1,700 an ounce. June gold futures last traded at  $1,764.10 an ounce, up 0.64% on the day.
"Gold  has been acting very well in the last month. All the technicals show that its  uptrend will be maintained in the short, medium and long term," he said.  "We would expect to see prices over $2,000 by sometime early next year.  That is not a surprise, fundamentally either, in the current environment."
Some  markets analysts see limited scope for gold in the near-term as the COVID-19  pandemic pushes the global economy into a recession, raising deflationary  fears. However, Grosskopf said that investors should look past any short-term  weakness in gold.
He  added that there is scope for gold to do well in both an inflationary and  deflationary environment.
"If  you get deflation and you get a real crash in the financial system, want to be  holding some gold," he said. "And if you see through it and you get  the recovery, you will now have an extra $6 or $7 trillion floating around  financial markets. That is when you really want to hold some gold to protect  against inflation. So I don't think as a gold bull, you need to discern right  now between the two scenarios.
Last  week the Federal Reserve announced a $2.3 trillion loan program for small and  medium-sized businesses. This latest action comes less than a month after the  U.S. central bank lowered interest rates to zero and introduced unlimited  quantitate easing.
Grosskopf  said that there is no telling how high the Fed's balance sheet will go before  the latest economic crisis is over.
"The  forecast of the Fed's balance sheet in the next two or three months is somewhat  akin to looking at a nuclear explosion. The Fed's balance sheet is going to  explode higher," he said.
While  demand for gold is expected to go higher, Grosskopf said that potential  investors need to more discerning when it comes to the precious metal. A significant  issue that has been raised in the gold market in the last few weeks is physical  demand versus the paper market.
Grosskopf  said that there are growing fears in the marketplace that when June gold  futures contracts rollover, there won't be enough metal for delivery.
"The  volatility in that futures versus spot price shows that there are stresses in  the system, and the stresses are related to physical delivery," he said.  "Nobody right now wants to trust the paper."
However,  Grosskopf added that he expects the supply issues to be worked out before June  contracts expire. He added that people will get their gold, but they might have  to wait.
"If  there is a failure to deliver of any significance," he said. "Then  you're going to see such a scramble into the physical bull markets, and the  gold price will hit a record right away and it won't look back."
If investors are worried  about not getting their physical gold, Grosskopf said that they should look at  allocated funds. Although these have a little higher premium, investors don't  have to worry about supply issues.
