LAS VEGAS, June  18, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Asia Broadband Inc. ( AABB ), through its wholly owned subsidiary Asia Metals Inc., announced today that it has initiated the planning and preparation process to create a development program for the Company’s new gold mine property acquisition in Colombia, South America.  From the three site visits to the property prior to the Colombia travel ban in March, the Company completed significant groundwork and accumulated considerable data on the property during the due diligence process prior to the property acquisition.  AABB has been utilizing this data to construct a further groundwork plan and staged development program, which is set to begin after the Colombia travel ban is lifted in the next several months. The gold mine property consists of 912 hectares and includes an artisan mining site that has historically produced gold and silver.
Furthermore, the Company continues its new gold mine acquisition campaign targeting properties in South America, Central America and Mexico, which have high development potential and historic gold production. The focus of the campaign is to duplicate the successful acquisition model of the Company's existing high-density, shallow gold mine property in Guerrero, Mexico, that has known historical gold vein structures.  AABB is currently directing a full-scale development and production expansion of its mine and property in Mexico.
Asia Broadband Inc. (OTC : AABB), through its wholly owned subsidiary Asia Metals Inc., is a resource company focused on the production, supply and sale of precious and base metals, primarily to Asian markets. The Company utilizes its specific geographic expertise, experience and extensive industry contacts to facilitate its innovative distribution process from the production and supply of precious and base metals in Guerrero, Mexico, to our client sales networks in Asia. This vertical integration approach to sales transactions is the unique strength of Asia Broadband and differentiates the Company to its shareholders.
