Abu Dhabi's foreign trade in precious metals, gems hits $1.48bln over 3 months
Image used for illustrative purpose. One-kg 24K gold and silver bars are displayed at the Chinese Gold and Silver Exchange Society, Hong Kong's major gold and silver exchange, during the first trading day after the Chinese New Year holidays, in Hong Kong February 14, 2013.
Abu Dhabi Customs has registered a huge increase in the foreign trading of precious metals and gemstones in the first quarter of 2020, according to the Ministry of Finance.
Trade of precious metals and gemstones reached 5.42 billion dirhams ($1.48 billion) during the first quarter of 2020,  up 34.4 percent from 4.03bn dirhams in the same period in 2019.
Trade of precious metals and gemstones supports the UAE capital's drive for economic diversification and non-oil foreign trade promotion of the emirate.
This increase in Abu Dhabi’s trading in precious metals and gemstones is backed by an increase in imports estimated at 2.2 billion dirhams compared to 514.5 million dirhams in the same period in 2019.
The value of exports was estimated at 3.1 billion dirhams and re-exporting estimated at 131 million dirhams.
Last month, the General Administration of Abu Dhabi Customs unveiled a package of economic incentives to support importers in Abu Dhabi and to mitigate the consequences of the current exceptional circumstances as a transit gateway for all vital sectors.
The stimulus package falls within the framework of Abu Dhabi government initiatives to preserve the national gains and support the vital sectors and companies, especially small and medium ones.
The incentives included postponing the payment of customs duties of importers for 90 days through facilities accounts that opened to customers of Abu Dhabi Customs, under which the payment of customs duties due on goods entered into the country is postponed for 3 months from the date of the customs statement.
The incentives also included pre-clearance services prior to shipment arrival through the possibility of clearing goods before they arrive in the country through the customs operations system.
Disclaimer: This article is provided for informational purposes only. The content does not provide tax, legal or investment advice or opinion regarding the suitability, value or profitability of any particular security, portfolio or investment strategy. Read our full disclaimer policy here
