Vancouver, British Columbia--(Newsfile Corp. - June 30, 2020) - Altum Resource Corp. (CSE: ALTM) (the "Company" or "Altum") is pleased to announce that it has changed its corporate name from "Altum Resource Corp." to "GoldHaven Resources Corp.". The Company's name change reflects the Company's focus on acquiring, exploring and developing precious metal properties in the Americas.
The Company anticipates that its common shares will begin trading on the Canadian Securities Exchange under its new name and trading symbol "GOH " at market open on July 3, 2020. The Company's new CUSIP number and ISIN for the shares will be 38149V103 and CA38149V1031, respectively. No action is required to be taken by shareholders with respect to the name change. Outstanding share certificates are not affected by the name change and do not need to be exchanged.
The Company also announces that its annual general meeting of shareholders ("AGM") will be held on Wednesday, August 19, 2020 at 10:00 am (Vancouver Time) at the head office of the Company, located at #2300 - 1177 West Hastings Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6E 2K3. The record date for the shareholders entitled to vote at the AGM will be July 17, 2020.
Altum is a mineral exploration and resource development company focused on identifying economically viable resource opportunities in the Americas.
This news release contains forward-looking statements and forward-looking information (collectively, "forward-looking statements") within the meaning of applicable Canadian and U.S. securities legislation, including the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements, other than statements of historical fact, included herein including, without limitation, the date the Company's common shares will begin trading under the Company's new name and trading symbol, the anticipated date of the Company's AGM, the anticipated record date for the AGM, the Company's expectation that it will be successful in enacting its business plans and the anticipated business plans and timing of future activities of the Company, are forward-looking statements. Although the Company believes that such statements are reasonable, it can give no assurance that such expectations will prove to be correct. Forward-looking statements are typically identified by words such as: "believes", "will", "expects", "anticipates", "intends", "estimates", "plans", "may", "should", "potential", "scheduled", or variations of such words and phrases and similar expressions, which, by their nature, refer to future events or results that may, could, would, might or will occur or be taken or achieved. In making the forward-looking statements in this news release, the Company has applied several material assumptions, including without limitation, that there will be investor interest in future financings, market fundamentals will result in sustained precious metals demand and prices, the receipt of any necessary permits, licenses and regulatory approvals in connection with the future exploration and development of the Company's projects in a timely manner, the availability of financing on suitable terms for the exploration and development of the Company's projects and the Company's ability to comply with environmental, health and safety laws.
The Company cautions investors that any forward-looking statements by the Company are not guarantees of future results or performance, and that actual results may differ materially from those in forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, operating and technical difficulties in connection with mineral exploration and development activities, actual results of exploration activities, the estimation or realization of mineral reserves and mineral resources, the inability of the Company to obtain the necessary financing required to conduct its business and affairs, as currently contemplated, the timing and amount of estimated future production, the costs and timing of the development of new deposits, requirements for additional capital, future prices of precious metals, changes in general economic conditions, changes in the financial markets and in the demand and market price for commodities, lack of investor interest in future financings, accidents, other risks of the mining industry, delays in obtaining governmental approvals, permits or financing or in the completion of development or construction activities, risks relating to epidemics or pandemics such as COVID-19, including the impact of COVID-19 on the Company's AGM, business, financial condition and results of operations, changes in laws, regulations and policies affecting mining operations, title disputes, the inability of the Company to obtain any necessary permits, consents, approvals or authorizations, including of the Canadian Securities Exchange in respect of the Company's change of name, the timing and possible outcome of any pending litigation, environmental issues and liabilities, and risks related to joint venture operations, and other risks and uncertainties disclosed in the Company's latest interim Management's Discussion and Analysis and filed with certain securities commissions in Canada. All of the Company's Canadian public disclosure filings may be accessed via www.sedar.com and readers are urged to review these materials.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. The Company undertakes no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements in this news release or incorporated by reference herein, except as otherwise required by law.
To view the source version of this press release, please visit https://www.newsfilecorp.com/release/58907
