For traders News and features Analysis Anglo American share price forecast: has the market priced in its Covid-19 recovery?
Mining stocks, including Anglo American (AAL) , took a hit in late February and into March when commodities demand slumped as China and other major consuming countries began to lock down to slow the spread of the coronavirus pandemic. But the stock has since rebounded with demand starting to return and the outlook remaining positive for infrastructure spending.
Anglo American stock fell by 50 per cent from the start of the year to the March lows, when a broad sell-off hit a range of asset classes. But the share price has since bounced up by around 68 per cent. As the world’s largest producer of platinum and a major player in iron ore, copper , nickel and coal, is the company well-positioned to continue rising in the second half of 2020?
This AAL stock analysis recaps the latest Anglo American share price news and the outlook for the stock.
The global mining industry has faced disruptions to supply as well as demand during the Covid-19 pandemic. While consumption slumped with industrial production cut dramatically around the world during government-ordered shutdowns, supply has been constrained as mines have also been subject to restrictions on their activity and workers have been affected by the virus.
The J.P. Morgan global purchasing manufacturers’ index (PMI) slumped to 39.7 in April, its lowest level since the financial crisis in April 2009. A number below 50 indicates a contraction in activity. “New export orders placed at manufacturers fell globally to a degree exceeding that seen even during the global financial crisis in April, indicative of global trade collapsing at an annualised rate of approximately 50 per cent,” said IHS Markit chief business economist Chris Williamson. The PMI rose to 42.4 in May, up by 2.8 points from April, but still remains in contraction.
The drop in demand has somewhat been offset by a decrease in mining output in various countries. Production of platinum group metals (PGMs) was reduced in South Africa, silver production was affected in Mexico and output of copper has been curtailed in Latin America, where the rate of Covid-19 infections continues to rise. Nickel and zinc production has also been suffering.
Chile’s copper production is estimated to have fallen by 200,000t, or 3.5 per cent of total production, notes ANZ commodity strategist Daniel Hynes, while mines accounting for 50 per cent of output in Peru have also been affected. These countries account for around 40 per cent of global copper production and the disruptions have contributed to higher copper prices . Iron ore prices have risen as Brazilian producer Vale’s output has been affected.
The AAL share price moved higher in 2019, rising from around 1,750 GBX per share to end the year at the 2,170 GBX per share level. It peaked at its highest level since 2012 in June last year when it announced a $1bn share buyback programme. Palladium prices hit a record high in 2019 on demand for automotive catalysts, and rising iron ore prices further buoyed the company’s profits.
The share price started the year on a strong note above 2,200 GBX but dropped to 1,018 GBX in March, its lowest level since June 2017, as commodity demand fell. The price subsequently moved up to the 1,800 GBX level as demand has started to rebound while production remains lower than expected.
Anglo reported a 4 per cent decline in production in the first quarter as a result of a lockdown or distancing measures in a number of the countries in which it operates, combined with the impact of changes to its metallurgical coal mining. That was despite continued strong iron ore production.
The company has revised down its forecast for 2020 iron ore production by around 4 million tonnes to 59-61m tonnes, and its guidance for thermal coal by around 4m tonnes to 22m tonnes. Diamond production has been revised to 25-27m carats from 32-34m carats.
Anglo was forced to declare force majeure on its PGM production in March after an explosion at a converter plant in South Africa. One of the two units at the plant is expected to remain under repair until the second quarter of 2021. Anglo has revised down its platinum output guidance from 2.0-2.2m ounces to 1.5-1.7m ounces, and its palladium production from 1.4m ounces to 1-1.2m ounces. The company has maintained its guidance for metallurgical coal, copper and nickel.
Anglo said it is implementing $0.5bn of cash reduction measures and cutting its 2020 capital expenditure guidance by approximately $1bn as it navigates the heightened uncertainty in the markets, indicating it is well-prepared to deal with potential challenges.
So, what are Anglo American shares : buy or sell?
Anglo American share price forecast: will the stock continue to rebound?
The gradual lifting of lockdown restrictions in various countries, particularly China, is expected to increase demand for commodities in the second half of 2020, offering a positive outlook for the AAL stock forecast.
In its latest Anglo American share forecast, Credit Suisse (CS) revised up its price target for the stock to £20.20 from £18, giving it an “outperform” rating. The bank’s analysts noted: "Anglo has performed strongly over the past few months but … we think this is a simple reflection of what we have seen in the underlying commodities and that the shares are yet to reflect the longer-term drivers in the company’s recovery from the pandemic.”
Although demand for base metals dropped abruptly during the pandemic and has resulted in higher inventories, the economic recovery and stimulus, especially in China, will support prices for the time being, according to analysts at ABN Amro. Over the longer term, the electrification of society and subsequent increase in production of electric vehicles containing copper wiring and nickel in the batteries, along with investments in power grid infrastructure and housing construction, are set to lift demand, the analysts noted. Higher Chinese steel production and disruptions to Brazilian supply will likely support iron ore prices. That should all offer a positive outlook for Anglo American.
Among 19 analysts offering a 12-month Anglo American share price prediction, the median price target is 2,049 GBX per share, ranging between 1,157 GBX and 2,415 GBX, for an 11 per cent increase from the 1,800 level, according to the Financial Times.
In its Anglo American share forecast, Wallet Investor indicates an increase in the share price in the middle of that range to 1,923 GBX by the end of this year and 2,138 GBX by the end of 2021. Looking further ahead, it predicts the share price will move up further to 2,349 GBX by the end of 2022 and 2,713 GBX by June 2025.
Anglo American’s share price performance in the second half of the year will depend on developments in the Covid-19 pandemic, as there are signs of a sharp rise in cases in Latin America that could further disrupt mining activity. A pause in reopening from government-ordered lockdowns in some countries as virus cases spike could also exert downward pressure on demand.
If you are hesitant to make long-term commitments but still want to try to profit from the AAL share price volatility, you can do so by trading contracts for difference , or CFDs, with Capital.com.
Trading CFDs gives you the opportunity to hold a long position, speculating that the price will rise, or a short position, speculating that the price will fall. Therefore, no matter whether you have a positive or negative view of the Anglo American share forecast, you can still try to profit from the price fluctuations.
