Gold miners, tech darlings and the big banks gave the Australian sharemarket a solid start to the new financial year after Wall Street's focus was drawn to the prospect of continued stimulus instead of a mounting coronavirus toll.
The ASX added 0.6% on Wednesday, making it back-to-back gains for the first time in a week.
The ASX 200 finished up 36.5 points, or 0.6 per cent, at 5934.4 on Wednesday to make it back-to-back gains for the first time in a week.
The banking giants helped lift financials 1 per cent while the goldminers added lustre to the materials sector, which jumped by 0.8 per cent.
The property and tech sectors also stood out in a choppy day’s trade filled with uncertainty.
Chief among the hurdles was the ever-present spectre of a second surge in COVID-19 cases which, as well as forcing some Victorian suburbs into lockdown, elicited a stern overnight warning from US disease experts and the Federal Reserve.
Not that the rise cases seemed to bother Wall Street.
In fact, Burman investment manager Juia Lee said US markets were likely buoyed by the prospect that incredible monetary and fiscal stimulus could continue longer than expected.
“On one hand you have COVID-19 cases rising, you’ve got fears for the economy with the recession, but then you have the expectation that the stimulus tap will remain on for a while yet,” Ms Lee said.
Australia grappled with its own coronavirus worries on Wednesday as ten Melbourne postcodes prepared return to lockdown restrictions after 73 new cases were recorded.
On the plus side, restrictions eased in NSW, with venue patron caps replaced with a four square metre rule and community sport allowed to resume.
There was more positive news came via monthly manufacturing index data, which proved encouraging across Asia.
China's Caixin Manufacturing PMI outperformed while Malaysia and South Korea, showed continued improvement. Only Japan disappointed.
On the ASX the big sectors outperformed, with the banking majors helping financials rise.
NAB led the way for the big four, up 1.9 per cent to $18.56, while Westpac added 1.8 per cent to $18.28.
BHP was flat, while Rio Tinto and Fortescue Metals fell, but an eight-year peak for gold prices lifted the materials sector.
For the goldminers, Newcrest added 3.2 per cent, Northern Star rose 7 per cent, Evolution 6.2 per cent, and Resolute Mining 7.1 per cent.
Afterpay touched a new record high $63.90 and still managed to close 2.1 per cent higher at $62.24 as the tech sector added 1.6 per cent. Data firm NextDC was the best company on the index with an 8.1 per cent gain to $10.68.
Ms Lee said the end of financial year rebalancing and first-day movement meant some of the worst performers of the past 12 months finished ahead.
Ooh!Media added 7.1 per cent, Flight Centre rose 3.2 per cent, G8 Education 1.1 per cent, Webjet 7.5 per cent. Southern Cross Media was flat.
“The end and beginning of the financial year is a bit of a strange time - you do see a bit of rebalancing,” Ms Lee said.
“In June there is tax loss selling, but int he first few weeks of July you see a bit of a bounce-back in the ones who were heavily sold off.”
US futures are down 0.2 per cent, pointing to a weak overnight session.
