As metal stocks try to look up, analysts raise red flag, say pain is not going away
Shares of Nalco trade at 2013 prices, SAIL is available at a price level last seen in 2003.
Analysts are cautious, as the coronavirus crisis becomes bigger around the world.
Lockdown extension likely to trigger selloff in Indian stocks: Chris Wood
NEW DELHI: Despite the recent recovery in the broader market, shares of Tata Steel NSE -1.49 % , Vedanta, Hindalco and Vedanta have all been ruling at their lowest levels since 2016, while those of Jindal Steel are trading near early 2017 levels.
Shares of state-run Nalco NSE -0.76 % trade at 2013 prices, SAIL NSE -1.12 % is available at a price level last seen in 2003. Yet, there is no taker for these stocks. Analysts are cautious, as the coronavirus crisis becomes bigger around the world.
Wuhan, the epicentre of the virus outbreak, has lifted the 76-day lockdown, raising hopes that life in China, the largest consumer of metals, is coming back to normal.
Reports indicated flattening of the virus infection in some other countries as well. This gave metal shares up to 7 per cent in Thursday's trade.
But analysts say given the magnitude of the pandemic, investors should take incoming news with a pinch of salt. They said metal demand, and hence prices, may remain weak for a prolonged period. For metal producers with manufacturing facilities face additional risks as Europe and the US have become new hotspots for the virus.
Tata Steel has operations in the US and Europe while JSW Steel runs facilities in Italy and the US. Hindalco's Atlanta-based arm Novelis operates 25 manufacturing facilities in nine countries. Noting that the ongoing lockdown in India may extend further, analysts do not see domestic demand recovery anytime soon.
"Valuations are also not important. Metals are very cyclical in nature, where demand largely depends on global economic outlook. A recovery will depend on the flattening of the curve for virus cases. In India, some estimates see that happening only in the first week of June," said Chakri Lokapriya, CIO & MD, TCG AMC.
At present, large steel players are running at 60-70 per cent capacity utilisation, which has helped them maintain inventory at a reasonable levels. Logistics disruptions in March-end eased to an extent and a few players are ready to ramp up operations once the lockdown ends.
"This could lead to rapid inventory buildup, similar to August 2019 when weak demand coincided with high capacity utilisation. This had spurred lot of destocking, leading to 21 weeks of sustained price decline. We may see an extended period of low steel prices, as demand is likely to grow only gradually," Edelweiss Securities said in a note.
The brokerage expects domestic steel prices to come off at least 10 per cent in the near term in line with global prices.
If the ongoing lockdown in India stays for 30 days, which is Phillip Capital's base case, Indian steel demand contraction will be 9 per cent. The brokerage sees a 16 per cent contraction in case of an even longer shutdown.
Prices of aluminium have drop 15 per cent since early January, while zinc is down 25 per cent, lead 20 per cent and copper 17 per cent. Phillip Capital said the prices should bottom out soon but any meaningful recovery may take longer than expected due to significant inventory buildup and slower demand recovery.
Phillip Capital expects Nalco to be worst hit due to the fall in aluminium and alumina prices, and a 2-7 per cent cut in volumes.
The brokerage estimates the Ebitda erosion at 26 per cent for Hindalco, 30 per cent for Hindustan Zinc and 36 per cent for Vendata thanks to a big drop in realisations. This brokerage does not expect SAIL or Tata Steel to default, and expects JSW Steel to remain comfortable until it takes over Bhushan Power.
ICICI Securities has revised downward earnings for Tata Steel, JSW Steel, Hindalco and Hindustan zinc.
"We maintain 'hold' recommendation on Tata Steel, JSW Steel and Hindalco with a revised price targets of Rs 275, Rs 150 and Rs 100, respectively. We also maintain 'buy' recommendation on Hindustan Zinc with a revised price target of Rs 180," the brokerage said.
