Aurelia Metals (AMI) has confirmed the maiden mineral resource estimate for its Federation deposit, near the Hera Mine in New South Wales
Indicated and inferred resources total 197,000 tonnes of lead, 348,000 tonnes of zinc, 67,000 ounces of gold and 755,000 ounces of silver
Further drilling is underway, both to extend the span of the known resource, and to infill the existing zone to firm up the estimate
A scoping study is also underway which will consider mining, processing and infrastructure scenarios as groundwork for a pre-feasibility study
Aurelia Metals is up 8.4 per cent at Tuesday's close, with shares priced at 51.5 cents each
Minerals explorer Aurelia Metals (AMI) has confirmed the maiden mineral resource estimate for its Federation deposit, near the Hera Mine in New South Wales.
Indicated and inferred resources total 197,000 tonnes of lead, 348,000 tonnes of zinc, 67,000 ounces of gold and 755,000 ounces of silver.
Based on this estimate, the net smelter return (NSR) for Federation of $373 per tonne compares favourably to the extant resource at the Hera mine of $227 per tonne.
Given the Hera mine is situated just 10 kilometres away, Aurelia may well be able to call on existing infrastructure and facilities, depending on ongoing metallurgical testwork and other logistical considerations.
Aurelia has already conducted over 29,000 metres of drilling at Federation to generate the resource estimate.
Further drilling is underway, both to extend the span of the known resource, and to infill the existing zone to firm up the estimate.
If Aurelia can extend the footprint and grade of the deposit, it could prove to be a valuable little precinct.
A scoping study is also underway, which will consider mining, processing and infrastructure scenarios as groundwork for a pre-feasibility study.
An environmental study is also underway and will proceed in concert with the scoping study as the project takes shape and various permitting and approval issues require attention.
While it's still a long road ahead at Federation, it seems Aurelia has a pretty definite destination in mind.
Aurelia Metals is up 8.4 per cent at Tuesday's close, with shares priced at 51.5 cents each.
