Crypto financial services firm Bitcoin Suisse announced today the addition of precious metals to its trading offering.
After seven years of trading a wide range of crypto assets, the Zug-based company has added gold, silver, and platinum to the crypto- and fiat currencies available for 24/7 trading with an immediate cash settlement.
Clients now have access to an even greater choice of strong assets to build a diversified portfolio, according to the firm. In times of high market volatility and uncertainty, Bitcoin Suisse is providing another option with a traditionally esteemed asset class.
Just a few weeks ago, Bitcoin Suisse added 24/7 trading of fiat currencies . The firm said that with precious metals, it adds assets that have been part of long-term investment strategies.
Gold, often referred to as the original “safe haven” asset, has remained a hard-to-access asset for many investors down through history, Bitcoin Suisse noted.
Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
“Even with increased access in recent years, the possibility of combining precious metal investments with so-called “digital gold” (Bitcoin) remains difficult. Now Bitcoin Suisse is helping to change this,” the company said in its statement.
The Bitcoin Suisse precious metals offering is accessible to all levels of client demand, with a low minimum purchase of 100 CHF and no custody fees for holdings up to 100 000 CHF.
Three precious metals can be traded not only against fiat currencies (CHF, USD, GBP, EUR, and DKK), but also against the top two cryptocurrencies, BTC and ETH. This gives the firm’s investors the possibility to move seamlessly between two asset classes, with no friction or delay.
Precious metal trades are settled immediately for fiat or cryptocurrencies without the usual time-lapse of one to two days, allowing Bitcoin Suisse clients to easily optimize their holdings in various market situations.
“Recent developments have boosted the demand for scarce, highly valuable assets such as gold and Bitcoin. Bitcoin may not be Gold 2.0, yet. In the meantime, we want to give our clients the maximum choice possible. By offering seamless precious metals trading, we go beyond the crypto asset class for the first time. It’s an excellent way to move between the two assets with the click of a button,” Bitcoin Suisse’s head of trading and liquidity, Stefan Lütolf, said.
