1of2Firefighters were battling a blaze at the Schnitzer Steel recycling facility in Oakland on Wednesday, June 17, 2020.Photo: Jill Tucker / The Chronicle
2of2Oakland firefighters contained a blaze that burned metal debris at the Schnitzer Steel recycling facility in Oakland on Wednesday, June 17, 2020.Photo: Courtesy of Oakland Fire Department
Firefighters contained a blaze that burned metal debris  at the Schnitzer Steel recycling facility in Oakland on Wednesday afternoon.
Six engines, two trucks, and two fire chiefs responded to the metals recycling facility, which is located at 1101 Embarcadero West in Oakland, according to Oakland fire officials. The fire was reported to the fire department at 3:50 p.m.
Shortly before 5 p.m., firefighters were still putting water on the fire. Video shared by the firefighters on the scene showed multiple engines shooting water on a smoking pile of metal debris.
The fire was under control by 5:11 p.m., fire officials said. There were no reports of damage to nearby structures, and no reports of injuries.
“Following a prompt response and aggressive fire attack, crews on scene made great progress on this incident,” Oakland fire officials said on Twitter. “Job well done by the proud men & woman of #OFD for their hard work and dedication to service.”
The facility — which had a fire in 2018 —is located next to Howard Terminal at the Port of Oakland, where the Oakland Athletics hope to build a ballpark.
Firefighters are expected to remain on the scene throughout the evening to “ensure no additional fires start on the pile,” officials said.
Photos posted to social media showed clouds of black smoke billowing into the air from the facility grounds.
“As crews continue to fight this blaze, residents/businesses in the area, people downtown, and those traveling on the water and 880 can expect to see heavy black smoke,” Oakland fire officials said on Twitter.
— Oakland Firefighters (@OaklandFireLive) June 17, 2020
Lauren Hernández is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: lauren.hernandez@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @ByLHernandez
