NEW YORK, March  04, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- via NetworkWire -- Bolt Metals Corp. (CSE: BOLT) (OTCQB: PCRCF) (XFRA: NXFE) today announces its placement in an editorial published by NetworkNewsWire ("NNW"), one of 40+ brands in the InvestorBrandNetwork (“IBN”), a multifaceted financial news and publishing company for private and public entities.
To view the full publication, “Electric Vehicle Growth Creates East-Asia Battery Mineral Boom,” visit: http://nnw.fm/SkH2t
The dramatic rise of electric vehicles (EV) is creating a surge in business for companies mining battery minerals, especially for companies operating in Indonesia, one of the world’s top producers of battery minerals. Bolt Metals Corporation (CSE:BOLT) (OTCQB:PCRCF) (XFRA:NXFE) , one of the companies working in Indonesia, recently announced a name change as it rebrands itself a leading resource developer in this growing market.
Bolt Metals has been moving away from its initial position as a cobalt producer and into a broader position as a battery-cathode material supplier. BOLT’s Cyclops mining project in northern Indonesia reflects this, providing a rich source of cobalt and nickel.  But it’s the mine’s location, as much as its resources, that creates potential for the Cyclops project, a new direction for Bolts Metals and a reflection of bigger changes in the EV market.
Bolt Metals Corp. is a Canada-based exploration company focused on the acquisition and development of production-grade, battery-metals projects within the Asia-Pacific region, employing a vertically integrated minerals-to-market strategy to leverage these assets to their fullest. The company’s flagship project, Cyclops, located in nickel-rich Indonesia, features environmental and mining permits, excellent infrastructure and easy access to an airport, city and skilled workforce. Backed by a successful 2019 exploration and development season, Bolts Metals is pursuing ambitious milestones for 2020. For more information, visit www.BoltMetals.com .
NetworkNewsWire (“NNW”) is a financial news and content distribution company, one of 40+ brands within our InvestorBrandNetwork (“IBN”), that provides: (1) access to a network of wire solutions via NetworkWire to reach all target markets, industries and demographics in the most effective manner possible; (2) article and editorial syndication to 5,000+ news outlets; (3) enhanced press release solutions to ensure maximum impact; (4) social media distribution via IBN to millions of social media followers; and (5) a full array of corporate communications solutions. As a multifaceted organization with an extensive team of contributing journalists and writers, NNW is uniquely positioned to best serve private and public companies that desire to reach a wide audience comprising investors, consumers, journalists and the general public. By cutting through the overload of information in today’s market, NNW brings its clients unparalleled visibility, recognition and brand awareness. NNW is where news, content and information converge.
Please see full terms of use and disclaimers on the NetworkNewsWire website applicable to all content provided by NNW, wherever published or re-published: http://NNW.fm/Disclaimer
This release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. All forward-looking statements are inherently uncertain as they are based on current expectations and assumptions concerning future events or future performance of the company. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are only predictions and speak only as of the date hereof. In evaluating such statements, prospective investors should review carefully various risks and uncertainties identified in this release and matters set in the company's SEC filings. These risks and uncertainties could cause the company's actual results to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements.
