NEW YORK, Feb.  27, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- via NetworkNewsAudio – Bolt Metals Corp. (CSE: BOLT) (OTCQB: PCRCF) (XFRA: NXFE), formerly Pacific Rim Cobalt Corp., today announces the broadcast of its audio interview with NetworkNewsAudio (“NNA”), one of 40+ brands in the InvestorBrandNetwork (“IBN”).
The interview can be heard at: http://nnw.fm/h1QLn
Bolt Metals CEO Ranjeet Sundher joins NNW’s Stuart Smith in an interview that discusses the company’s market strategy as it evolves to become a specific player in the expanding electric vehicle supply chain in China and Indonesia. The company’s name change on Feb. 26, 2020, finalizes a transitioning and rebranding effort that has been in the works for some time.
“We’re very focused on production-grade battery metals in our region, and we’re now going to employ vertical mineral-to-market strategy and leverage our assets to the fullest,” said Sundher, a veteran of the mining and investor sector in southeast Asia for 25 years. “There’s no better place in the world to join the supply chain than from within Indonesia.”
Bolt Metals saw solid success in 2019 with drill results and nickel intersections exceeding expectations. The company’s flagship Cyclops laterite nickel-cobalt property features environmental and mining permits; comprehensive infrastructure, including year-round sealed road access; close proximity to air and sea transport links; gentle topography; and an experienced local workforce.
“From a drilling standpoint and a permitting standpoint, everything solidified as to what we hoped the project was and what it actually is,” Sundher says. “We then took the next step of sending a lot of our ore, our materials to a processing plant to see if this is going to be able to be processed in such a way that we can start to talk to offtake partners. The results were incredible!”
Sundher points to the project’s 99% recovery on nickel and 96% recovery on cobalt as two factors that made 2019 a pivotal year for the company. Those results provided solid evidence that Bolt Metal Corp’s Cyclops project, located in Papua Province, Indonesia, fits the supply chain criteria for the electric vehicle sector in Asia.
A global shift away from carbon-based cars and trucks is pumping billions of dollars into battery-powered electric vehicle research and development projects. Over $20 billion has been committed to nickel projects in Indonesia alone, with all focused on the EV space, Sundher adds.
“In 2020, we’re looking to show the market that we have a business plan that people care about,” he says, noting the company is actively engaging market players in China, Indonesia and others within the Asia-Pacific region. “What we bring is local know-how and a fantastic project and project generation. Quite early in our business plan, China’s largest battery manufacturer wanted to do a preliminary offtake with us, which demonstrated that we were in the right country with the right project. In 2020, we hope to take that relationship and several others to the next level.”
Listen to the full interview here: http://nnw.fm/h1QLn
Bolt Metals Corp. ( CSE: BOLT ) ( OTCQB: PCRCF ) ( XFRA: NXFE ) is a Canada-based exploration company focused on the acquisition and development of production-grade battery metals projects within the Asia-Pacific region, employing a vertically integrated “minerals-to-market” strategy to leverage these assets to their fullest. The company’s flagship project, Cyclops , located in nickel-rich Indonesia, features environmental and mining permits, excellent infrastructure and easy access to an airport, city and skilled workforce. Backed by a successful 2019 exploration and development season, the Company is pursuing ambitious milestones for 2020. For more information, visit www.boltmetals.com
NetworkNewsAudio (“NNA”) allows you to sit back and listen to market updates, CEO interviews and a company AudioPressRelease (“APR”). These audio clips provide snapshots of position, opportunity and momentum. NNA can assist your company by cutting through the overload of information in today's market. NNA brings its Client Partners unparalleled visibility, recognition and brand awareness. NNA is just one site within our sizable family of 40+ brands within the InvestorBrandNetwork (“IBN”). IBN is a comprehensive provider of news and original articles; we aggregate and syndicate this content for much bigger impact. IBN also adds Press Release Enhancement and a full array of social media communication solutions and has amassed a collective audience that includes millions of social media followers. As a multifaceted financial news and distribution company with an extensive team of journalists and writers, IBN has the unparalleled ability to reach a wide audience comprising investors, consumers, journalists and the general public with an ever-growing distribution network of 5,000+ key syndication outlets across the nation.
Please see full terms of use and disclaimers on the InvestorBrandNetwork website applicable to all content provided by IBN, wherever published or re-published: http://IBN.fm/Disclaimer
This release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. All forward-looking statements are inherently uncertain as they are based on current expectations and assumptions concerning future events or future performance of the company. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are only predictions and speak only as of the date hereof. In evaluating such statements, prospective investors should review carefully various risks and uncertainties identified in this release and matters set in the company's SEC filings. These risks and uncertainties could cause the company's actual results to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements.
