VANCOUVER, British Columbia, June  11, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Brixton Metals Corporation (TSXV: BBB) (the “Company” or “Brixton”) is pleased to announce the start of its 2020 exploration program at its wholly owned Thorn Project located in the Golden Triangle of British Columbia. Over the winter months Brixton compiled 154 assessment reports to cover its recently acquired mineral claims. In addition, the Company engaged Fathom Geophysics to acquire and process property wide ASTER and SENTINEL-2 satellite data for alteration minerals.
Acquired new assays for 10,524 soils, 3,240 rock and 486 silts from historic assessment reports with the 2,300 square kilometer claim block
The combination of this newly acquired data resulted in 4 new, high priority exploration areas for gold and copper which will be a significant emphasis for 2020
Chairman and CEO of Brixton, Gary R. Thompson stated, “We are excited to begin the exploration season at the giant Thorn Project. We will continue to advance exploration on the Camp Creek blind porphyry target and the Outlaw sediment host gold target in preparation for drilling later this summer. The newly identified target areas combined with the known targets support our district scale mining camp in the making thesis.”
The plan is to conduct 9 line-km of Induced Polarization (IP) geophysics over the Camp Creek blind porphyry target including downhole IP of hole 150 (829m depth) and hole 162 (554m depth), where the 2019 drilling encountered porphyry style mineralization. Hole 150 and 162 are located about one kilometer apart as plotted in the cross-section in Figure 1 below.
Additional exploration work is planned as follows:
Future drill targets shall be determined upon integration of the above new results.
Click here for Figure 1. Camp Creek Porphyry Target Cross-Section
In preparation for drilling at the Outlaw West area the Company is planning to collect additional infill soil at 50m by 50m stations and additional rock samples around the showings where 2018 rock grab samples returned up to 39 g/t Au. See Figure 2 below for the Outlaw target area.
Click here for Figure 2. Outlaw Gold Target
During the winter months, the Company engaged Fathom Geophysics to acquire and process property wide ASTER and SENTINEL-2 satellite data for alteration minerals mapping. ASTER satellite data was processed in order to highlight potential epidote, chlorite, kaolinite, alunite, dickite, muscovite, pyrophyllite alteration, where SENTINEL-2 satellite was processed for mapping goethite, jarosite and kaolinite alteration. This exercise has been successful in highlighting several areas of coincidental advanced argillic and jarosite anomalies.  As part of its data mining and remote sensing data processing, the Company has been able to identify four new, high priority areas of interest. During the 2020 summer exploration campaign, the Company is planning to conduct geological mapping and prospecting combined with soil-rock geochemistry for the collection of up to 10,000 samples. In addition, select areas will be surveyed with ground based radiometric using a backpack unit to assist with potassic alteration mapping. Figure 3 is a compilation of the new geochemical data and previous data over alteration mapped for copper. Figures 4 and 5 are just the new geochemical data and alteration mapped over the new West, Central East and South Targets
