Aluminum coils at an Arconic facility in Tennessee.
Arconic is a metals producer—the kind of stock investors often shun as fear of recession mounts in the late stages of a business cycle. Falling commodity prices and weakening demand are a double whammy for those kinds of cyclical stocks.
J.P. Morgan says investors should think again. Analyst Seth Seifman upgraded the stock to the equivalent of Buy from Hold on Monday, saying the company could offer shelter for investors as the chances increase that the economy could begin to shrink.
“Recession is an obvious risk and probably a reason the stock sold off last week,” Seifman wrote in a research report. “Nevertheless, aerospace exposure should provide ballast for Howmet (70% of sales) while auto aluminization and shortages resulting from common alloy tariffs should limit downside at Arconic.”
Howmet is a business producing high-performance metal alloys for aerospace, as well as other end markets. The Arconic operation rolls aluminum for cans, construction and cars.
He sees less potential downside from a slowing economy than for other cyclical stocks for the company (ticker: ARNC) because the aerospace business is strong and cars are swapping out steel for aluminum—a trend that has been going on for decades.
In addition, the analyst says, the company has some “self-help” characteristics—factors that will boost shares regardless of what goes on in the economy. Earlier this year, Arconic rejected a go-private offer from Apollo Global Management (APO), instead announcing plans to break into pieces, separating the aerospace business from the rest of the company. The split is on track to be completed during the second quarter of 2020. The name of the new entity will be Howmet Aerospace.
Seifman covers aerospace and defense stocks, so he could be too focused on Arconic’s best end market, rather than on fundamentals for its business processing metals. Barclays aerospace and defense analyst David Strauss also upgraded Arconic shares to Buy in August.
Yet the company also has supporters among people who focus on the metals markets. Goldman Sachs metals and mining analyst Matthew Korn, for instance, also likes Arconic shares. He rates the stock at Buy with a $28 target price, while the shares were trading for a bit less than $25 on Monday afternoon. Siefman’s target is $30 a share, while. Strauss’s is $31.
Investors (and Wall Street analysts) love aerospace these days. It’s one of the best-performing industrial end markets. The aerospace suppliers Barron’s tracks are up about 30% year to date, better than the other industrial companies in the S&P 500 .
It wasn’t so long ago, however, that commercial aerospace giant Boeing (BA) was viewed by investors as a heavy-equipment producer, “cheap at 20 times earnings and expensive at 10 times earnings.” The expression illustrates how earnings fluctuate with the business cycle.
Earnings at heavy-equipment companies often plunge when the economy weakens, reducing profits relative to their stock prices and making them appear to trade at high multiples of earnings. Earnings explode when the business cycle improves.
Boeing, in the 1990s, traded for less than 10 times earnings when stocks overall were trading for 14 times. Boeing trades for almost 17 times estimated 2020 earnings today, a premium to the S&P 500 despite well known woes with its new single-aisle 737 MAX jet.
Caterpillar (CAT) is a great example of the cyclical dynamic . It trades for 10 times estimated 2020 earnings of $12.14 a share, a discount to other stocks in the S&P. Yet investors fear Caterpillar is “expensive
at 10 times earnings.” Cat stock traded for almost 30 times estimated earnings around the end of 2016. Over the next three years, from late 2016 to 2019, the stock went from about $80 to more than $120 as earnings expanded from about $3 a share to $12.
Investors are thinking about where to put money as the economy slows. J.P. Morgan likes Arconic, but other industrial companies such as United Technologies (UTX), Honeywell (HON) and even the controversial industrial stock General Electric (GE) are some other options for those wanting more aerospace exposure. All three conglomerates generate a significant portion of sales from that market.
Buy a Cyclical Metals Stock for Recession Protection? The World Is Upside Down.
Arconic is a metals producer—the kind of stock investors often shun as fear of recession mounts in the late stages of a business cycle.
