NOT FOR DISSEMINATION IN THE UNITED STATES OR FOR DISTRIBUTION TO U.S. NEWSWIRE SERVICES.
TORONTO, May  15, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Century Metals Inc. (“Century Metals” or the “Company”) (TSXV: CMET) announces that following a review by the Company’s auditors, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (“PwC”), the Company has filed amended and restated interim financial statements and management discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) for the three and nine months ended December 31, 2019.  The review by PwC was undertaken in conjunction with the proposed reverse take-over involving Reyna Silver Corp., initially announced on September 24, 2019.  The significant changes made related to an additional $47,345 of share-based compensation expense, and updated subsequent event notes as well as an corrected presentation within the statement of cash flows regarding cash flow transactions with related parties
The amended and restated Interim Financial Statements and MD&A for the indicated period are available under the Company's profile on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.
On Behalf of the Board of Directors of Century Metals Inc.
For further information please contact:
Completion of the RTO is subject to a number of conditions, including but not limited to, TSXV acceptance and, if applicable, disinterested shareholder approval. Where applicable, the transaction cannot close until the required shareholder approval is obtained. There can be no assurance that the transaction will be completed as proposed or at all.
Investors are cautioned that, except as disclosed in the filing statement to be prepared in connection with the transaction, any information released or received with respect to the transaction may not be accurate or complete and should not be relied upon. Trading in the securities of Century Metals should be considered highly speculative.
The TSX Venture Exchange Inc. has in no way passed upon the merits of the proposed transaction and has neither approved nor disapproved the contents of this news release.
Neither the TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in policies of the TSX Venture Exchange) accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release.
More articles issued by Century Metals Inc.
