The problem with Tianqi’s rapid growth was that it was funded with an estimated $3.5 billion in loans from China’s state-owned CITIC Bank and the price of lithium, when traded as lithium carbonate, collapsed by 60% from $25,000 a ton in 2016 to less than $10,000/t today.
The immediate outlook is no brighter with a surplus of battery materials bearing down on prices as the COVID-19 pandemic crushes demand for most discretionary products, including electric vehicles.
Much of the world's lithium ends up in the batteries of electric cars. Photo: Julian ... [+] Stratenschulte/dpa (Photo by Julian Stratenschulte/picture alliance via Getty Images)
Buyers for all, or part, of Tianqi’s Australian assets have started circling in the belief that there’s a bargain on offer given the bank pressure on the Chinese company and confidence that the current downturn will pass and electric vehicles will eventually win the race against gasoline power.
One of the potential buyers of the 51% stake in the Greenbushes mine is Albemarle Corporation, a U.S. company which owns the minority 49% stake and could be well placed to take full control.
Other potential buyers include a company called Mineral Resources, Albemarle’s Australian partner in a lithium processing plant located close to the mine, and a second lithium mine in Australia’s north-west.
There will also be interest in Tianqi’s 100% owned lithium processing plant which started producing battery-grade material late last year.
Potential buyers of the processing plant include the Australian industrial conglomerate, Wesfarmers, which is looking for a way into the battery-metals business having already spent $500 million buying a half share in an undeveloped lithium deposit with SQM holding the other half.
The Wesfarmers/SQM joint venture has been planning to build a lithium processing plant on a site close to the new Tianqi facility. If Tianqi is a seller of its plant Wesfarmers/SQM is an obvious buyer.
Lithium batteries being packed in China. WAN SC / Barcroft Media via Getty Images)
Other moves could follow Tianqi’s planned sell-down of its lithium assets as high-priced, boom-time deals, are unwound under bank pressure.
J.P. Morgan, an investment bank, sees Tianqi’s problems as an opportunity for Mineral Resources to re-arrange its lithium assets which are poorly located with the mine it owns with Albemarle close to 1000 miles north of the co-owned processing plant which handles material from Greenbushes.
If Mineral Resources moves on Tianqi’s Greenbushes stake it would cement its relationship with Albemarle.
Whether Wesfarmers would stand back and allow plum assets to change hands in a business that it has earmarked for future growth is a question that will only be answered when the bidding starts.
But a second question is whether lithium buyers will overpay a second time around for battery-metal assets in the belief that the electric-car revolution has not been postponed, just delayed.
I studied geology in the 1960s and worked for a small mining company before getting a start in journalism during the 1969 nickel boom. Since then I've covered repeated
I studied geology in the 1960s and worked for a small mining company before getting a start in journalism during the 1969 nickel boom. Since then I've covered repeated booms and busts in the commodities sector for a passing parade of newspapers, magazines and website. I am also a regular contributor to radio and television news services in Australia.
