In February, a group of citizens formed an alliance following the Northern Metals recycling plant fire in Becker. The group is raising concerns about safety and questioning city leaders.
“Immediately when I just stepped into my garage, which is attached to my home, you could smell it, you could smell it and it was awful, it caught in the back of your throat," said Abby Malzahn.
Malzahn stated she does not want to relive the fire at Northern Metal Recycling again, but she does have questions on what's happening now.
“We had a lot of concerns about the air quality, obviously, but our biggest concern was the duration of the fire," she said.
Since the fire, a group formed comprised of citizens from Becker, Big Lake and Monticello. They call themselves The Great River Area Impact Alliance.
GRAI Alliance member, Elizabeth Lee, told the Becker City Council the group wanted better oversight of Northern Metals' operations and a town hall meeting to address the public's concerns about environmental issues and fire fighting preparedness.
"We need to know that we are going to be safe and what the possible health effects could be," said Lee. "And, our volunteer firefighters must have adequate equipment and training to fight fires like the one that just happened."
“What we found in the last 12 months alone is there were 50 scrap metal yard fires just reported in the news and that frequency is really scary to us and we want to know did the city ever analyze or calculate that risk prior to bringing northern metals to town," Malzahn said.
The group also has concerns for their local volunteer fire department who have to battle the fire.
“Did they have the proper training, did they have the right equipment to handle this, after the fire did they have an extractor to clean their equipment, I am hearing that some of these firefighters were on scene for 17 hours,” Malzahn said.
"Our volunteer firefighters did not even know, exactly, what they were getting into when they had to fight that fire," said Lee.  "Gardeners and farmers still do not know what the polluted ash means for the food they're growing, too."
