ConocoPhillips said Tuesday it expects to restore curtailed production in Alaska sometime in July. The energy giant said it “will continue to make economically driven production decisions at the asset level in the months ahead.” The company said curtailments in the second quarter mostly related to oil production, averaging 225 thousand barrels of oil equivalent per day (MBOED) on a net basis. About 65% of curtailments were in the Lower 48, 15% in Alaska and 15% in the Surmont operation in Canada. The company is expecting second-quarter production volumes of 960 to 980 MBOED. “Excluding Libya, and adjusting for closed dispositions and curtailments, production in the second quarter of 2020 is expected to be in line with the same period a year ago and approximately 5 percent below the first quarter of 2020,” the company said in a statement. Shares were not active premarket, but have fallen 36% in the year to date, while the S&p 500 has fallen 6%.
Market Pulse Stories are Rapid-fire, short news bursts on stocks and markets as they move. Visit MarketWatch.com for more information on this news.
Next: Acuity Brands reports profit and sales that fell, but were well above expectations
Risk Disclaimer - By using this web site you agree to its terms and conditions.
All materials, including but not limited to articles, directories, photos, lists, etc., on this website are the sole property of ForexTV or the respective copyright holders and are intended for informational/educational purposes using hypothetical and sometimes anecdotal illustrations. The unauthorized use of any and all materials is prohibited and restricted by copyright law. Any use of materials on this site must be approved in advance by ForexTV.
Before deciding to invest in foreign exchange you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. The possibility exists that you could sustain a loss of some or all of your initial investment and therefore you should not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. You should be aware of all the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial advisor if you have any doubts. Forex (or FX or off-exchange foreign currency futures and options) trading involves substantial risk of loss and is not suitable for every investor. The value of currencies may fluctuate and investors may lose all or more than their original investments. Risks also include, but are not limited to, the potential for changing political and/or economic conditions that may substantially affect the price and/or liquidity of a currency. The impact of seasonal and geopolitical events is already factored into market prices. The leveraged nature of FX trading means that any market movement will have an equally proportional effect on your deposited funds and such may work against you as well as for you. Past results are no indication of future performance. Information contained this web site is intended for informational purposes only and was obtained from sources believed to be reliable. Information is in no way guaranteed. No guarantee of any kind is implied or possible where projections of future conditions are attempted.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Accept Cookie Policy
