Banks and financials were also worst hit with 28-42% decline in earnings estimates.
Grasim, UltraTech Cement, Shree Cement and JSW Steel also showed a 25-30 per cent cut in FY22 PAT estimates, said CLSA.
Mumbai: Consensus earnings per share estimates for the Nifty have seen record cuts following the March quarter results, said CLSA . January-March was the 22nd consecutive quarter of earnings cuts due to Covid-19 disruptions. Even after the big cuts, consensus points to Nifty earnings per share ( EPS ) rising by 16 per cent in FY21 and 37 per cent in FY22, with top three names contributing to majority of this growth , the brokerage said. More downgrades are likely going ahead, said CLSA.
Corporates have been hit by the Covid-19 pandemic and several weeks of lockdown in India and other countries. India announced lockdown starting March 25 and has started the phase of ‘unlocking’ the economy from June.
“Autos, banks, metals, midcaps and state-owned oil names were worst hit and only six defensive names received small upgrades,” the foreign brokerage said.
Among these sectors, auto companies were the worst hit with 32-68 per cent cut in earnings estimates for the ongoing and next financial year. Tata Motors, Maruti Suzuki India and Eicher showed the biggest cut in FY22 profit estimates among Nifty companies, said CLSA.
Banks and financials were also worst hit with 28-42 per cent decline in earnings estimates. Grasim, UltraTech Cement, Shree Cement and JSW Steel also showed a 25-30 per cent cut in FY22 PAT estimates, said CLSA.
Defensive stocks in Nifty which saw consensus estimates being upgraded include Dr Reddy’s Laboratories, NTPC, Bharti Airtel, Cipla, Power Grid and Britannia. Their earnings estimates were upgraded by 1-4 per cent. With more earnings cuts coming through, the index ended the financial year 2019-20 with an 8 per cent decline in EPS compared with the previous financial year. “CLSA’s Nifty EPS estimate is 16/14 per cent below FY21/22 consensus. Our estimates predict the most notable consensus downgrades in ONGC, Maruti and some key banking names,” said CLSA.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
