A growing number of research groups are working with liquid metals, hoping to exploit their potential to create new materials, new catalysts, and possibly new ways to trap carbon dioxide. Republished with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, from ref. 14 ; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
That unfamiliarity is changing. Over the last few years, he says, liquid metals have undergone a renaissance among researchers—thanks, in part, to growing interest in wearable devices and soft robotics. These technologies demand new kinds of electronics that bend and stretch.
Liquid metals also hold enormous potential as routes to new materials and catalysts, which can kick-start useful chemical reactions for many industries and applications. The metals could even help trap and convert carbon dioxide, offering another technology to combat climate change. Less than a decade ago, only a handful of groups around the world were working with liquid metals, notes Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh, a chemical engineer at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia. “Now it’s exploding.”
Mechanical engineer Carmel Majidi, at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, PA, says development of technology based on liquid metals has been held back by concerns about leaks and unreliability. But a push toward safer robots without heavy metal parts, and toward devices worn on clothing, skin, or even inside the body, make the flowing properties of a liquid a big asset.
Although mercury has been used for millennia in medicine, pigments, and, of course, thermometers, most research on liquid metals now focuses on gallium, which, unlike mercury, is nontoxic. Gallium also melts at just 30 °C; mixing in other elements such as tin or indium makes useful gallium alloys with even lower melting temperatures.
Liquid metals are also highly reactive, making them especially useful for chemical engineers. Gallium alloys have negligible vapor pressure, so they don’t evaporate and can’t be inhaled. And they have among the largest surface tensions of any liquid at room temperature, making them bead up into spheres.
To use liquid metal for soft and flexible electronics, researchers must control the fluid’s shape and motion. Earlier this year, for example, a team from China demonstrated that magnetic fields could control a liquid-metal blob of gallium-indium-tin alloy—a phenomenon with an eerie resemblance to the T-1000 in Terminator 2 ( 1 ).
And Dickey, who works at North Carolina State University in Raleigh, is exploiting one particular property to control these materials: a liquid metal’s oxide skin. Like all metals, liquid metals oxidize when exposed to oxygen; this creates a nanometer-thick oxide skin around a fluid interior. “It allows you to manipulate the liquid in ways that are normally not possible with a conventional liquid like water,” he says. Because the liquid is encased in this flexible skin, it doesn’t spill or smear as an amorphous puddle. Instead, it holds its shape even while being stretched, bent, spread around like paint, injected through microfluidic channels ( 2 ), or printed with a three-dimensional printer ( 3 ).
That skin can lead to some curious behaviors. His lab has found that when a drop of gallium-indium alloy sits in a strong alkali solution, applying voltage causes the skin to form around the drop. The skin acts as one of the world’s most effective surfactants—chemicals that alter the drop’s surface tension—by turning the drop’s spherical shape into a snowflake-like fractal pattern ( 4 ).
The researchers still aren’t exactly sure what causes this dramatic transformation. “I don’t know if that work is as practical as others, but just in terms of the cool factor, I think it’s pretty remarkable,” Dickey says. “It’s the kind of thing I show to people and their jaws hit the floor.”
But he and his colleagues have demonstrated more practical applications as well. By encasing gallium alloys in flexible plastic, they’ve created a deformable and tunable antenna ( 5 ). And by forming thin tubes of liquid metal surrounded by the oxide skin, they have created wires that can stretch up to 10 times their original length ( 6 ). The wires are self-healing: When severed, they simply fuse back together.
By sandwiching gallium-indium nanoparticles—liquid encased in their oxide shells—between rubber sheets, Dickey’s team has made a bendable circuit board ( 7 ). Pressing on the board pops the oxide shell around the nanoparticles, spilling out liquid metal that merges to form conductive wire. Using a pen to break the nanoparticles, researchers can then draw out a functioning circuit by hand.
The same principle can be used to draw or print on all kinds of surfaces. Similar to screen printing a T-shirt, Martin Thuo, a materials chemist at Iowa State University in Ames, has used nanoparticles of a bismuth, indium, and tin alloy, called Field’s metal, to print circuits on rose petals and gelatin, a proxy for human tissue ( 8 ).
He’s now trying to print circuits on neurons—a step toward better electrodes implanted in the brain to treat disorders including Parkinson’s disease and obsessive–compulsive disorder. Liquid metal electrodes could better conform to the shape of the brain, creating a more reliable contact. They would also be easier and safer to implant, Thuo says. With a minimally invasive procedure, the liquid metal could be delivered and removed through a small incision.
