Coronavirus scare has some positives for Tata Steel, JSW Steel
Shares of Tata Steel dropped 6.4%, while JSW Steel slumped 8.1% on Monday.
The brokerage said there could be demand destruction in the near-term on account of Coronavirus but it expects a ‘supportive environment’ for metals from the second- half of 2021.
Ambit Capital has initiated coverage on Tata Steel NSE -1.49 % and JSW Steel NSE -1.80 % with ‘buy’ ratings citing expected stimulus by China, credit impulse and continued global liquidity. The brokerage said there could be demand destruction in the near-term on account of Coronavirus but it expects a ‘supportive environment’ for metals from the second- half of 2021. Shares of Tata Steel dropped 6.4%, while JSW Steel slumped 8.1% on Monday as worries about Coronavirus spreading weighed on sentiment. “As an early cycle metal, steel stands to benefit the most from Chinese infrastructure spend. Global cyclical recovery and restocking should provide added support,” said Ambit.
“Tata Steel, with significant operating and financial leverage, could significantly improve RoE (return on equity) on cyclical recovery in global pricing and improved Indian supply/demand,” Ambit said. The brokerage said steel maker’s net debt will remain high and Europe will remain fragile but its Indian operations would make up for these vulnerabilities. The stock is trading at 0.6 times FY20 price to book – the lower-end of its 10-year range.
The brokerage said despite higher iron ore costs post Odisha auctions, the company’s consolidated operating profit would grow from Rs 130bn in FY20E to Rs 215bn by FY22E (29% CAGR) led by volume growth and margin expansion. “Commissioning of 5MT Dolvi expansion in 1HFY21E should again coincide with cyclical recovery by mid-FY21,” the brokerage said. “Higher volumes, better mix should drive earnings growth through the cycle.”
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
