There are several theories for how seabed nodules form. They are not geological in origin, unlike the formation such metals on land.
First, a biological process (such as the remnant of a shark tooth ) falls to the ocean floor. This forms the basis around which microorganisms gather.
These microorganisms have developed processes over millions of years to extract trace metals from the seawater. These biological processes catalyze the chemistry needed to form and grow seabed nodules.
Seabed Nodules grow at an incredibly slow rate of 10 millimeters every million years . Once these nodules are removed, they will never reoccur within human timescales.
It has also been shown recently that these nodules are home to unique metal-metabolizing microorganisms that have not just been found on the surface of nodules, but within them too .
These microbes may play a role in the nodule’s formation and degradation, and can be very valuable for cleaning up polluted areas ( bioremediation ).
In other seabed locations that are being considered for mining, such as manganese seabed crusts, diverse microbial communities have been discovered that are not found anywhere else .
Since less than 0.05% of the deep seabed has been visited, imaged or sampled, numerous unknown organisms, including ones that can only live on or within metallic nodules and crusts, are at risk of extinction as a consequence of the proposed mining.
Biomanufacturing processes that harness the power of deep ocean enzymes could be a more sustainable ... [+] method of extracting metals in the future, than traditional mining techniques.
Several major chemical and pharmaceutical companies already see the value of marine genetic resources.
There are 13,000 patents created around marine genetic resources, almost half of which are owned by German chemicals giant, BASF.
Several countries have been calling for a new UN Treaty called the Treaty on Biodiversity Beyond National Jurisdiction to ensure such microbial biodiversity is recognized and protected in the high seas.
In the future, could we be more effectively harnessing rather than destroying the power of nature?
There have been many significant advances in synthetic biology in recent years. eDNA has allowed scientists to learn more about species who inhabit the deep ocean, without even needing to see these species.
Other discoveries in synthetic biology, such as CRISPR Cas-9 , can help read, edit, write and print genomes, perhaps catalyzing a new marine bioengineering industry.
Already, several large companies have developed that use biology from land for use as novel clothing with steel-like strength , mushroom-grown handbags , or wood made without trees that can be used for musical instruments.
As the world is on the cusp of a new biological revolution, it is important to understand the importance of life across all areas of the planet.
These advances could mean that one day, it may be more valuable to be farming metals from giant oceanic biorefineries using microorganisms from the deep ocean, rather than extracting the metal byproduct using strip mining techniques and placing these valuable microorganisms in danger .
Such a future is only possible if we first understand the nature of the deep ocean living environment and not rush toward mining such resources.
Louis Metzer, PhD, contributed to this article, particularly his knowledge of the role of deep ocean microorganisms in the formation of deep ocean polymetalic nodules.
I am a Development Economist focused on Innovation, Sustainability, and Ethical Economic Growth. I currently work with leading Silicon Valley technology companies on
I am a Development Economist focused on Innovation, Sustainability, and Ethical Economic Growth. I currently work with leading Silicon Valley technology companies on sustainable growth opportunities, particularly targeted at lower income nations.  I Chair LSE’s Ocean Finance Initiative, am a member of WEF’s Global Expert Network, and a member of CCICED’s China Council. My book on Sustainability in the Fourth Industrial Revolution, called ‘Soul of the Sea in the Age of the Algorithm,’ focuses on an Ocean and Climate Renaissance and builds on my experience as an Economic and Innovation adviser to Fortune 500 CEOs and Governments around the world.  I hold degrees in Development Economics from Harvard University’s Kennedy School of Government and University of Cambridge.
