Cut four 0.5 by 9-inch strips of printer paper.
Glue two of the aluminum strips together, so there are two layers of aluminum on top of each other.
Glue two of the paper strips together, so there are two layers of paper on top of each other.
Glue one strip of paper on top of one strip of aluminum.
Repeat the previous step with the remaining aluminum and paper strip.
Ensure the glue is set before beginning the activity.
With the help of an adult, light the candle. Ensure that you have a large pitcher of water or fire extinguisher nearby—just in case.
Take the strip that is made up of two layers of aluminum. With the help of an adult carefully hold one end of the strip about 1.5 to 2 inches above the candle flame. Keep it there for about three seconds. What happens to the aluminum strip?
Remove the aluminum strip from above the candle. Carefully touch the part of the strip that was above the flame. How does it feel compared to the rest of the strip?
Take the strip that is made up of two layers of paper. Hold one end of the strip about 1.5 to 2 inches above the candle flame. Keep it there for three seconds, being careful to not accidentally burn the paper strip. What do you notice this time?
Remove the paper strip from above the candle, and gently touch the part of the strip that was above the flame. How does it feel?
Next take a strip that is made up of aluminum and paper. Hold one end of the strip above the candle flame as you did with the others. Have the aluminum layer face toward the candle and the paper layer toward the ceiling. Keep the strip 1.5 to 2 inches above the candle for three seconds. What do you observe? Are your results different than before?
After removing the strip from above the candle carefully touch the strip on both sides where it was above the flame. Do both sides feel the same?
Take the last strip made up of aluminum and paper. This time hold the strip above the flame with the paper layer facing the candle flame and the aluminum layer facing up. What happens this time? Can you explain your results?
Remove the strip from above the candle and carefully touch it on both sides where it was above the flame. What do you notice?
Extra: What happens when you glue the aluminum strip to other materials such as a plastic sheet or copper sheet? Do your results change?
Did you see one of your strips curl above the candle flame? You should have! The all-aluminum strip and the all-paper strip should have not changed when you held them above the flame. This is because the two layers of the strip are made of the same material. If the strip gets hot, which you should have noticed when touching it, both layers expand the same amount. If the strip consists of two different materials, however, such as the one you made from paper and aluminum, something different will happen.
When holding the paper/aluminum strip above the flame you probably observed that it immediately started to bend or curl in one direction. It curls upward when the aluminum layer faces the candle and downwards when the aluminum layer faces the ceiling. This is because the aluminum and the paper layer heat up when above the flame. The aluminum expands more than the paper because of its higher thermal expansion coefficient. Because the paper and aluminum are glued together, the aluminum curls away from the paper strip to make up for the different lengths of each of its layers—like the curling gift wrap ribbon! You will see similar results with other strips that consist of two different materials that have different thermal expansion coefficients.
Make sure to blow out the candle. You can recycle any unused paper or aluminum.
Sign up for Scientific American’s free newsletters.
