Daniel O’Flaherty Is The CEO & Director of Maverix Metals Inc. (TSE:MMX) And They Just Spent CA$189k On Shares
Simply Wall St March 17, 2020
Potential Maverix Metals Inc. ( TSE:MMX ) shareholders may wish to note that the CEO & Director, Daniel O’Flaherty, recently bought CA$189k worth of stock, paying CA$4.01 for each share. While that’s a very decent purchase to our minds, it was proportionally a bit modest, boosting their holding by just 1.5%.
In the last twelve months, the biggest single sale by an insider was when the Independent Director, Christopher Barnes, sold CA$194k worth of shares at a price of CA$5.56 per share. While insider selling is a negative, to us, it is more negative if the shares are sold at a lower price. It’s of some comfort that this sale was conducted at a price well above the current share price, which is CA$4.00. So it is hard to draw any strong conclusion from it.
In the last twelve months insiders purchased 82.90k shares for CA$374k. But insiders sold 52500 shares worth CA$297k. In the last twelve months there was more buying than selling by Maverix Metals insiders. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
There are always plenty of stocks that insiders are buying. So if that suits your style you could check each stock one by one or you could take a look at this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
Many investors like to check how much of a company is owned by insiders. We usually like to see fairly high levels of insider ownership. Insiders own 12% of Maverix Metals shares, worth about CA$56m. While this is a strong but not outstanding level of insider ownership, it’s enough to indicate some alignment between management and smaller shareholders.
What Might The Insider Transactions At Maverix Metals Tell Us?
It’s certainly positive to see the recent insider purchases. And an analysis of the transactions over the last year also gives us confidence. But on the other hand, the company made a loss last year, which makes us a little cautious. When combined with notable insider ownership, these factors suggest Maverix Metals insiders are well aligned, and that they may think the share price is too low. While we like knowing what’s going on with the insider’s ownership and transactions, we make sure to also consider what risks are facing a stock before making any investment decision. Every company has risks, and we’ve spotted 3 warning signs for Maverix Metals you should know about.
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
