The platform includes more than 900 proprietary price indexes for 80 countries, as well as metals futures prices and other reference data.
Waste360 Staff | Feb 27, 2020
Davis Index, a global commodity price reporting agency, has launched what it claims is the world's only market intelligence publication built solely for the metals recycling industry . The service includes more than 900 proprietary price indexes for 80 countries, as well as metals futures prices and other reference data. According to Davis Index, it's the only platform to cover so many countries along with hyper-local coverage of markets in the U.S., United Kingdom, Germany, Spain, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Japan, South Korea and Vietnam.
"In terms of depth and breadth of coverage, accuracy, cost and functionality, Davis Index is in every sense a disruptor," said Sean Davidson, Davis Index founder and CEO, in a statement. "Existing services are frequently inaccurate and consistently overpriced. The recycling industry needed a tool that represents the materials they actually trade—a tool that it can access and use in its efforts to preserve and improve margin. Davis Index is that asset. This is the price information service that the industry has waited 30 years for."
Davis Index’s main focus is to provide accurate price indexes for free market scrap metal and secondary alloys that are not listed on exchanges but drive global trade. The service includes indexes for ferrous and nonferrous scrap, bulk and container freight, secondary alloys and, for some specific countries, finished and semi-finished steels. Each price index follows International Organization of Securities Commissions compliance guidelines.
Davis Index’s proprietary indexes are built for a variety of users, including:
Mills and smelters: for use to enter supply contracts with their end consumers, such as die-casters and auto original equipment manufacturers
Davis Index publishes nearly 800 metals price indexes on a weekly basis, 90 daily indexes and more than 100 monthly indexes. Data is available through www.DavisIndex.com and twice-daily reports: Davis Index Recycling Asia and Davis Index Recycling Global. Both reports and access to the web platform are currently offered at $799 per year, per user. The fee also includes functional licenses to use the data in contracts.
While the complete Davis Index platform recently opened for public access, it was first announced at select recycling industry events earlier this month. The Davis Index Recycling Asia service was debuted during the Material Recycling Association of India’s annual convention in New Delhi on February 9, and the Davis Index Recycling Global service debuted during the Washington, D.C.-based Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries’ Consumers’ Night in St. Louis on February 14.
Davis Index is headquartered in Singapore, with offices in Canada, India, Mexico, Singapore, Ukraine and the U.S.
