Understanding how deep-ocean metals remain uncovered on the open sea floor could help geoscientists provide advice to the mining industry.
A large manganese nodule dredged from the South Pacific Ocean surrounded by smaller nodules from the eastern Coral Sea. Photo: Dietmar Müller. Top photo: Shutterstock
Lumps of rare metallic elements on the deep-ocean floor strangely remain uncovered despite the shifting sands and sediment many leagues under the sea. Scientists now think they know why – and it could have important implications for mining these metals while preserving the strange fauna at the bottom of the ocean.
The growth of these deep-sea nodules – metallic lumps of manganese, iron and other metals found in all the major ocean basins – is one of the slowest known geological processes. These ringed concretions, which are potential sources of rare earth and other critical elements, grow on average just 10 to 20 millimetres every million years.
Yet in one of Earth science’s most enduring mysteries, they somehow manage to avoid being buried by sediment despite their locations in areas where clay accumulates at least 100 times faster than the nodules grow.
Understanding how these agglomerations of metals remain on the open sea floor could help geoscientists provide advice on accessing them for industrial use. A new study published this week in Geology will help scientists better understand this process.
“It is important that any mining of these resources is done in a way that preserves the fragile deep-sea environments in which they are found,” said lead author Dr Adriana Dutkiewicz , an ARC Future Fellow in the School of Geosciences at the University of Sydney.
Rare earth and other critical elements are essential for the development of technologies needed for low-carbon economies. They will play an increasingly important role for next-generation solar cells, efficient wind turbines and rechargeable batteries that will power the renewables revolution.
Rotating virtual globe showing predicted probability of nodule occurrence with warm colours indicating high, and cold colours low probability, based on an interactive globe constructed by Xiaodong Qin at the School of Geoscience, University of Sydney
“The International Seabed Authority is currently preparing new environmental regulations to govern deep-sea mining,” Dr Dutkiewicz said. “Our analysis represents a global, data-driven synthesis to impartially inform these policies and deep-ocean environmental management.”
Dr Dutkiewicz and co-authors Dr Alexander Judge and Professor Dietmar Müller combined open-access data for thousands of polymetallic nodules with global datasets of key environmental parameters to create a machine-learning model that ranks the factors controlling nodule location. The resulting map predicts where polymetallic nodules are most likely to occur.
The authors were surprised to find that globally the nodules occur in regions where the bottom current speeds are far too slow to remove sediment. Instead, the nodules are associated with seafloor fauna.
“Organisms such as starfish, octopuses and molluscs seem to keep the nodules at the seafloor surface by foraging, burrowing and ingesting sediment on and around them,” Dr Dutkiewicz said.
“Although these organisms occur in relatively low concentrations on the abyssal seafloor, they are still abundant enough to locally affect sediment accumulation.”
This insight is supported by direct seafloor observations of nodule fields by independent studies. “Our conclusion is that deep-sea ecosystems and nodules are inextricably connected,” Dr Dutkiewicz said.
