The band’s “Virtual World Tour” is set to start July 2nd and run all the way to July 30th, and some dates have the band tackling up to three sets in one day. Outside of press releases and statements from the band, little is known of what the “Virtual World Tour” will actually look like, and the overall effect of the tour won’t be seen for some time. However, until then Suicide Silence guitarist, Chris Garza, has shared some exclusive details with Forbes regarding the setup of their “Virtual World Tour,” the band’s plan for future virtual tours, and why virtual touring is actually more expensive for the band than their typical road tour.
How’d the band decide on the cities and locations to perform to for this virtual tour?
As far as places that we decided we wanted to attack first, it was a combination of countries and cities that were postponed, and then it was places that we were trying to go to after those [postponed] tours, so we kind of combined all of these territories and put them in one 30-day span.
How are you guys planning for obstacles on this virtual tour compared to obstacles you might plan for on a typical road tour? For example, maintaining a steady internet connection must be a necessity.
Obviously one of the main concerns was we need a stable internet connection wherever we go, so that forced us to rent out a room that’s very expensive and pretty much took away all unnecessary risks. So we got a room that has top quality internet and the room itself is high quality so those little things shouldn’t be a problem at all.
What are the band’s expectations with regards to profit margin for this virtual tour?
I’m not sure if there are any expectations but it’s more like what’s successful to us. I think successful to us is us doing it and us being able to do it again. So not having it be such a loss where no one wants to do it anymore, and it looks like that’s not going to happen thank god. We had the conversations about the money and this is extremely high risk, way harder, and way more expensive than a real tour is actually. I guess the expectation, if there is any, is I know once people see it things are going to start clicking slowly. From our early successes with the band, word of mouth just spread like wildfire and word gets around quick, so we want to make sure everyday we’re working our asses off, and we want to make sure the first show is the best it could possibly be so people can finally start talking about it and actually see it.
It’s combination of small things and big things so obviously we have the room, and I don’t want to throw a number around but let’s just say it’s not cheap, and for a band our level to purchase that alone is pretty out there, but we love what we do so we’re all in it. We have that and then we have little things like “oh s**t, where are we going to live?” So we have to rent a house for over a month so that we all have a place to stay, and then we had to get multiple cameramen because based on some of streams I’ve seen they’re pretty f***ing boring, so it kind of taught us that we need multiple cameramen to operate this and they pretty much need to be on the crew for a month straight.
Then we have people working behind the scenes like our manager, and he has people helping him market it. Everyone that’s working on this is deep rooted in the Suicide Silence circle, it’s people we’ve known for almost 20 years and who are the best at what they do. Some people are getting paid and some people are doing this for free just because we’re all family and it’s just a lot. Once you see the final number for everything you’re just like “oh my god, this is a lot of money.”
So is the plan for Suicide Silence to stick with virtual tours until actual live shows return?
That’s the goal, we were talking about expectations earlier and I mean when we pull this off the goal is to do it again so we don’t come out in a hole, but rather see that this is catching on so we can do another leg. And what’s cool about this idea is that there’s no band or artist on the planet that’s doing anything like this, or even close to the caliber that we’re doing it. And let’s say touring does pick up, we could still do this because it’s still its own thing. I think once it evolves and people see what’s actually going on, I think the word of mouth is truly going to start spreading around to where even when touring starts we could still be doing this.
I’m doing my best to be optimistic, but I think artists are going to be forced to think outside the box and start evolving when they realize how far away a show in person is going to be. This is going to transcend us, and hip hop artists and pop artists going to start looking at what a death metal band is doing. We’re kind of the only one’s paving this way, this is not a livestream which is why we coined “Virtual World Tour.” So we’re talking about a way to make things fresh and worth peoples while to actually sit down and watch this.
I’m a freelance music journalist, sound designer, and rock guitarist based in Washington D.C. I graduated from Berklee College of Music in 2019 where I cut my teeth
I’m a freelance music journalist, sound designer, and rock guitarist based in Washington D.C. I graduated from Berklee College of Music in 2019 where I cut my teeth performing in New England’s DIY punk scene, and also got my start as a music journalist writing for The Berklee Groove. As a guitarist I’m a member of the alt-punk band, Heavy Sleeper, but I also operate as a session and touring rock-metal guitarist. This goes hand and hand with my music journalism work, as I cover all things related to rock and metal be it news, interviews, and album reviews.
