Did You Miss Spectrum Metals’s (ASX:SPX) Magnificent 1550% Share Price Gain?
Simply Wall St November 6, 2019
While Spectrum Metals Limited ( ASX:SPX ) shareholders are probably generally happy, the stock hasn’t had particularly good run recently, with the share price falling 19% in the last quarter. But that doesn’t change the fact that the returns over the last three years have been spectacular. The longer term view reveals that the share price is up 1550% in that period. So you might argue that the recent reduction in the share price is unremarkable in light of the longer term performance. The only way to form a view of whether the current price is justified is to consider the merits of the business itself.
Anyone who held for that rewarding ride would probably be keen to talk about it.
Spectrum Metals hasn’t yet reported any revenue, so it’s as much a business idea as an actual business. So it seems shareholders are too busy dreaming about the progress to come than dwelling on the current (lack of) revenue. It seems likely some shareholders believe that Spectrum Metals will find or develop a valuable new mine before too long.
As a general rule, if a company doesn’t have much revenue, and it loses money, then it is a high risk investment. You should be aware that there is always a chance that this sort of company will need to issue more shares to raise money to continue pursuing its business plan. While some such companies do very well over the long term, others become hyped up by promoters before eventually falling back down to earth, and going bankrupt (or being recapitalized). Of course, if you time it right, high risk investments like this can really pay off, as Spectrum Metals investors might know.
Spectrum Metals had cash in excess of all liabilities of AU$3.7m when it last reported (June 2019). While that’s nothing to panic about, there is some possibility the company will raise more capital, especially if profits are not imminent. With the share price up 20% per year, over 3 years , the market is seems hopeful about the potential, despite the cash burn. You can click on the image below to see (in greater detail) how Spectrum Metals’s cash levels have changed over time. You can see in the image below, how Spectrum Metals’s cash levels have changed over time .
It can be extremely risky to invest in a company that doesn’t even have revenue. There’s no way to know its value easily. One thing you can do is check if company insiders are buying shares. If they are buying a significant amount of shares, that’s certainly a good thing. Luckily we are in a position to provide you with this free chart of insider buying (and selling).
Investors should note that there’s a difference between Spectrum Metals’s total shareholder return (TSR) and its share price change, which we’ve covered above. The TSR attempts to capture the value of dividends (as if they were reinvested) as well as any spin-offs or discounted capital raisings offered to shareholders. We note that Spectrum Metals’s TSR, at 1550% is higher than its share price return of 1550%. When you consider it hasn’t been paying a dividend, this data suggests shareholders have benefitted from a spin-off, or had the opportunity to acquire attractively priced shares in a discounted capital raising.
We’re pleased to report that Spectrum Metals shareholders have received a total shareholder return of 1000% over one year. That gain is better than the annual TSR over five years, which is 24%. Therefore it seems like sentiment around the company has been positive lately. Someone with an optimistic perspective could view the recent improvement in TSR as indicating that the business itself is getting better with time. Investors who like to make money usually check up on insider purchases, such as the price paid, and total amount bought. You can find out about the insider purchases of Spectrum Metals by clicking this link.
There are plenty of other companies that have insiders buying up shares. You probably do not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on AU exchanges.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
