Did BTU Metals Corp. (CVE:BTU) Insiders Buy Up More Shares?
Simply Wall St December 5, 2019
It is not uncommon to see companies perform well in the years after insiders buy shares. On the other hand, we’d be remiss not to mention that insider sales have been known to precede tough periods for a business. So we’ll take a look at whether insiders have been buying or selling shares in BTU Metals Corp. ( CVE:BTU ).
Most investors know that it is quite permissible for company leaders, such as directors of the board, to buy and sell stock in the company. However, such insiders must disclose their trading activities, and not trade on inside information.
Insider transactions are not the most important thing when it comes to long-term investing. But it is perfectly logical to keep tabs on what insiders are doing. For example, a Harvard University study found that ‘insider purchases earn abnormal returns of more than 6% per year.
In the last twelve months, the biggest single purchase by an insider was when insider Ryan Kalt bought CA$159k worth of shares at a price of CA$0.13 per share. Even though the purchase was made at a significantly lower price than the recent price (CA$0.35), we still think insider buying is a positive. While it does suggest insiders consider the stock undervalued at lower prices, this transaction doesn’t tell us much about what they think of current prices.
In the last twelve months insiders purchased 3681500 shares for CA$413k. But insiders sold 1105000 shares worth CA$112k. In the last twelve months there was more buying than selling by BTU Metals insiders. The average buy price was around CA$0.11. We don’t deny that it is nice to see insiders buying stock in the company. But we must note that the investments were made at well below today’s share price. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. By clicking on the graph below, you can see the precise details of each insider transaction!
BTU Metals is not the only stock that insiders are buying. For those who like to find winning investments this free list of growing companies with recent insider purchasing, could be just the ticket.
Have BTU Metals Insiders Traded Recently?
Over the last three months, we’ve seen a bit of insider selling at BTU Metals. Independent Director Jean-Marc Lacoste sold just CA$12k worth of shares in that time. Neither the lack of buying nor the presence of selling is heartening. But the volume sold is so low that it really doesn’t bother us.
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. A high insider ownership often makes company leadership more mindful of shareholder interests. From our data, it seems that BTU Metals insiders own 14% of the company, worth about CA$2.3m. But they may have an indirect interest through a corporate structure that we haven’t picked up on. Whilst better than nothing, we’re not overly impressed by these holdings.
So What Do The BTU Metals Insider Transactions Indicate?
While there has not been any insider buying in the last three months, there has been selling. But the sales were small, so we’re not concerned. However, our analysis of transactions over the last year is heartening. While we have no worries about the insider transactions, we’d be more comfortable if they owned more BTU Metals stock. Along with insider transactions, I recommend checking if BTU Metals is growing revenue. This free chart of historic revenue and earnings should make that easy .
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
