Do Insiders Own Lots Of Shares In Genius Metals Inc. (CSE:GENI)?
Simply Wall St June 9, 2020
A look at the shareholders of Genius Metals Inc. ( CSE:GENI ) can tell us which group is most powerful. Institutions will often hold stock in bigger companies, and we expect to see insiders owning a noticeable percentage of the smaller ones. Warren Buffett said that he likes “a business with enduring competitive advantages that is run by able and owner-oriented people.” So it’s nice to see some insider ownership, because it may suggest that management is owner-oriented.
Genius Metals is a smaller company with a market capitalization of CA$3.3m, so it may still be flying under the radar of many institutional investors. In the chart below, we can see that institutions don’t own shares in the company. We can zoom in on the different ownership groups, to learn more about Genius Metals.
What Does The Lack Of Institutional Ownership Tell Us About Genius Metals?
Small companies that are not very actively traded often lack institutional investors, but it’s less common to see large companies without them.
There are multiple explanations for why institutions don’t own a stock. The most common is that the company is too small relative to funds under management, so the institution does not bother to look closely at the company. Alternatively, there might be something about the company that has kept institutional investors away. Genius Metals might not have the sort of past performance institutions are looking for, or perhaps they simply have not studied the business closely.
Hedge funds don’t have many shares in Genius Metals. Looking at our data, we can see that the largest shareholder is the CEO Guy Goulet with 8.2% of shares outstanding. Next, we have John Booth and Hubert Vallée as the second and third largest shareholders, holding 1.3% and 1.2%, of the shares outstanding, respectively. Interestingly, Hubert Vallée is also a Member of the Board of Directors, again, indicating strong insider ownership amongst the company’s top shareholders.
Our studies suggest that the top 7 shareholders collectively control less than 50% of the company’s shares, meaning that the company’s shares are widely disseminated and there is no dominant shareholder.
Researching institutional ownership is a good way to gauge and filter a stock’s expected performance. The same can be achieved by studying analyst sentiments. As far I can tell there isn’t analyst coverage of the company, so it is probably flying under the radar.
While the precise definition of an insider can be subjective, almost everyone considers board members to be insiders. The company management answer to the board; and the latter should represent the interests of shareholders. Notably, sometimes top-level managers are on the board, themselves.
Most consider insider ownership a positive because it can indicate the board is well aligned with other shareholders. However, on some occasions too much power is concentrated within this group.
It seems insiders own a significant proportion of Genius Metals Inc.. Insiders have a CA$392k stake in this CA$3.3m business. It is great to see insiders so invested in the business. It might be worth checking if those insiders have been buying recently.
The general public — mostly retail investors — own 88% of Genius Metals. This level of ownership gives retail investors the power to sway key policy decisions such as board composition, executive compensation, and the dividend payout ratio.
If you would prefer check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, backed by strong financial data.
NB: Figures in this article are calculated using data from the last twelve months, which refer to the 12-month period ending on the last date of the month the financial statement is dated. This may not be consistent with full year annual report figures.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
