Australian exploration company, Eclipse Metals Limited ( ASX:EPM ) has announced the grant of Exploration Licence, EL27584 at the Devil’s Elbow Uranium, Gold, Palladium Project in the Northern Territory. The exploration licence was awarded by NT’s Department of Primary Industry and Resources to wholly owned subsidiary of EPM, North Minerals Pty Ltd.
Eclipse Metals has been expecting the grant ever since receiving advice of consent from Commonwealth Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt, in compliance to section 42(8) of the Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 of Northern Territory in January 2020. A bilateral agreement granting consent by traditional landowners had already been ratified by the Northern Land Council (NLC) Executive Council in late-2019.
Uranium and gold mineralisation at the project areas was discovered and initially explored by Uranerz Australia and later between 2002 and 2008, it was explored by Cameco Australia prominently to the north of Ranger Fault. The Devil's Elbow U-Au-Pd prospect, located ~285km east of Darwin, hosted within the renowned Alligator Rivers Uranium Field, is ~60km from Rio Tinto’s Ranger Uranium Mine.
The Devil’s Elbow prospects have showcased strong similarities to the Jabiluka Uranium-Gold mine, and the uranium and gold mineralisation is interpreted to be hosted in alterations of the Cahill Formation.
Eclipse Metals recognises the tenure grant as an important milestone for the Company and an enhanced value of the project area with significant historical exploration expenditure. The project is expected to evolve as the major asset generating extensive value for EPM, its shareholders and the local community.
Uranium prices have surged significantly due to supply disruptions amid the pandemic. A positive shift in the global energy market has created a renewed interest in uranium, unarguably one of the cleanest energy sources.
In the past, assaying of shallow trenched samples had delivered high-grade uranium, gold and palladium results including 3.2% U3O8, 3.7% U3O8, 4.40% U3O8 and 5.8% U3O8, with 38.1g/t Au and 28.02g/t Pd, corresponding to fractures in alterations of the Nungbalgarri Volcanics.
The Company has conducted extensive analysis of historical exploration data and utilised the assessment to identify several new electromagnetic, gravity and radiometric targets. Securing large and extensive project areas are expected to maximise the prospectivity of Devil’s Elbow Project and substantially expand the value generation potential associated with the project.
The brownfield granted tenure will be valued separately to assess substantial rise in the asset base. Further, an assessment of elaborate historical technical data along with defined walk-up drill targets will provide a concrete platform for planned exploration programs.
Further planning for on-ground exploration activities is underway and is expected to commence considering the practical situations related to current travel restrictions due to the pandemic.
A conventional helicopter supported diamond drilling program has been proposed and is anticipated to follow up on the targets identified from geological and geophysical studies. The exploration program is anticipated to target regions around the Devil’s Elbow, Terrace and Ferricrete uranium deposits with priority targets identified by historical geochemical and radiometric anomalies within EL27584.
Stock Performance - EPM settled the day’s trade at $0.009 on 4 June 2020, an increase of 12.5% against previous close. On 5 June 2020 (AEST 01:08 PM), the stock was trading flat, with a market capitalisation of $12.73 million. The last one-month and six-month return was noted at 50% and 125%, respectively.
This website is a service of Kalkine Media Pty. Ltd. A.C.N. 629 651 672. The website has been prepared for informational purposes only and is not intended to be used as a complete source of information on any particular company. The above article is sponsored but NOT a solicitation or recommendation to buy, sell or hold the stock of the company (or companies) under discussion. We are neither licensed nor qualified to provide investment advice through this platform.
All pictures are copyright to their respective owner(s).Kalkinemedia.com does not claim ownership of any of the pictures displayed on this website unless stated otherwise. Some of the images used on this website are taken from the web and are believed to be in public domain. We have used reasonable efforts to accredit the source (public domain/CC0 status) to where it was found and indicated it below the image.
There is no investor left unperturbed with the ongoing trade conflicts between US-China and the devastating bushfire in Australia.
Are you wondering if the year 2020 might not have taken the right start? Dividend stocks could be the answer to that question.
As interest rates in Australia are already at record low levels, find out which dividend stocks are viewed as the most attractive investment opportunity in the current scenario in our report.
