Shareholders voted 99.59% in favour of setting the number of directors at five, 99.52% in favour of appointing Davidson & Company LLP, Chartered Accountants as auditors, and 95.05% in favour of approving and ratifying the Company's Stock Option Plan.
Voting results for all resolutions noted above are reported in the Report on Voting Results as filed under the Company's SEDAR profile on June 30, 2020.
EMX is pleased to announce the appointments of Ms. Christina Cepeliauskas, as the Company's new Chief Administrative Officer and Mr. Doug Reed, as the Company's new Chief Financial Officer; and, both appointments effective July 1st, 2020.
Christina has been CFO of EMX for the last 12 years. During these last 12 years there have been challenges and many proud moments of success for EMX. Christina is excited to embark on a new position as Chief Administrative Officer which allows her to utilize her skills and passions to support the EMX team going forward. She is delighted that Mr. Doug Reed, who has been EMX's Controller for ten years to take on the role of CFO.
Mr. Reed brings more than 15 years of accounting experience in the mineral exploration and mining industry focusing on financial reporting, regulatory compliance, internal controls and corporate finance activities. Mr. Reed has held numerous CFO position with publicly traded and private entities. Mr. Reed has previously worked in public practice providing professional services and advice to publicly traded companies on the NYSE, TSX-V, and OTC markets on various public reporting services, such as audit requirements, qualifying transactions for reverse take-over, mergers and acquisitions, and financing transactions. Mr. Reed holds a Bachelor of Science from the University of Victoria and is a Chartered Professional Accountant, CA.
About EMX. EMX is a precious and base metals royalty company. EMX's investors are provided with discovery, development, and commodity price optionality, while limiting exposure to risks inherent to operating companies. The Company's common shares are listed on the NYSE American Exchange and the TSX Venture Exchange under the symbol EMX. Please see www.EMXroyalty.com for more information.
