ETMarkets Survey: Nifty50 won’t revisit March lows, but a deep correction likely
NEW DELHI: Analysts on Dalal Street do not have much expectations from the stocks in sectors like airlines, tourism, auto , capital goods and consumer durables because of the grim outlook for the economy, and also from IT because of rich valuations.
A dozen brokerages that took part in the ETMarkets survey mostly said they were cautious on capex-focused sectors and consumer discretionary at large.
After hitting their 52-week lows in March, equity benchmarks Sensex and Nifty cut year-to-date losses to 14-15 per cent by the end of June. But many of the sectoral indices did not see similar rebound: BSE Metal index is still down 30 per cent year to date, the BSE Capital Goods index 24 per cent, BSE Auto index 18 per cent and BSE Consumer durables index 18 per cent.
Hemang Jani of MOFSL is cautious on capital goods, metals and oil & gas sectors. He said working capital will be an issue in the case of capital goods, as companies face pressure on the operational performance due to the prevailing economic situation and competitive intensity within the sector. Order inflows are also set to fall sharply, leading to a plunge in revenue over the next two quarters.
"For metals, domestic demand is improving, but it is still down 50 per cent YoY. Exports have risen substantially, improving capacity utilisation for most primary steel producers. But higher share of exports (in sales) should still dent blended realisations and margins of producers, as exports are at a discount to domestic realisation," Jani said.
Airlines are hitting an air pocket, says Umesh Shah of Samco Securities. “There would be pressure on margins thanks to travel curbs, fare caps and increase in ATF fuel costs, while delay in delivery of new aircrafts will continue to be an overhang.
He is also bearish on media should from a short-term perspective as ad revenues might experience declines thanks to reduced corporate spending. Shares of Spicejet are down 55 per cent for this calendar and those of InterGlobe Aviation 25 per cent.
Rushmik Oza of Kotak Securities said he would stay away from consumer durables and agro-chemicals sectors due to a steep runup in valuations. He finds IT unattractive, due to subdued earnings growth and higher valuations.
Deepak Jasani of HDFC Securities also finds the IT sector avoidable. The BSE IT index is down 3 per cent for this calendar.
He says he is not so enthused by the high P/E stocks and those of commercial vehicle makers. In agro-chemicals, many stocks have seen a good runup: Dhanuka Agritech is up 73 per cent year to date, Rallis India 63 per cent, Bayer Cropscience 65 per cent Sharda Cropchem 20 per cent.
G Chokkalingam of Equinomics Research & Advisory said he would avoid airlines, cinemas, casinos and consumer durables, as these businesses would be impacted directly by the spread of coronavirus.
Cinema stocks PVR (down 47 per cent) and Inox Leisure (down 40 per cent) have taken a hard knock this year. Casino maker Delta Corp is down 56 per cent.
"Sectors like auto, real estate, cement and steel would get impacted indirectly due to significant deflationary conditions prevailing in the economy. Hence, we would avoid stocks from these sectors as well," Chokkalingam said.
