Europa Metals (EUZ) has announced it intends to  convene a virtual General Meeting (“GM”) to both apply best practices in-line with other companies on the LSE AIM market since its delisting from ASX and specifically support the Company’s cost cutting strategy to preserve cash resources through amending the pre-emption rights of shareholders, a share consolidation on a 500:1 basis and a share option plan to incentivise senior management.
Details of the GM and associated materials have been communicated to shareholders for the GM to to be held at 11.00 a.m. (UK time) on 15 July 2020 via a Virtual Meeting Facility.
Accordingly, the Directors strongly encourage all Shareholders to either lodge a directed proxy form/form of instruction or vote online prior to the Meeting or attend the Meeting virtually.
However, shareholders who can attend the virtual AGM will be able to watch, listen and submit written questions to the directors and participate in all poll votes put to the Meeting in real time.
However, we note that shareholders who intend to participate virtually must notify and register with the Company in advance of the Meeting at the contact details set out in the Notice!
Whilst there several resolutions set out for shareholder approval; they are all connected with two key objectives:
To align Europa’s corporate governance more closely with the LSE and AIM market; Since de-listing from ASX last year, the Board has deemed it appropriate for the Company to adopt best practices for companies listed on AIM. These measures will include a 500:1 share consolidation, to reduce the amount of shares in the market and reduce volatility, and disallow certain pre-emption rights by amending the Company’s Constitutional documents to limit the number of shares the Board can issue annually without convening a GM.
To support the Company’s cost cutting actions; Directors and senior management have recently taken a widely commended 20% pay cut. The Company therefore proposes to incentivise these key employees through a proposed share plan, which if approve3d, will successfully incentivises key employees whilst preserving precious cash resources.
Shareholder approval of certain special resolutions is therefore specifically sought to grant the Directors:
To grant general authority to issue Shares up to 25% of the Company's issued share capital as at the date of the Meeting for non-cash consideration purposes and, separately, to issue Shares up to a further 50% of the Company's issued share capital as at the date of the Notice of Meeting for cash consideration purposes.
To consolidate the number of Shares in issue on a 500 for 1 basis as it is well documented that companies with share prices significantly less than 1 pence per Share, negatively affects investor perception of the Company and amplifies volatility in its share price. Shareholders will have the same percentage interest in the Company following the Consolidation, but will hold fewer individual Shares, with each Share having a higher market value due to the total aggregate number of Shares in issue being less.
To approve a new share option plan and to issue Incentive Options to the Directors to reward and incentivise key personnel while further aligning the interests of management with those of Shareholders.
Shares in Europa Metals have been highly volatile over the past twelve months but are currently well above the levels seen 12 months ago of 0.010p at 0.0145p in trading today.
The information, investment views and recommendations in this article are provided for general information purposes only. Nothing in this article should be construed as a solicitation to buy or sell any financial product relating to any companies under discussion or to engage in or refrain from doing so or engaging in any other transaction. Any opinions or comments are made to the best of the knowledge and belief of the writer but no responsibility is accepted for actions based on such opinions or comments. Vox Markets may receive payment from companies mentioned for enhanced profiling or publication presence. The writer may or may not hold investments in the companies under discussion.
