Exploring Mining Podcast Episode 79: News from (NYSE: IAG) (TSXV: WGO) (TSXV: HIGH) (TSXV: BNCH)
Point Roberts, WA and Delta, BC - June 30, 2020 (Investorideas.com Newswire) Investorideas.com, a global investor news source covering mining and metals stocks releases today's edition of Exploring Mining Podcast , featuring stock news from TSX, TSXV, CSE, ASX, NASDAQ, NYSE companies plus interviews with CEO's and leading experts.
Exploring Mining Podcast Episode 79: News from (NYSE: IAG) (TSXV: WGO) (TSXV: HIGH) (TSXV: BNCH)
IAMGOLD Corporation ( NYSE:IAG ) has received approval for its application for the Cote Gold Project in Ontario, Canada. Gordon Stothart, IAMGOLD President and CEO, explained:
"The transformative impact of Cote Gold on IAMGOLD's production profile and global cost structure, in addition to its long mine life in an attractive jurisdiction, establishes clear and compelling reasons for this Project to proceed. Our current financial position supports our proposed growth plans, with over $800 million in cash on hand, access to a currently undrawn $500 million committed revolving credit facility, and expected stronger operating cash flows from our current mining operations, including anticipated contributions from Saramacca at Rosebel and steady performance from Essakane and Westwood."
White Gold Corp. ( TSXV:WGO ) has started drilling on its Titan Project and has begun ground surveys on other high priority targets, initiating its fully funded 2020 exploration program on its extensive 420,000 hectare land package in the White Gold District, Yukon, Canada. White Gold CEO David D'Onofrio said:
"We are very excited to kick off our 2020 exploration program. The fully funded program is designed to be focused and impactful starting with drilling the Titan anomaly identified late last year and to follow up on some of our other highest priority projects. The quick and accurate delineation of these targets through our disciplined and systematic exploration methodologies is a testament to our scientific and data driven approach and provides additional confidence in the prospectivity of these and our other targets."
HighGold Mining Inc. ( TSXV:HIGH ) has commenced resource expansion and definition drilling at its Lawyers gold-silver project in British Columbia, Canada. The company's CEO, John Williamson, commented:
"The Company has embarked on the largest drill program in the Toodogonne region. The drill rigs have started at Cliff's with additional drilling to soon commence at the ABG Zone. In 2019 drilling encountered multiple new zones and large extensions across multiple areas at the heart of the property. Every zone still remains open in all directions and as such, we anticipate more new mineralization to be discovered with the drill".
Benchmark Metals Inc. ( TSXV:BNCH ) has started its 2020 drill program and exploration activities at its flagship Johnson Tract Gold Project in Alaska. The first phase of the program is aiming for 7,000 to 10,000 metres of diamond drilling on five target areas surrounding the Johnson Tract deposit. Benchmark President and CEO Darwin Green said:
"We are excited to launch on the first serious exploration drill program in 25 years at Johnson. HighGold's work in 2019 generated numerous quality drill targets within an 800-meter radius of the high-grade JT Deposit mineral resource, several of which will be drilled for the first time this year. Focus is on expanding the mineral resource base and discovering new zones of mineralization, with early emphasis given to the Northeast Offset target where limited drilling by previous operators identified what is believed to be the fault-displaced continuation of the deposit. Crews are on-site, COVID-19 mitigation plans are in place, and drills are in position and ready to commence coring."
The Investorideas.com podcasts are also available on iTunes, Spotify, Tunein, Stitcher, Spreaker.com, iHeartRadio and Google Play Music.
Visit the Podcast page at Investorideas.com:
About Investorideas.com - News that Inspires Big Investing Ideas Investorideas.com is a recognized news source publishing third party news, research and original financial content. Learn about investing in stocks and sector trends with our news alerts, articles, podcasts and videos, looking at cannabis, crypto, AI and IoT, mining, sports biotech, water, renewable energy and more. Investor Idea's original branded content includes the following podcasts and columns : Crypto Corner , Play by Play sports and stock news column, Investor Ideas Potcasts Cannabis News and Stocks on the Move podcast and column, Cleantech and Climate Change , Exploring Mining the AI Eye .
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
