10 deals in 2 months! RIL says TPG,  L Catterton will invest Rs 6,441 cr in Jio Platforms
NEW DELHI: After a rally driven mostly by global cues and foreign institutional inflows, the focus may shift to fast-rising Covid-19 patient count and company-specific news this week. Any development on H1-B visa issues may ruffle some feathers on the IT counter as would any Supreme Court verdict on the telecom AGR dues or the interest payment on loans on moratorium. Analysts and market participants will also keep an eye on wholesale inflation data due early this week. A couple of blue chip firms will also release their March quarter numbers this week.
Meanwhile, Jio Platforms keeps on raking in the moolah for the oil-to-retail conglomerate. A steady flow of cheques will keep the Reliance Industries counter buzzing during the week.
Here are a few key factors that may guide the market next week:
As we move towards the end of the quarterly earnings season, mostly small- and mid-sized companies that are scheduled to release their numbers this week. But there will also be a few big names. Tata Motors, Pfizer, Ashoka Buildcon, CanFin Homes and CSB Bank will present their number on June 15, followed by HPCL, Ipca Labs, Navin Fluorine and Ratnamani Metal on the next day. Cummins India, Indostar Capital, JK Cement and Muthoot Finance will declare theirs on June 17; Brigade Enterprises, Gayatri Projects, Thermax and Whirlpool on June 18 and LIC Housing Finance, Novartis and Ramco Systems on June 19.
RIL will list its rights issue shares on Monday, which are likely to be priced at a premium of around Rs 330 given the current share prices. The company had raised over Rs 53,000 crore from the issue that closed in May. Meanwhile, cheques kept on flowing in for Jio Platforms, which will have a bearing on Reliance Industries shares. Reliance Industries on Saturday said two more investors will invest a total of Rs 6,441.30 crore in its subsidiary. This along with the eight previous deals have brought in Rs 104,326.95 crore. The company plans to use these proceedings to trim its massive debts.
India hit another grim milestone as its infection tally crossed the 3 lakh figure. Worryingly, the country is recording more cases every day, meaning it is yet to hit the peak. With transportation services reopened, authorities are fearing a fresh spike in the numbers in the days ahead.
Indian government will release wholesale inflation numbers for May on Monday, which is likely to go down. Besides, data for May’s balance of trade and bank loan and deposit growth will also be released during the week.
Foreign institutional investors continued to pour money into domestic equities as risk sentiments improved. They invested a net of Rs 1,649.31 crore during the week gone by, taking the tally to Rs 22,840 for June till now. For the current year, FIIs have taken out a net Rs 17,505 crore from Indian stock markets, as per NSDL data.
Nifty50, after a strong opening at the start of the week, turned volatile and closed lower by the end. Prices have reversed from a 61.8% Fibonacci extension of the first up leg, which coincides with 30 week EMA and forms a bearish cloud cover candlestick pattern on weekly chart. “The market breadth for the week mostly remained weak. The index needs to decisively close above 10,150 to reclaim some momentum strength. We maintain a bearish outlook for the markets going ahead. Traders should sell on rallies,” said Jimeet Modi, Founder & CEO, SAMCO Securities & StockNote. .
Volatility barometer India VIX snapped a four-week losing streak and advanced about 5 per cent during the week. The index, also known as the fear gauge of the market is likely to rise which will determine the speed of the market movement, Modi said. However, US VIX is currently at much higher levels of 40-41 which implies that fear factor is again rising for the US markets after a terrific comeback.
The likelihood of a possible second wave of the coronavirus infections in the US, along with the Fed’s grim growth outlook for the year has stoked risk aversion globally, and that has put pressure on the rupee. “Still, the rupee has seen resilience around the 76.60 mark and could reverse this trend unless it does not fall below 76.60. It looks like the RBI is keen to maintain the rupee in a 75.50 to 76.00 band, and that should give rupee bulls some breather. We expect the rupee to trade in the 74.80 to 76.60 band in the near term,” said Sugandha Sachdeva VP-Metals, Energy & Currency Research, Religare Broking.
IT stocks may see some volatile movements if the US administration freezes the coveted H1-B visas, the most sought after category of US visa by the Indian techies. Late last week, a media report claimed SU President Donanld Trump may freeze the issuance of new visas as he is under pressure to save jobs in the country.
The Supreme Court last Thursday directed telecom companies to file a reply on the roadmap and timeline of payment of adjusted gross revenue (AGR) dues and securities they can provide as guarantee. The apex court's order came on telcos' plea that they be allowed to spread the payment of their dues over 20 years or less. The court will next hear the case on June 18. The apex court has also listed for June 17 a hearing on the plea for waiver of interest accrual due to the deferment of loan interest in place to help borrowers through their financial crisis during the national lockdown.
