Technology Metals Australia Limited (TMT) has chosen FLSmidth as the preferred supplier of the key roasting kiln section of their Gabanintha vanadium processing plant in Western Australia.
The Notice of Award includes the release for the completion of a front-end engineering and design (FEED) study and the supply of the complete roasting kiln section of the plant. The supply contract will be released upon successful finalisation of all technical and commercial preconditions.
The award follows the successful pilot-scale test work completed during the feasibility study, during which salt roasting was conducted on a bulk sample of Gabanintha magnetic concentrate at FLSmidth’s facility in Pennsylvania, USA.
“We are delighted to receive the Notice of Award from TMT to supply a rotary roasting kiln to their Gabanintha Vanadium Project. This underlines FLSmidth’s strong record as a leading equipment supplier in the battery minerals sector. With proven equipment combined with local knowledge and significant experience in the battery minerals area, FLSmidth is well placed to support this growing mining segment,” says Manfred Schaffer, Mining President, FLSmidth.
Managing Director of TMT, Ian Prentice, commented: “We are very pleased to have further developed Technology Metals’ relationship with FLSmidth. Formalising this relationship with the world’s leading supplier of rotary kilns enables us to leverage off FLSmidth’s expertise to further de-risk the development of the world-class, large-scale, low-cost, long-life Gabanintha Vanadium Project.”
Vanadium is a hard, silvery grey, ductile metal that has traditionally been employed in the steel industry where it is primarily used in metal alloys such as rebar and structural steel. An emerging and likely significant use for vanadium is in the fast-growing energy storage (battery) sector, due to the increasing use of vanadium redox flow batteries (VRFBs). VRFBs are an efficient storage and re-supply solution for renewable energy as they can store large amounts of previously generated energy for later use. As such, vanadium is an important metal in creating a low-carbon future and is in line with our MissionZero objectives.
Read the article online at: https://www.globalminingreview.com/finance-business/01072020/flsmidth-selected-to-supply-roasting-kiln-to-tmts-gabanintha-vanadium-mine/
