I always think gold miners are a better investment than the metal itself. But even they’re risky, mind, so I’d really only invest in miners that produce precious metals as part of a wider range of commodities.
Kaz Minerals (LSE: KAZ) is an example, though its share price has been erratic over the past five years. It’s based in Kazakhstan, where it operates open pit copper mining, and the location alone might put off some investors. But Kaz’s extraction method is a low-cost one, and that can provide a handy buffer when commodity prices fall.
Kaz also produces gold and silver, which are commonly found as by-products of copper production.
In 2019, the company beat its production guidance for both metals. Gold production of 201,000 ounces (up from 183,000 ounces in 2018) smashed through start-of-year guidance of 170,000-185,000 ounces. And silver output, at 3,382,000 ounces, was 13% ahead of guidance. Meanwhile, production of Kaz’s main target, copper, reached 311,000 tonnes (from 295,000 tonnes in 2018). That easily beat the company’s guidance of 300,000 tonnes.
World commodity prices have been weakening, though, with average copper prices on the London Metals Exchange down 8% in 2019. But this is where Kaz’s low production costs come to the fore. In 2019, the firm boasted an “industry-leading net cash cost of 77 us cents per pound” for copper, down from US85c/lb the year before.
That helped boost operating profit by 8% to $923m. Net debt is up, though, at $2,759m, from $1,986m. Overall, with metals markets under pressure, I think Kaz minerals shares look increasingly tempting.
FTSE 100 mining giant Anglo American (LSE: AAL) is perhaps more in investors’ minds right now as the suitor in the ongoing takeover of Sirius Minerals (LSE: SXX). But it also reported a rise in 2019 profits on Thursday.
Anglo is big in platinum group metals, and recorded modest rises in production for 2019. Total platinum production reached 2,050,600 ounces (from 2,020,500 ounces in 2018), with palladium production up 1,385,900 ounces ( from 1,379,000 ounces).
On the upside, copper production costs were 6% lower in US dollars, helped by exchange rate movements.
On the financial front, results were impressive. In the words of chief executive Mark Cutifani, the firm generated “a 9% increase in underlying EBITDA to $10.0 bn, a 19% ROCE and a total shareholder return of 31% for the year.”
Again, we saw net debt increase, to $4.6bn. But that’s still less than half of underlying EBITDA, and the company put the increase down to “investment in growth opportunities.”
A full-year dividend of $1.09 (84.7p) per share represented a 9% uplift, and a yield of 4%, which I think is pretty good.
Would I buy Anglo American shares? Mining is very much a cyclical sector, and we should expect P/E multiples lower than average to compensate for expected volatility.
We’re looking at a P/E of around 10 for Anglo. I see that as good value, at a time when global economic weakness is impacting demand. I’d buy for long-term income.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Alan Oscroft owns shares of Sirius Minerals. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
