Fortescue Metals Group has formally opened its Fortescue Hive, the newly expanded Integrated Operations Centre at its Perth head office.
L-R: FMG COO Greg Lilleyman, chairman Andrew Forrest, WA mines minister Bill Johnston, and FMG CEO Elizabeth Gaines
FMG founder and chairman Dr Andrew Forrest AO and CEO Elizabeth Gaines were joined by Western Australian minister for mines and petroleum Bill Johnston, shadow minister for WA resources Matt Keogh, shadow minister for mines and petroleum Bill Marmion and federal member for Perth Patrick Gorman.
The purpose-built facility includes Fortescue's planning, operations and mine control teams, together with port, rail, shipping and marketing teams.
Forrest said mining was one of the most innovative industries in the world.
"Fortescue has long been a technology leader in the industry and was the first mining operation in Western Australia to control a railway from a remote location when we unveiled our Train Control Centre in Perth in 2009," he said.
"Since then Fortescue has continued to lead the pack and today we officially launch the Fortescue Hive, our reimagined IOC, which sits at the heart of our integrated supply chain to deliver critical ores to develop the great cities of our region and beyond."
The newly refurbished space allows 330 team members across Fortescue's complete supply chain to work together, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, to deliver improved safety, reliability, efficiency and commercial outcomes.
"Fortescue has developed the world's most advanced vertically integrated bulk operations infrastructure," Gaines said.
"The Fortescue Hive seamlessly links our core exploration, metallurgical, mining and marketing expertise to deliver value to our customers, shareholders and the broader community.
"Importantly, the Fortescue Hive will underpin our future use of technology including artificial intelligence and robotics and will expand to include the generation and integrated distribution network for the Pilbara Energy Connect, our hybrid solar-gas power solution."
The facility covers 2,500sq.m and took 15 weeks to establish.
About 6.5 tonnes of concrete was removed from the building, while 2.1t of steel was installed.
The fit-out includes 162 workstations and 996 computer monitors, connected by 64km of underfloor cables.
"WA's iron ore sector continues to drive the digital mines of the future, reinforcing our reputation as a global leader in smart mining," Johnston said.
"This technology is not only transforming the iron ore industry, but is being trialled by other commodity groups such as the gold sector.
"Innovative centres such as the Fortescue Hive are a great win for worker safety, with a number of companies reporting improved safety outcomes across the state."
