Vancouver, British Columbia--(Newsfile Corp. - June 24, 2020) - Genesis Metals Corp. (TSXV: GIS) ("Genesis" or the "Company") today reports it has commenced a staged surface exploration program that will be executed the coming months at its Chevrier Gold Project in the eastern Abitibi Greenstone Belt of Central Quebec. The Company completed a Phase I drilling program in May which consisted of a total of 2,502 metres in 9 holes. Results from holes GM-20-59 to 62 were reported by the Company on June 2, 2020; results for holes GM-20-63 to 67 are pending.
The initial phase of the surface program involves follow-up till sampling grids and detailed soil grids to refine the six priority targets identified from the 2019 glacial till survey (September 26, 2019; February 5, 2020 News Releases); Map 1, below. In addition, the work will include surface prospecting, sampling and geological mapping, as well as application of geophysical tools such as detailed drone/helicopter magnetic surveys. The aim of this work is to delineate discrete gold targets for trenching and drill testing later in the year.
The compilation work carried out on Chevrier over the past several months has identified an area that was sampled in 2017 along a powerline 800 metres northeast (up-ice) of till anomaly #3 (see Map 1, below) with a cluster of prospecting grab samples with assays including 17.8 g/t gold, 10.8 g/t gold, 3.5 g/t gold and 1.94 g/t gold. This area is close to the projection of the Fancamp Deformation Zone and will be a focus of follow-up work during the surface program.
Plans for a second phase of drilling will be announced once all assays from the current program are received and evaluated. The Company remains fully funded for its planned work in 2020.
Genesis will continue to monitor the evolving COVID-19 situation and will comply with all government directives and pro-actively follow protocols consistent with minimizing the spread of the COVID-19 virus to protect the health of its work force and their local communities.
Map 1: Till Target Areas and Gold in Rock Sample Anomalies, Chevrier Gold Project
The +290 square kilometer road accessible Chevrier property covers a 15-kilometer segment of the Fancamp Deformation Zone, along which zones of gold mineralization are associated with high strain zones in predominantly mafic volcanic rocks. The property is contiguous with the high-grade Monster Lake gold project and 20 kilometers northeast of the new IAMGOLD Corporation/Vanstar Mining Resources Inc. 3.1 Moz Nelligan gold discovery. For additional details on the Chevrier Project, 2019 results and plans for 2020 please refer to the Company's February 5, 2020 News Release .
The analytical work reported on herein was performed by Activation Laboratories Ltd. of Ancaster, Ontario, an internationally recognized analytical services provider. All samples are analysed for gold using standard Fire Assay-AA techniques. Samples returning over 5.0 g/t gold are analysed utilizing standard Fire Assay-Gravimetric methods. The Company follows industry standard procedures for the work carried out on the Chevrier project, with a quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) program. Blank, duplicate, and standard samples were inserted into the sample sequence sent to the laboratory for analysis. Genesis detected no significant QA/QC issues during review of the data.
The Qualified Person for this news release for the purposes of National Instrument 43-101 is André Liboiron, P. Geo., Project Manager. He has read and approved the scientific and technical information that forms the basis for the disclosure contained in this news release.
Genesis Metals Corp. is a member of the Discovery Group of Companies, an alliance of public companies focused on the advancement of mineral exploration and mining projects with a proven track record of generating shareholder value through responsible, sustainable, and innovative development. Discovery Group companies have generated over $500 million in direct and indirect expenditures resulting in over a billion dollars in M&A activity, with notable recent successes being the sale of Northern Empire Resources Corp. to Coeur Mining Inc. and the sale of Kaminak Gold Corp. to Goldcorp Inc. Current Discovery Group member companies include: Great Bear Resources Ltd., Bluestone Resources Inc., ValOre Metals Corp., Ethos Gold Corp., Fireweed Zinc Ltd., Dunnedin Ventures Inc., and K2 Gold Corporation.
Genesis Metals Corp. is a gold exploration company focused on advancing its Chevrier Gold Project in the prolific Abitibi region of Quebec, Canada.
Neither the TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in the policies of the TSX Venture Exchange) accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release.
Certain disclosure in this release, including statements regarding the anticipated timing for receipt of survey and till results; the Company's exploration plans; constitute forward-looking information or statements (collectively, "forward-looking statements") for the purpose of applicable securities laws. In making the forward-looking statements, the Company has applied certain factors and assumptions that are based on the Company's current beliefs as well as assumptions made by and information currently available to the Company, including that the Company is able to obtain any government or other regulatory approvals required to complete the Company's planned exploration and development activities; that the Company is able to procure personnel, equipment and supplies required for its exploration and development activities in sufficient quantities and on a timely basis; that actual results of exploration activities are consistent with management's expectations; that the current price and demand for gold will be sustained or will improve; that general business and economic conditions will not change in a materially adverse manner; Although the Company considers these assumptions to be reasonable based on information currently available to it, they may prove to be incorrect, and the forward-looking statements in this release are subject to numerous risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause future results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in such forward-looking statements. Such risks include, among others, the risks related to the inability to obtain required regulatory approvals on a timely basis or at all, that the risk that actual results of the Company's exploration activities may be different than those expected by management; delays in receiving survey and till results or obtaining any required government or other regulatory approvals; inability to procure required equipment and supplies in sufficient quantities and on a timely basis; the nature of mineral exploration and mining and the uncertain commercial viability of certain mineral deposits; the Company's lack of operating revenues and risks related to dependence on key personnel. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. The Company does not intend, and expressly disclaims any intention or obligation to, update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
Please review our Disclaimer and Privacy Policy before subscribing.
