The report covers a detailed competitive outlook including the market share and company profiles of the key participants operating in the global market. Key players profiled in the report include Magontec Ltd., Nanjing Yunhai Special Metals Co., Yinguang Weijie Magnesium Industry Co, Fugu Jinwantong Magnesium Industry Co., and Ningxia Hui-ye Magnesium Marketing Group Co.,Ltd.
The Magnesium Alloys Market is expected to exceed more than US$ 2.48 Billion by 2024 at a CAGR of 12.9%. Metals and alloys business are transitioning in terms of innovation and development of recent alloys to improve strength and alternative properties of the traditional metals. Magnesium is one in all the foremost abundantly found components within the world. it’s found primarily within the surface of ocean beds within the type of dolomite, magnesite, and mineral minerals. Alloying magnesium improves its heat resistance, strength, and creep resistance. magnesium alloys are used as an alternative to metal and iron metals for weight reduction and to boost strength of the fabric. Magnesium alloys have wonderful corrosion resistant property and square measure significantly lightweight in weight so, they’re used during a big selection of applications like transportable electronic devices, automobile components, computer parts, and transportable telephones.
The report scope includes market analysis on regional as well as country level. The report also provides competitive landscape covering company market shares with detailed profiling for major revenue contributing companies.
Global Magnesium Alloys Market report covers various regions including North America, Europe, Asia Pacific, and Rest of World. The regional Magnesium Alloys Market is further bifurcated for major countries including U.S., Canada, Germany, UK, France, Italy, China, India, Japan, Brazil, South Africa and others.
Global Magnesium Alloys Market is segmented based on the alloy type as, Cast Alloys and Wrought Alloys. The report segments global Magnesium Alloys Market based on end-use as Automotive & Transportation, Electronics, Aerospace & Defense, Power Tools and Others.
Magnesium alloys are made in definite proportions with metal, zinc, manganese, and other rare earth metals to create completely different alloys with distinctive physical properties. These alloys are made by electrolysis and thermal reduction processes. In electrolysis, magnesium chloride is 1st extracted from the ores and reduced to a metallic type using the electrolysis method. within the thermal reduction method, mineral is extracted from the ores by adding reducing agents like ferrosilicon. The extracted material is refined at warm temperature and pressure to create a pure magnesium alloy.
Global Magnesium Alloys Market share consists of several players including Magontec Ltd., Nanjing Yunhai Special Metals Co., Yinguang Weijie Magnesium Industry Co, Fugu Jinwantong Magnesium Industry Co., and Ningxia Hui-ye Magnesium Marketing Group Co.,Ltd.
The Magnesium Alloys Market has been segmented as below:
The Magnesium Alloys Market is segmented on the lines of Magnesium Alloys Market, By End-User, Magnesium Alloys Market, By Type and Magnesium Alloys Market, By Region.
Magnesium Alloys Market, By End-User this market is segmented on the basis of Automotive & Transportation, Electronics, Aerospace & Defense, Power Tools, Others, Medical and Sporting Goods. Magnesium Alloys Market, By Type this market is segmented on the basis of Cast Alloys and Wrought Alloys. Magnesium Alloys Market, By Region this market is segmented on the basis of North America, Europe, Asia Pacific and Rest of World.
Global Magnesium Alloys Market estimates & forecast from 2015 to 2024, with CAGR for 2018-2024.
Comparative market size analysis for 2017 & 2024, with actual data for 2017, estimates for 2018 and forecast from 2019 to 2024
Global Magnesium Alloys Market trends, with detailed analysis on consumer trends & manufacturer trends
Overview on supply analysis covering trends across raw material suppliers, technology providers and distributors
The global Magnesium Alloys Market report covers detailed study with the underlying influencing factors for the variations in the industry growth trends.
Reasons to Buy this Report:
Request Sample Report from here: https://www.marketresearchengine.com/magnesium-alloys-market
