Here is what happened in Thursday’s session:
Nifty Realty and Nifty Metal indices rose for the third straight day, as investors are hoping for a pickup in demand. Nifty Realty gained 2.55 per cent, led by up to 6 per cent jump in Sunteck Realty, DLF, Brigade Enterprises and Prestige Estates. Similarly, Nifty Metal Index added 2.4 per cent, pushed by up to 7 per cent gains in Ratnamani, Welcorp, NMDC, Jindal Steel and Hindalco.
The market’s fear gauge, India VIX, dropped 4 per cent to trade at 30 level. The volatility barometer lost 12 per cent in May series, falling for the second continuous series.
Promoters of Uflex released pledges on 2.25 lakh shares of the company, following which shares spiked 7.78 per cent to Rs 187. On the other hand, promoters of Max India pledged 12 lakh shares. The stock closed 2.55 per cent higher. Among other major transactions, Atul NSE 0.63 % Auto gained 4.69 per cent to Rs 163 after Kedia Securities acquired over 14,000 shares.
Over 280 stocks kissed their upper circuit limits set by BSE during the day. They included Avenue Supermarts, Delta Corps, Mahindra CIE Automotive, Future Retail, Venky’s, Reliance Power, KPIT Tech and Lemon Tree, among others.
Over 120 stocks crossed above the signal line on the MACD indicator giving out ‘buy’ signal. They included ICICI Bank, L&T Finance Holdings, HDFC Bank, GMR Infrastructure, Havells India, HUL, Rain Industries and Hero Moto, among others.
Some 25 stocks flashed ‘sell’ signals on the MACD indicator, most of them being pharma names. They included Bharti Airtel, Singer India, NDTV, Jubilant Life Sciences, Titan Biotech, Suven Pharma, Advanced Enzyme Tech and Kabra Extrusion, among others.
Among 30-odd stocks that crossed the 70-mark on the RSI indicator and turned overbought were Vodafone Idea, Brightcom Group, EID Parry, Thinkink Picturez, Hindustan Oil Exploration, Godrej Industries and Delta Corps, among others.
After showing sharp upside breakout in the last session, Nifty showed an excellent follow-through up move. A long bull candle was formed that closed above the immediate gap resistance of 9,350 which is a positive indication, said an analyst. “The short-term trend in Nifty is positive. Next overhead resistance is placed around 9,580-9,600, which could be reached in the next 1-2 sessions. Near term upside targets to be watched around 9,750. Immediate support is placed at 9,350,” said Nagaraj Shetti, Technical Research Analyst, HDFC Securities.
