The private lender that was the biggest blue chip gainer on Wednesday turned biggest Nifty loser even as the company said it would raise Rs 15,000 crore by way of issuance of equity. The stock fell 2.24 per cent to Rs 423.35.
Metal stocks continued to shine as factory activity improved across the world. Nifty Metal Index edged higher for the third consecutive day, lifted by up to 10 per cent gains in APL Apollo, MOIL, Nalco, Tata Steel, Hindustan Copper and SAIL. The index added 0.98 per cent during the day.
The 10-share Nifty Pharma index snapped a four-day losing streak and advanced 0.62 per cent. Cadila Healthcare was the biggest gainer, up 5 per cent, while Cipla, Sun Pharma, Biocon and Aurobindo Pharma gained up to 4 per cent.
Shares of Apollo Tyres gained 0.91 per cent to Rs 110.80 after the company promoter bought 3.8 lakh shares. Shares of Polycab India spiked 5.46 per cent to Rs 841.05 after a designated person of the company dumped 3 lakh shares of electronic accessories maker.
Over 450 stocks kissed their upper daily limit set by exchanges. They included IFCI, Infibeam Avenues, Future Retail, Adani Green Energy, GE Transmission, Indiabulls Real Estate, South Indian Bank, IDBI Bank and Dish TV, among others.
Nearly 40 stocks gave a ‘buy’ signal as the share prices crossed above the signal line of the MACD indicator. They include Tata Power, Rail Vikas Nigam, Nalco, Manappuram Finance, Nelcast, Spencer’s Retail and HDFC, among others.
Relentless buying in certain names in the last few days have put them in the ‘overbought’ category as they crossed above the 70-mark on RSI indicator. They included Tata Power, Future Retail, GIC Housing, SITI Networks, Rites, Uniply Industries, Aditya Birla Capital and Nippon Life AMC, among others.
Nifty witnessed sustainable follow-through up move after the firm upside bounce on the day prior. A reasonable long candle was formed with minor upper shadow. Technically, this pattern signals a positive trend with minor profit booking at the highs. “Nifty’s short-term trend continues to be positive. The next upside resistance to be watched is in the 10,650-10,700 zone, which could be achieved in the next few sessions. Key lower support is placed at 10,450,” said Nagaraj Shetti, Technical Research Analyst, HDFC Securities.
