RIL, financial stocks drive Sensex 290 pts higher; Nifty tops 10,100
NEW DELHI: After a choppy trade for six and a half hours, domestic equity indices ended Wednesday’s session with gains thanks to institutional buying in banks, financial services and RIL shares.
Investors were watchful ahead of the US Fed policy outcome tonight, which may provide some forward guidance as the economy gradually starts showing signs of recovery.
“Although the Fed is expected to maintain status quo, markets will be looking out for any hint that can impact markets. The direction will depend on whether it is hawkish or dovish in tone,” said Vinod Nair, Head of Research at Geojit Financial Services.
Broader market indices also registered gains with market breadth in favour of advances. Five stocks gained for every three declines during the session.
Here is a lowdown on what happened in Wednesday’s session:
Nifty Metal and Nifty Auto indices saw some serious break in momentum as they fell for the third straight day. They declined 0.58 per cent and 1.14 per cent, respectively. Nifty Media index also joined them declining for the third day, led by over 7 per cent drop in PVR.
Nifty Midcap Index outperformed, as it climbed 1.22 per cent led by gains in Jubilant Life Sciences, Indian Bank, Crompton and LIC Housing Finance. In comparison, Nifty Smallcap Index gained 0.51 per cent, Nifty500 added 0.67 per cent and Nifty 0.69 per cent.
Ajit Abraham Isaac, promoter of Quess Corp, acquired nearly 18,000 shares of the company. Following the transactions, the stock climbed 0.45 per cent to Rs 268.85. Adani Tradeline, promoter of Adani Ports, released 4.8 lakh pledged shares of the port handler. Stock of the company creeped up 0.17 per cent to Rs 346.
Pharma names dominated the list of stocks that hit 12-month highs during the session. They included Aurobindo Pharma, Dr Reddy’s Labs, Granules India, Lupin and Shilpa Medicare. Among others were Adani Green, Dhanuka Agritech, GMM Pflauder and Network18, among others.
Over 400 stocks hit the upper ceiling mandated by BSE during the trade. They included Network18, Gayatri Projects, Dishman Carbogen Amcis, Trident, HFCL, Parag Milk, Dish TV and Lemon Tree, among others.
Heavy demand for some 90 stocks made them ‘overbought’ according to the RSI indicator. They included RBL Bank, NBCC, GV Films, Sun Pharma Advanced Research, TV18 Broadcast, Granules India and Indian Hotels, among others.
As many as 45 stocks gave sell signals, according to the MACD indicator, as prices crossed above the signal line. They included Indostar Capital, HDFC Life Insurance, Escorts, SBI Life Insurance, ACC and Fineotex Chemical, among others.
The market has been consolidating in the 10,000-10,300 range since last few sessions. “The midcap space saw buildup in momentum and we expect the same to continue. Currently, all data parameters suggest buying on dips. On the sectoral front, expect banking and metal stocks to lead while positivity is also seen in auto and commodity segments,” said Sahaj Agrawal, Head of Research- Derivatives at Kotak Securities.
