Tech view: Don't read too much into Friday's rally, Nifty bias still negative
NEW DELHI: After weak trade throughout the session, domestic equity indices pared some of the losses and closed virtually flat, as investors were unimpressed by the stimulus package put out by the government.
A sharp rise in the number of coronavirus cases and an escalation in tensions between the US and China also put pressure on equities. Buying emerged in metals and to some extent in FMCG names, which helped the benchmark indices at the end.
Here are a few key trends seen in Friday’s session:
Nifty Pharma was the worst performing sectoral index during the week gone by as investors preferred to book profit after a sharp rise over the past month. Even on Friday, the index dropped 0.86 per cent dragged by Lupin, Glenmark Pharma, Sun Pharma, Cadila Healthcare, Divi’s Labs and Biocon, which slid 1-3 per cent.
Nifty Auto index was the best performer on NSE as it climbed 5 per cent in five sessions after companies resumed work in their factories. On Friday though, the index slipped 1 per cent dragged by Ashok Leyland, M&M, Hero MotoCorp and TVS Motor.
Directors of Sacheta Metals acquired nearly 20,500 company shares while pledges on over 8 lakh shares of Solara Active Pharma were invoked. Shares of Sacheta Metals jumped 6.47 per cent to Rs 12.50 following those transactions. Solara Active Pharma added 1.20 per cent to Rs 470.
Over 200 stocks hit the upper circuit limits set by BSE on Friday, which included Jubilant Life Sciences, Zensar Technology, ITDG, Shankara Building Projects, SpiceJet, Reliance Capital and Edelweiss Financial, among others.
As many as 57 BSE-listed stocks gave buy signals during the session as they crossed above the signal line on the MACD indicator. They included India Cements, Sanghi Industries, Udaipur Cement, Alembic, Himalaya Food, Emami and Praj Industries, among others.
Some 69 stocks gave sell signals as they crossed below the signal line. They included McLeod Russel, Infosys, Shriram Transport Finance, LIC Housing Finance, MindTree, Nocil, Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilisers and Balrampur Chini, among others.
Thanks to brisk buying in last few days, some 17 stocks turned overbought on BSE as they crossed above the 70-mark on the RSI indicator. They included Hindustan Zinc, Mahindra EPC, Salasar Techno Engineering, Apollo Micro Systems, Blackrose Industries and Cigniti Technologies, among others.
Optimism was evident in the market since the morning trades and the Nifty bounced back from the lows to close in a recovery pattern towards the end of the day. Traders lapped up stocks on hopes of a bold announcement by the FM on the stimulus package front, said analysts. “Technically, the double bottom formation has formed in oversold markets and at least we can expect the Nifty to move closer to 9,300. However, it is mandatory to keep a stop loss at 9,040,” said Shrikant Chouhan, Executive Vice President, Equity Technical Research at Kotak Securities.
