MCX gets Sebi nod for futures on bullion, base metals indices
The index futures will be cash settled, unlike its individual constituents which have to be settled by delivery.
“Having cash settled index futures will be a pull for many participants, including for MFs,” said Rajesh Palviya, derivatives head of Axis Securities.
Barclays raises forecasts for crude oil prices, but flags slow recovery
Mumbai: MCX NSE 0.66 % will soon launch index futures on bullion and base metals indices, paving the way for increased participation by mutual funds and arbitrageurs, among a host of other market constituents.
“The Exchange has received permission from Sebi for futures on indices like iComdex Bullion and iComdex Base Metals,” said an MCX official. "We will most likely kick off the bullion index futures from August and the base metals from October.”
The index futures will be cash settled, unlike its individual constituents which have to be settled by delivery.
The multiplier will be 50 and the margins have yet to be decided.
Index futures on equities like Nifty and Bank Nifty are extremely popular among participants and MCX hopes that the launch would attract “substantial” interest to its platform, which is the largest in India for energy and metals contracts.
“Having cash settled index futures will be a pull for many participants, including for MFs,” said Rajesh Palviya, derivatives head of Axis Securities.
MCX runs the country’s largest commodity derivatives segment with average daily turnover of around Rs 32,000 crore. It has well over 90% market share, with NCDEX, BSE, ICEX and NSE having smaller CDS segments.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
