Previous best estimates have improved to a total combined sulphide and oxide measured, indicated & inferred mineral resource of 658,500 tonnes of contained copper
Given the news of the expanded resource base, it's uncertain whether MLX will restart mining operations, seek to divest itself, or enter into a joint venture agreement
Metals X closed up 1.5 per cent on Tuesday, with shares trading at 6.8 cents apiece
Metals X (MLX) has upgraded the resource estimates at its Nifty Copper Operations by 10 per cent.
29,764 metres of diamond drilling across 309 holes have indicated an inferred resource (cut-off grade of 0.75% copper) of 39.66 million tonnes at 1.51%, yielding 598,500 tonnes of copper — a 52,900-tonne increase on previous best estimates.
This brings the total of combined sulphide and oxide measured, indicated & inferred mineral resources to 47.29 million tonnes at 1.39% copper for 658,500 tonnes of contained copper.
The new estimates are based on a revised geological model for the Nifty deposit which has allowed for improved resolution of geological detail within the mineralised area.
Metals X Executive Chairman, Patrick O'Connor says, "Metals X in the last nine months of 2019 invested $4.1 million in underground drilling at the Nifty Copper Mine which resulted in a 10% increase in contained sulphide copper metal to now report a combined total measured, indicated and inferred mineral resource of 658,500 tonnes of copper.
“Nifty has a large copper endowment, impressive exploration potential and production-ready infrastructure that provides excellent leverage to any improvements in copper prices."
The Nifty copper mine ceased operations in November 2019, the company saying it had "invested significant resources into improving productivity at the mine. Unfortunately, despite this, the operation is not where it was expected to be at this stage of the Reset Plan."
It's uncertain which way MLX will head with Nifty now given the expanded resource base, whether it will restart mining operations, or if it will seek to divest itself or enter into a joint venture agreement.
Since Nifty hit the wall, MLX has been focused on its 50% joint venture stake in the world-class, long-life Renison Tin Operations in Tasmania - Australia’s largest tin producer.
Mr O'Connor says, “Metals X is currently undertaking a strategic review of its copper assets, which include the Nifty Copper Mine, Maroochydore Copper Project and surrounding Paterson exploration tenure.
"The Board, in consultation with its advisors, is exploring various options for these copper assets including joint ventures and the partial or complete divestment of some or all of these assets, with a view to maximising value for MLX shareholders."
There could be a pretty Nifty deal in the pipeline for MLX investors.
Metals X closed up 1.5 per cent on Tuesday, with shares trading at 6.8 cents apiece.
