Steel, iron ore firms gain pricing power, hope for demand revival in base metals
Last Updated at January 5, 2020 00:16 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
The S&P BSE Metal index is pointing towards a recovery in the metals segment. The index has jumped 22.4 per cent in the past three months, outperforming the benchmark Sensex by a wide margin. Steel companies have been increasing prices in this period, after hitting bottom.
Base metal companies are also hoping for a demand revival and an improvement in order books. In the past one month, the London Metal Exchange (LME) is up 4.8 per cent, while prices of other metals like steel and iron ore are up 3.5 to 5.8 per cent. Zinc heading for a supply shortfall Major economies such ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
