Once IGO's earn-in is complete, a joint venture will be formed between the two companies
According to Metals X, the Paterson Province hosts several gold, gold-copper, copper, and tungsten deposits
On a tough day on the ASX, shares in Metals X closed just over a per cent lower at 9.2 cents each
Junior explorer Metals X (MLX) has struck a farm-in deal with mining giant Independence Group (IGO) over the Paterson Exploration Project in WA.
Under the deal, IGO can fund $32 million worth of exploration worth at MLX's Paterson project over 6.5 years to pocket a 70 per cent interest in the project. A minimum of $11 million needs to be spent within the first 3.5 years of the deal.
Once IGO has earnt its 70 per cent interest, a joint venture between the two companies will be formed and IGO will free-carry MLX to the completion of a pre-feasibility study on a new mineral discovery.
Importantly, the 2394-square-kilometre Paterson project surrounds but does not include MLX's Nifty Copper Operation and Maroochydore Copper Project.
IGO is planning to kick off the earn-in exploration work in September.
Metals X CEO Mike Spreadborough said the company looks forward to working with a company of IGO's renown.
"IGO is a highly-regarded, successful and experienced exploration and mining company and this Term Sheet delivers a significant exploration commitment on our substantial and exciting tenement holdings in the Paterson Province," Mike said.
"Importantly, Metals X will retain full control of the Nifty Copper Operation and its established infrastructure plus the Maroochydore Copper Project which collectively host over one million tonnes of in-ground copper metal," he continued.
IGO Managing Director and CEO Peter Bradford said today's deal will create shareholder value for both IGO and Metals X investors.
"IGO has recognised the exploration potential of the Paterson Province for some time. The joint venture with Metals X over 2,400 square kilometres of highly-prospective ground further consolidates IGO’s presence in this highly endowed, yet under-explored province," Peter said.
Located in the Pilbara region of WA, the Paterson Province hosts several gold, gold-copper, copper, and tungsten deposits.
Despite news of today's deal, neither IGO nor Metals X were able to keep their shares above the green.
On a particularly tough day on the market, shares in MLX slumped in the last hour of trade and closed 1.08 per cent lower at 9.2 cents each.
IGO shares lost 3.21 per cent today and closed worth $5.12.
