Metals are used in almost every aspect of modern society, from transport to energy, housing to healthcare, food to technology. Innovation continues apace to develop ever more useful metal-containing materials for wider and more specialised applications, like for new energy technologies (eg. solar cells, batteries, wind generation, etc) and to produce complex electronic devices and networks.
This course is focused on the properties and approaches that are key for the appropriate assessment and management of risks associated with metals. The course will help you develop an understanding of the properties of metals and the impact of their toxicity on humans and the environment.
How will this course teach me about metals toxicity and management?
This course has been written by experts in the industry with a vested interest in ensuring the widespread knowledge of the toxicity, management and impact metals can have in our lives.
Take a look at the learning outcomes for each of the modules here.
Who is this course for?
Regulatory authorities in charge of evaluating metals in different chemicals management systems (hazard identification, exposure assessment, risk assessment, risk management)
Professionals in the field of environmental science, particularly those working with decision-makers in the public or private sectors
Industry persons in charge with environmental regulations related to metals, including new recruits needing training on metals science
This course has been written by Eurometaux, Arche Consulting and the International Council on Mining & Metals (ICMM). Combining the experience of these three bodies provides a breadth of knowledge to be shared across this course, leading to some fantastic lessons to be learned in its content.
Initial single place cost for non-members: £400 (€450/$520) - members receive a discount based on their membership level
For group rates for multiple trainees please email us for a quote at: cw.sales@chemicalwatch.com or call us on +44 (0)1743 818 292
Disclaimer: For the smoothest learning experience it is advised to complete the courses either in Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge.
Advance and Essential members are entitled to a discount on all Chemical Watch events.
