The firm expects an inflationary reaction to the COVID-19 response from central banks — but just how much is uncertain.
“For gold prices to go materially above US$2,000, we believe inflation will need to move above the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target and this move to be met with a muted policy response,” it states.
For David Smith, the economic recovery will be more complex, a topic he touched on during his presentation at the digital MoneyShow last week.
The senior analyst at the Morgan Report warned of a period of stagflation similar to the one experienced in the mid-1970s.
“You have inflation and deflation going at the same time, but the underlying trait of inflation. Eventually, if the Fed keeps printing the amount of money that they are doing, we could have a massive inflationary move,” he said to listeners.
In this environment, gold is favored to perform positively, according to Smith.
“But in any of those circumstances gold will continue to do well because it’s a storehouse of value — it’s real money and it’s an opportunity to preserve your wealth as insurance first, profit second.”
Gold was trading for US$1,737.58 at 10:27 a.m. EDT on Friday.
Silver continued to trend higher, poised to make its fifth week of gains, despite headwinds mid-session.
The white metal has climbed 2.7 percent since late April and is benefiting from safe haven investor attention and growth in industrial demand.
Give me my free report!
Moving towards US$18 an ounce, silver’s steady ascent is right on trend, explained Sprott’s (TSX: SII ,OTC Pink:SPOXF) Rick Rule during a MoneyShow webinar late last week.
“Remember again too that silver follows gold. It is the gold stocks and the gold itself that move first, but historically silver and then the silver stocks have moved the furthest — and I suspect that that will be the case now,” Rule told listeners.
At 10:40 a.m. EDT on Friday, silver was valued at US$17.75.
Platinum displayed strength on Monday (June 15), climbing to US$821 per ounce, its highest price since late May, before falling to US$793. Currently platinum is moving for US$808.50.
As the other precious metals pushed to end the period in the green, palladium was dragged lower.
The automotive metal has faced dwindling demand from manufactures. While some of this was offset by a COVID-19-induced production decline, stockpiled material will drag on its value now that projects are ramping up output. At 11:02 a.m. EDT on Friday, palladium was priced at US$1,826 per ounce.
Also on track for a week of positive growth was the base metals sector, which saw gains across most of the assets. Copper added 2.7 percent to its value this week, propelled by reinvigorated industrial demand, mostly in China.
In an interview with the Investing News Network , Byron King, who writes Whiskey & Gunpowder at Agora Financial, highlighted the potential of the red metal.
Watch the full interview with King above.
“There’s going to be a lot more copper in cars, there’s going to be a lot more copper in — just in other electrical things as the world builds out. Whether it’s renewable energy, all those sorts of things. And it’s not just a US/Canada thing, it’s a global thing,” he said.
Copper was trading at US$5,799 per tonne on Friday.
Zinc made modest gains over the week. Impacted by some of the same production setbacks that have plagued copper since the pandemic was announced, zinc may benefit from a reduction in supply.
That’s because prior to the COVID-19 containment measures, the metal had been on its way to a significant surplus at the pre-closure production levels.
With prices 17 percent lower than the same period last year, the output reduction may motivate the metal later on.
“We are now looking at a 2.6 percent mine decline year-on-year,” said Bruce Alway , director of metal research at Refinitiv.
