Global metal prices have seen the first sustained rise in months after the coronavirus pandemic sent them on an initial steep decline.
Large mine closures in Africa and South America are causing a large reduction in supply, pushing prices up
Mines are classed as essential services within Australia and most are still operating, albeit with some logistical issues
Despite a correction earlier this week, the past fortnight has seen copper and zinc prices consistently climb after reaching their lowest value since 2016.
Nickel has also been on the increase.
CRU commodity analyst Paul Wiggers de Vries said mine closures in Africa and South America had caused a large reduction in supply, pushing prices up.
"Some of them haven't been operating for more than a month and it's not looking at lightening up at all," Mr Wiggers de Vries said.
"The biggest disruption at the moment is Peru which is basically in a lockdown, and most of the miners are operating at reduced rates or not operating at all.
Mines have been classed as an essential service within Australia and most are still operating, albeit with some logistical issues.
Mr Wiggers de Vries said the increase in prices was likely to play to the favour of Australian mining companies in the short term.
"Where Australians are going to be able to benefit at the moment is being able to deliver in short terms to China and south-east Asia," he said.
Minerals Council of Australia CEO Tania Constable said global stimulus packages have contributed to the market rise.
Tania Constable says high demand from Asian regions is pushing metal and mineral prices up.
"China has started starting to come back online … [and] they have got a strong stimulus package," Ms Constable said.
"That's really going to support demand, particularly for Australian resources, because we have prepared well.
"We're really well placed to be providing those minerals and metals into our major markets, China, and more broadly the Asian region."
Ms Constable said during the COVID-19 pandemic China buyers have been "stockpiling" minerals and metals.
"The ports are all open, we haven't had an issue with producing in Australia and transporting to China," she said.
Ms Constable said with health and safety for workers at the forefront, there has still been pressure for businesses to keep mines operating with demand rising.
"We know that in order to be able to keep operating we need to be responsible and responsive to the COVID pandemic, and meet all the requirements that the state health departments and their chief medical officers advise," she said.
"All of our companies are saying that they're still at reasonably high outputs or even producing, in some cases, more than they were producing before.
