A sharp correction in the commodity prices over the past few weeks is likely to wipe out most of the earnings of metals and mining sector companies and may even lead to net losses in some cases.
ET Intelligence Group: Highly-leveraged Indian metals and mining companies including Vedanta, Tata Steel, Jindal Steel & Power , SAIL, Hindalco and JSW Steel NSE -1.80 % are expected to report a sharp fall in their earnings following lower commodity prices and falling demand. This would also raise concerns over their debt repayment abilities. These companies together have a net debt of Rs 3 lakh crore.
A sharp correction in the commodity prices over the past few weeks is likely to wipe out most of the earnings of metals and mining sector companies and may even lead to net losses in some cases. These companies have been executing heavy capex plans funded largely by debt. The tough economic scenario amid high debt exposure has resulted in 40-60% erosion in their market capitalisation in the year to date.
Shares of Vedanta and Hindalco have fallen the steepest by 60%. Both the companies have high dependency on aluminium, wherein prices have fallen by over 14% in 2020 so far. The expected net debt relative to the operating profit before depreciation and amortisation (Ebitda) for FY20 on consolidated basis appears to be well in the limit for Vedanta at 1.2 times and for Hindalco at 2.4 times. But, possibility of a sharp fall in Ebitda in the fourth quarter (March 2020 quarter) may upset analyst estimates.
In addition, cash generated by a group company may not be easily transferable to the parent company. For instance, cash generated by Hindustan Zinc NSE -0.66 % cannot be transferred into Vedanta, the parent company without tax leakages.
Vedanta’s businesses include oil, aluminum, copper and power. International crude oil prices have fallen by 60% while that of aluminium and copper have dropped by 14% and 22% respectively in 2020 so far.
According to brokerage reports, Vedanta’s holding company has a debt of Rs 54,000 crore ($7.4 billion) and its sole source of income is the dividend paid by its subsidiaries. The company has recently issued commercial paper to raise upto Rs 2,250 crore.
In the case of Hindalco, the US subsidiary Novelis has a better margin stability but significant portion of the debt is with the Indian company.
Steel companies appear even more vulnerable. Tata Steel, SAIL, JSW Steel, and Jindal Steel and Power have an FY20 estimated net-debt-to-Ebitda ratio of four to nine, which may further increase.
According to a statement issued by Tata Steel, the production cut by the auto industry in Europe will have a ‘knock-on’ impact on the industry. Government-owned SAIL has the highest net-debt-to-Ebitda ratio of nine, followed by Tata Steel at around six. A ratio above four is considered to be risky.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
