International steel prices have recovered in the past week by 3 per cent.
At the current pace, JSW expects sales volume of 15 million tonnes (MT) and production of 16 MT for FY21, assuming no production decline in the coming quarters.
Mumbai: Metals shone in a dull Mumbai market even as equity gauges across Asia’s industrial powerhouses climbed Tuesday, shortening the odds on a V-shaped recovery in China after the latest aggregate data from the ‘factory to the world’ signalled revival in demand .
Jindal Steel NSE -0.26 % and Power (JSPL), JSW Steel, NMDC, Tata Steel and Coal India NSE 1.24 % powered the Nifty Metal index to gains of 2.7 per cent on a day the 50-share benchmark ended lower. Jindal Steel surged 14 per cent at Rs 109.95 after the company reported a consolidated net profit of Rs 305.62 crore in the March quarter, compared with a net loss of Rs 2,713.34 crore in the year-ago period.
Positive commentaries by JSW Steel and Jindal Steel have offset the impact of recent rating downgrades, with investors looking at the likelihood of a Beijing-led revival in manufacturing and infrastructure industries across Asia.
Analysts at Edelweiss Securities said China’s trade data and macro-economic indicators for April indicate that the worst seems to be over.
“While April-20 has been reasonably better for China, indicating that economic activity after the Covid-19 lockdown is resuming, it remains to be seen if domestic demand sustains in subsequent months,” said Edelweiss.
After falling by over 10 per cent in the past two months, international steel prices have recovered in the past week by 3 per cent. Industrial output in the world’s biggest consumer of steel, aluminium, zinc and cement climbed about 4 per cent in April, reversing double-digit declines in earlier months as vast swathes of the Chinese industrial hubs remained shut through the first quarter of the calendar year.
Back home, production is slowly reviving. JSW Steel and JSPL have reported rising demand from overseas. With more than half their revenue generated overseas, these companies now operate at 85 per cent of capacity, and output could reach 100 per cent from June.
At the current pace, JSW expects sales volume of 15 million tonnes (MT) and production of 16 MT for FY21, assuming no production decline in the coming quarters. With the current capacity of 18 MT, its production was 16 MT in FY20. JSPL has guided for sales volume of 7.25 MT, a 15 per cent on-year expected jump. JSW Steel’s realisation improved 7 per cent sequentially in the March quarter, while volumes dropped 5 per cent.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
