Hindustan Copper Limited climbed 4.8 per cent, followed by Vedanta Limited (4.37 per cent), Tata Steel (3.8 per cent), SAIL (3.6 per cent), and Jindal Steel (3.4 per cent)
Last Updated at December 13, 2019 10:41 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Metal stocks, led by Vedanta and Tata Steel, gained in Friday's trade on the NSE after US President Donald Trump approved trade deal with China to halt December 15 tariffs.
At 10:10 am, Nifty Metal index was the top gainer among Nifty sectoral indices and was trading 2.24 per cent higher as compared to 0.57 per cent gain in the benchmark Nifty50 index. According to a Bloomberg report, President Donald Trump signed off on a phase-one trade deal with China, averting the December 15 introduction of a new wave of US tariffs on about $160 billion of consumer goods from the Asian ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
