Metal heavyweights will recover after virus scare eases: Rahul Shah
Selling has been happening in index futures, which is putting pressure on these heavy weights, says the Vice President, Broking & Distribution, Motilal Oswal Financial Services.
There has been massive selling across the board. We are seeing some of those metal names being severely hit. In this environment, given the uncertainty, even when we do see some recovery, do you see markets going back to those handful of stocks that have seemed like safer bets so far?
Interestingly, what we have seen is the polarisation of stock in seven-eight stocks; maximum position has been created in those stocks. You will see all these technical factors hitting the markets. Selling has been happening in index futures , which is putting pressure on these heavy weights as well. It will maybe take seven-eight days to settle down and the the upside will again start in the stocks which have been beaten up. Heavyweights, as you mentioned, will recover. But you need to be brave enough to buy in such markets.
On a day like today, no one really wants to think about the macro picture at all. But given that we are talking about the possibility of recovery, does this now throw all of that into question? Or, are you still relatively confident that once we do see a recovery, India will somewhat be unscathed compared to what is happening in the rest of the world?
We have seen a huge selloff this week. There is no respite in terms of buying coming at all. FII selling will likely stop in a couple of days; or the kind of speed at which selling is happening might take a break for a while, and then we will see markets bouncing back. India story still remains intact; it will get affected a little but overall, the domestic consumption play will continue. My sense is that all these things will take a while; maybe another 15-20 days or a month to settle down. In the near term, the risk to reward is quite favourable from here. The risk could be another 2-3% more on the indices side and that pain could only be in terms of margin selling. Post that, we would see some kind of recovery in the markets.
