Ready to bet on base metals for the next five years: Jonathan Barratt
Mumbai: Metal stocks surged on Friday after US President Donald Trump approved a phase one trade deal with China. The BSE Metal index gained 2.3% with Vedanta, Hindalco Industries NSE -0.91 % , Tata Steel NSE -1.49 % and Steel Authority of India NSE -1.12 % advancing 2-4%.
The US President signed off on a phase-one trade deal with China, averting the December 15 introduction of a new wave of US tariffs on about $160-billion worth of consumer goods from China.
The tariff war between the two countries have affected the metal sector as it has depressed base metals prices and hurt business sentiments.
“The outlook for the sector has improved after the phase one trade deal,” said Abhimanyu Sofat, head of research at IIFL.
Pankaj Pandey, head of retail research at ICICIdirect, said domestic recovery is still tentative for metal companies.
“Metals are more of a trading bet because of valuations rather than a structural bet at this point,” said Pandey.
Sofat of IIFL views the metals space as a contra play because of cheaper valuations and is bullish on Tata Steel. The BSE Metal index has fallen 17% so far this year while the BSE Sensex is up nearly 14% so far this year.
JM Financial is also bullish on Tata Steel and views it as a preferred play in the ferrous space.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
