OTC Markets Group ( OTCQX:OTCM ) will be hosting the upcoming US Western Metals and Mining Virtual Investor Conference on Tuesday June 30. The online event welcomes individual and institutional investors along with advisors and analysts to listen to presentations from 15 participating exploration companies with properties in the US. "On behalf of the entire team, we proudly welcome special guests and keynote presenters: Former Governor of Idaho, Butch Otter and Byron King, Research Geologist and Editor, Agora Financial Services to this signature event,” Jason Paltrowitz, executive vice president of corporate services at OTC Markets Group said in a statement. Registration is available here .
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, NetCents Technology Inc ( CSE:NC ) (OTCQB:NTTCF) said Monday it will use a 45-day extension on the filing of its second quarter financial results ended April 30. The cryptocurrency payments company said it is continuing to work diligently to submit Interim Filings by July 6.
EuroLife Brands Inc ( CSE:EURO ) (OTCPINK:EURPF) updated shareholders on the progress of a pair of acquisitions that will bolster the pan-European health and wellness company’s portfolio of assets. The Toronto-based firm said it had successfully negotiated the final terms to acquire a stake in Farmhus GmbH, which operates a state-of-the-art industrial hemp cultivation facility in Germany. EuroLife said it expects to sign the final agreement “in the weeks to come,” with several supply agreements nearing the final stages with Farmhus.
Pacton Gold Inc ( CVE:PAC ) (OTCPINK:PACXD) said Monday that it had increased its previously announced flow-through placing by C$1.675 million due to demand. The firm will issue a further 2,120,253 flow-through shares at a price of C$0.79 each, it said in a brief statement. On May 27 this year, the firm revealed it has entered a $2.1 million financing package with Sandstorm Gold Ltd . The entire private placement consisted of up to 7.14 million shares at $0.70 each for total gross proceeds of $5 million.
Tectonic Metals Inc ( CVE:TECT ) CEO Tony Reda will present at the Virtual Investor Conference on Tuesday, June 30. Reda will discuss the firm’s new Alaskan gold property and its recent strategic financing at 5PM EST. The live, interactive online event allows participants to ask presenting companies questions in real time. Attendees can register by using the link here .
Group Eleven Resources Corp ( CVE:ZNG ) (OTCMKTS:GRLVF) closed the final tranche of its previously announced non-brokered private placement with Glencore Canada Corporation, issuing 12.8 million units priced at C$0.05 per unit for gross proceeds of C$640,000. Each unit consists of one share and one-half of one warrant exercisable at C$0.10 per share for a 36-month period. Proceeds will go towards exploration as well as general and administrative purposes.
Ideanomics Inc (NASDAQ: IDEX) announced that its Mobile Energy Global (MEG) subsidiary Qingdao Ai Neng Ju New Energy Sales Company Ltd, has completed the delivery of electric vehicle (EV) sales orders for a total of 117 units worth 22.5 million renminbi ($3.15 million). The multiple orders included 25 Dongfeng heavy trucks ordered by the Hangzhou Deqian Industrial Company, 40 Aoxin EV500 logistic vehicles for the Jiudao Group, and a mixed bag of orders for 52 electric vehicles from other customers. Ideanomics said it received a follow-on order from the Jiudao Group for an additional 360 units scheduled for delivery in July, once financing is wrapped up by June 30. Ideanomics headquartered in New York with offices in Beijing and Qingdao, continued to respond forcefully to an analyst note issued last week from J Capital Research and Hindenburg Research.
1933 Industries Inc ( CSE:TGIF ) ( OTCQX:TGIFF ) said all amendments it put forward were approved by holders of 10% Senior Unsecured Convertible Debentures due September 14, 2021 at a meeting held Monday. Debentureholders voted overwhelmingly in favour of the amendments, with support ranging from 84.3% to 99.9% of votes received. As a result, the following debenture amendments will be made to the indenture governing the convertible debentures: the conversion price applicable to the debentures is amended from $0.45 per share to $0.10 per share; the price at which the company may require a forced conversion of the debentures is amended from $0.70 per share to $0.15 per share, with any such conversion to be made at the amended conversion price of $0.10 per share; and pay interest due on the debentures in cash or through the issuance of its common shares, at a price of $0.10 per share.
Lexaria Bioscience Corp ( CSE:LXX ) ( OTCMKTS:LXRP ) has retained IRTH Communications LLC to provide investor relations and communications services to the firm. “Lexaria looks forward to enhancing its general investor relations services and fulfillment of corporate materials to investors by increasing its interaction with investment professionals, including research analysts, stockbrokers, advisors, institutional funds and family offices,” the Kelowna-based company said in a statement Monday. IRTH will receive US$7,500 per month over the course of a 12-month contract and 347,222 restricted shares priced at US$0.288 each, with additional fees possible for added services.
Internet of Things Inc ( CVE:ITT ) (OTCMKTS:INOTF) said it take advantage of the extension period provided by the Canadian Securities Administrators for its annual filings. The Company continues to work diligently and expeditiously with its auditors to file the annual filings on or before July 15, 2020. In addition, the company intends to file the interim filings on or before August 13, 2020.  Members of the company's management and other insiders are currently subject to a trading black-out policy. Internet of Things confirmed that no material business developments have taken place since it last filed its financial statements for the period ended October 31, 2019.
American Battery Metals Corporation (OCTQB:ABML) said Monday it closed an oversubscribed $2,625,000 common stock financing round. The Nevada-based company had initially targeted $2 million in fundraising, as Chief Technology Officer Ryan Melsert participated with an investment of $150,000. American Battery Metals is developing a lithium-ion battery recycling plant, and is prepared to play a significant role in the near and long term development of domestic supply chains for lithium, cobalt, nickel, and other key battery metals. The battery recycling plant is expected to commence commercial operations in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Bioasis Technologies Inc ( CVE:BTI ) ( OTCQB:BIOAF ) and Chiesi Global Rare Diseases have entered into a licensing agreement for Bioasis’ xB3 BBB platform technology to treat rare diseases with a focus on four undisclosed lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs). Under the terms of the agreement, international research-focused healthcare firm Chiesi Group, the parent of Chiesi Global Rare Diseases, will pay Bioasis an upfront payment of US$3 million. Bioasis, based in Guilford, Connecticut, may also be eligible to receive additional development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments of up to US$138 million, as well as additional royalties on net sales of licensed products. Chiesi Group will be responsible for all costs associated with research, development and commercialization of the four undisclosed LSD programs. LSDs are inherited disorders resulting from a lack of specific enzymes that break down certain lipids (fats) or carbohydrates (sugars) in the body cells.
NexTech AR Solutions Corp ( OTCQB:NEXCF ) ( CSE:NTAR ) said Monday it will supply it’s InfernoAR video conferencing and virtual events platform to the Dallas Independent School District. In a statement, CEO Evan Gappelberg said the contract win illustrates how businesses and governments are looking for platforms that stop breaches and protect privacy. "Bringing token authentication to the edge greatly enhances security and performance, which is huge for winning more contracts from our growing customer base," Gappelberg explained. “We are currently experiencing a surge in demand for our services across our multiple business segments including ARecommerce, our ARitize app, and our InfernoAR-video conferencing and virtual events platform.
EnWave Corporation ( CVE:ENW ) (OTCPINK:NWVCF) revealed that global snack manufacturer Calbee Inc is to commission a further two of the firm's 10kW Radiant Energy Vacuum (REV) dehydration machines in Japan. The group has signed an equipment purchase agreement with Calbee, which was founded in 1949 and holds more than half of the market share in the Japanese snack market. "Calbee entered into a royalty-bearing commercial license agreement with EnWave approximately one year ago, and the purchase of the two additional REV machines demonstrates the commercial value of using EnWave’s proprietary technology for producing premium snack products," EnWave said.
GlobeX Data Ltd ( CSE:SWIS ) ( OTCQB:SWISF ) has acquired the domain name Sekur.com for its Sekur communications suite, it said Monday. Toronto- and New York-based GlobeX said it had been trying to acquire the .com domain for six months. GlobeX said it purchased the domain for US$13,000 including broker fees, a negotiated amount from the original US$18,000 asking price. The firm already owns the domain Sekur.ch.
Acasti Pharma Inc ( NASDAQ:ACST ) ( CVE:ACST ) said it is looking forward to seeing the results from its TRILOGY 2 trial on its flagship drug candidate CaPre as it outlined the findings of a 'rigorous' review of data from its TRILOGY 1 trial, which as previously reported did not reach statistical significance due to the unusually large placebo effect. Despite positive results in the CaPre group, the TRILOGY 1 trial failed to reach statistical significance due to an unusually large placebo response of 27.5% and 28 % median reductions in the triglyceride levels at 12 and 26 weeks respectively.
CytoDyn Inc ( OTCQB:CYDY ) announced Monday it is partnering with Mexican health authorities to conduct a clinical trial of leronlimab for severe and critically ill coronavirus (COVID-19) patients, with the potential to collaborate on additional coronavirus trials. In a statement, the company said it has entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the National Institutes of Health and High Specialty Hospitals of Mexico (NIH), which coordinates the main medical care and public research institutions. Under the MOU, CytoDyn said it will supply leronlimab at its own expense to the NIH and that both parties are proceeding expeditiously to complete the mutually-agreed protocol for the clinical trial.
CanaFarma Hemp Products Corp ( CSE:CNFA ) has said it is launching three more of its YOOFORIC branded hemp oil-infused chewing gums in August this year, bringing the total number of its gum products to six. The move comes after news last Monday June 22, that the group is launching two new lines in July this year - YOOFORIC RISE and  YOOFORIC PILLOW TALK. The new gums set for August are YOOFORIC GO, YOOFORIC PRO and YOOFORIC AFTER PARTY. The first two are designed for athletes and golfers respectively.
XPhyto Therapeutics Corp. ( CSE:XPHY ) (FSE:4XT) (OTCPINK:XPHYF) said its diagnostic partner, 3a-Diagnostics GmbH, has confirmed active functionality of the peptide biosensors that were incorporated into XPhyto's oral dissolvable thin film (ODF) platform. 3a has developed peptide-based biosensor screening tests for bacterial and viral infectious diseases, including influenza A, scarlet fever, stomatitis, periimplantitis, and periodontitis. Additional pandemic-focused biosensors are in planning and development, specifically for coronavirus (COVID-19), H1N1 (swine flu), and H5N1 (avian flu). Positive detection of the respective pathogen results in enzymatic release of an extreme, but safe, bitter compound.
NetCents Technology Inc ( CSE:NC ) (OTCQB:NTTCF), a cryptocurrency payments technologies company, has revealed that it will add the United States to its NetCents cryptocurrency credit card program. In a statement Friday, the Vancouver-based company said that it will capitalize on the marked interest shown by US-based cryptocurrency holders in the technology development done for the Canadian cryptocurrency credit card program to launch the program in the US. By including the US to the card program prior to launch, NetCents said it is able to streamline the “technical development, management, and rollout of the program” while increasing the “potential card program userbase tenfold.”
Ximen Mining Corp ( CVE:XIM ) (OTCMKTS:XXMMF) said exploration has started at its historic Amelia gold project near Mt. Baldy in British Columbia in a bid to generate new targets for trenching and drilling. The results of this prospecting and mapping will be used to apply for permitting for drilling later this season, the firm told investors in a statement on Monday. Mining at the Amelia gold property goes back to the late 1800s and the area, originally known as Camp McKinney, is host to 15 known polymetallic and precious metal mineral occurrences. The historic Cariboo-Amelia mine recovered 81,602 ounces of gold, 32,439 ounces of silver, 113,302 pounds of lead and 198,140 pounds of zinc.
Avalon GloboCare Corp . ( NASDAQ:AVCO ), a clinical-stage global developer of cell-based technologies and therapeutics, announced that it has successfully completed Phase I first-in-human clinical study of its leading Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy candidate, AVA-001. The group said that nine out of ten patients with relapsed/refractory B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) achieved complete remission (CR) - a rate of 90% - within one month after the initiation of AVA-001 CAR T-cell therapy treatment. It noted that treatment with AVA-001 was generally well tolerated with minimal toxicities and adverse side effects.
PUDO Inc ( CSE:PDO ) ( OTCQB:PDPTF ) saw an increase of 46% in first quarter revenue as the logistics company increased its service offering across North America. The “pick up, drop off” parcel company reported revenue of nearly C$314,000 during the three months ended May 31, 2020 compared to the C$215,000 it reported during the same quarter a year ago. Toronto-based PUDO said the revenue boost was due to new partner volumes and the successful sale of additional services to other partners.
Mind Medicine (MindMed) Inc (NEO:MMED) ( OTCQB:MMEDF ) has said it is “rapidly advancing” its drug development pipeline and research activities since being publicly listed on March 3 this year. MindMed Co-Founder and Co-CEO JR Rahn said: "Our progress in the past few months clearly demonstrates the quality of our team and the pace at which we operate as a company.” They added: “We are honored to pioneer the fast growing psychedelic inspired medicines industry alongside peers including COMPASS Pathways, ATAI Life Sciences and non-profits MAPs, USONA and the Heffter Institute. There is a very clear distinction of the caliber of organizations advancing clinical trials to develop disruptive medicines for mental health and addiction and we look forward to continually raising the bar for the entire space and patients."
PreveCeutical Medical Inc. ( CSE:PREV ) ( OTCQB:PRVCF ) (FSE:18H) said it has successfully designed, screened and shortlisted a panel of smart-siRNA constructs with potent gene silencing activity (in vitro) in its Dual Gene Therapy Research Program. The group noted that this further update to its Dual Gene Therapy Program is an important and fundamental aspect which involves deriving Smart-siRNA constructs, effective in downregulating the company's target gene of interest, in type 2 diabetes and obesity. The panel of Smart-siRNA constructs incorporate a proprietary chemistry, adding to their novelty. In the next phase, this construct's biostability will be essential for assessment in preclinical (mice) models of type 2 diabetes and obesity.
Loop Insights Inc ( CVE:MTRX ) (OCTMKTS:VRZPF) said it is set to launch its latest product “Loop Cloud,” an application programming interface cloud software product. In addition to delivering all the traditional benefits of Loop’s Fobi hardware device, the Vancouver-based technology company said Loop Cloud offers remote onboarding and monitoring capabilities as well as scheduled maintenance and service. “Brick and mortar retailers struggle to make sense of their data and Loop solves this problem” said Loop chief strategy officer David Salisbury in a statement. “Not only that, we provide an automated tool that creates actionable strategies for curating a better shopper experience and increasing operational efficiencies.”
Cardiol Therapeutics Inc ( TSE:CRDL ) ( OTCQX:CRTPF ) has appointed financial markets expert Steven Grasso as Business Advisor to the pharmaceutical CBD company. Grasso is a familiar face to CNBC viewers as a market analyst and a regular contributor to the highly-rated “Fast Money” program, which has daily viewership of over 250,000 people. Throughout his 27-year career, Grasso has worked closely with some of the largest hedge funds, insurance companies and mutual fund providers in his role as director of institutional sales for Stuart Frankel & Co. Grasso will help Cardiol to raise its profile amongst the US investment community, according to the Oakville, Ontario-based firm.
Harvest One Cannabis Inc ( CVE:HVT ) ( OTCQX:HRVOF ) unveiled management changes on Monday, including the appointment of a new interim chief financial officer with effect from the beginning of July. Marc Tran has been appointed as interim finance chief, subject to regulatory approval. Tran has over 20 years of public company financial leadership experience.  Aaron Wong is to resign as the group's chief financial officer (CFO) effective June 30 this year, to pursue other interests. In addition, Andrew Kain will transition from his roles as chief operating officer and general counsel with effect from the end of June, the firm said. However, he will remain with Harvest One in a contractual capacity, advising Bayfield and the special committee of the board in the completion of its ongoing strategic review, the firm added.
Auryn Resources Inc ( TSE:AUG ) (NYSEAMERICAN:AUG) has tapped Elizabeth Senez as the company’s interim chief financial officer for a 14-month period starting in July. The junior explorer said Senez is taking on the role while Auryn's chief financial officer Stacy Rowa goes on maternity leave around August 1. Senex has over 15 years of experience in accounting, finance and corporate treasury in Canada, Panama and the UK.
Great Panther Mining Ltd (TSE:GPR) (NYSEAMERICAN:GPL) has struck a deal with Nyrstar on amending certain agreements connected to the Coricancha mine in Peru, which the company says will improve its ability to advance the project. Great Panther bought the project from Nyrstar in 2017 and the deal included that Nyrstar would have to fund a portion of the bond to secure remediation costs at Coricancha. Under the new terms, Great Panther can now use 'commercially reasonable efforts' to seek an amendment to a closure plan for certain legacy tailings facilities which Nyrstar is obligated to fund. The objective of the amendment is to seek a technically superior closure plan for approval by the Peruvian authorities with potentially lower costs.
Pure Gold Mining Inc ( CVE:PGM ) said the TSX Venture Exchange has accepted for filing documentation with respect to its non-brokered private placement, announced on May 20, 2020, which will see the issue of 9,868,421 flow-through shares at a purchase price of $1.52 each with 37 placees.
Candelaria Mining Corp ( CVE:CAND ) said the TSX Venture Exchange has accepted for filing its proposal to issue 18 million bonus warrants in consideration of a secured term loan facility dated June 24, 2020, between Candelaria and Accendo Banco SA, whereby Accendo has agreed to lend $9 million to the company. The loan has a five-year term and bears interest at 13% per annum The company has access to US$1.5 million upon signing, with the remainder available upon completion of final loan documents. Each warrant is exercisable into one common share at 11 cents for five years from closing.
GR Silver Mining Ltd. ( CVE:GRSL ) (OTCQB:GRSLF) said that following its press release of May 29, 2020, the company is continuing to work diligently and currently still expects to make its Q1 Filings on or prior to July 15, 2020. It confirmed that there have been no material business developments, other than those announced through news releases, since April 24, 2020, when the company filed its December 31, 2019 year-end audited financial results.
One World Lithium Inc. (OTCMKTS:OWRDF) (CSE:OWLI) (CNSX:OWLI.CN), which on June 15, 2020, announced that it made an application to the British Columbia Securities Commission to approve a temporary management cease trade order on the basis that it would be unable to file its annual consolidated financial statements, accompanying management's discussion and analysis and related CEO and CFO certifications, for the year ended December 31, 2019, within the extended deadline for filing, has said it anticipates that the annual filings will be made on or before July 15, 2020.
Genprex, Inc. ( NASDAQ:GNPX ), a clinical-stage gene therapy company developing potentially life-changing technologies for patients with cancer and diabetes, has confirmed that it was added to the Russell 3000 Index after the market closed on Friday, June 26, 2020, as part of the 2020 Russell US Indexes reconstitution. "Genprex is excited to be a member of the Russell 3000 Index, and we look forward to sharing our story and unique approaches for the treatment of lung cancer and diabetes with a wider group of investors,” said Rodney Varner, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Genprex. “We believe the Company’s future is bright as we work to secure better outcomes for patients suffering from these serious medical conditions." The Russell 3000 Index includes the 3,000 publicly traded companies on the Nasdaq and NYSE exchanges with the largest market capitalizations.
Dyadic International, Inc. ( NASDAQ:DYAI ), a global biotechnology company focused on further improving and applying its proprietary C1 gene expression platform to accelerate development, lower production costs and improve the performance of biologic vaccines and drugs at flexible commercial scales, confirmed that the company will be added to the small-cap Russell 2000 Index and the broad-market Russell 3000 Index effective after the US market opens on June 29, as a result of the annual Russell index reconstitution. "We are very pleased to join the Russell 2000 Index and Russell 3000 Index representing another significant company achievement. Our inclusion further highlights the ongoing growth in our business portfolio and the expansion of our visibility in the investment community as we continue to successfully demonstrate the broad application potential of our robust C1 technology platform," said Mark Emalfarb, Dyadic's chief executive officer. The Russell 3000 Index measures the performance of the largest 3,000 US companies representing approximately 98% of the investable US equity market.
Milestone Scientific Inc . (NYSEAMERICAN:MLSS), a leading developer of computerized drug delivery instruments that provide painless and precise injections, announced that it has been added to the Russell 3000 and Russell Microcap Indexes, following the annual Russell indexes reconstitution, effective after the market open on June 29, according to a final list of additions posted on June 26. Leonard Osser, CEO of Milestone Scientific said: "We're pleased to be included in the Russell 3000 and Russell Microcap Indexes. These additions reflect our continued progress as we move forward with the launch of our medical instruments based on our proprietary Dynamic Pressure Sensing technology. We believe our inclusion in the Russell Indexes will help improve awareness, liquidity and exposure within the global community of institutional investors."
AIM ImmunoTech (NYSEAMERICAN:AIM), announced that it has been added to the Russell Microcap Index, following the annual Russell indexes reconstitution, effective after the market open on June 29, according to a final list of additions posted on June 26. Tom Equels, CEO of AIM ImmunoTech, commented "This addition to the Russell Microcap® Index reflects our progress as we continue to advance both our COVID-19 and oncology programs. Inclusion in the Russell Microcap® Index should also help increase our exposure within the global investment community as we continue to execute on important milestones." Russell indexes are widely used by investment managers and institutional investors for index funds and as benchmarks for active investment strategies.
Orgenesis Inc. ( NASDAQ:ORGS ), a pioneering, global biotech company committed to accelerating commercialization and transforming the delivery of cell and gene therapies (CGTs), announced that it has been added to the Russell 3000 Index, following the annual Russell indexes reconstitution, effective after the market open on June 29, according to a final list of additions posted on June 26. Vered Caplan, CEO of Orgenesis , commented, “We’re pleased to be included in the Russell 3000 Index. We believe this inclusion will help improve the Company’s exposure within the global investment community. The addition to the Russell 3000 Index reflects our commitment to building shareholder value through growth of our global CGT Biotech Platform and building our pipeline of POCare Therapeutics and Technologies, with an ultimate goal of providing life-changing treatments at reduced costs within the point-of-care setting.”
