Phillip Streible Friday May 15, 2020 16:07
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Continuing to navigate through the uncharted waters in the  investing world and focusing primarily on exploiting various trigger points  that could lead to the next wave higher in gold, I want to bring to your  attention a rare development that occurred last week.  While the U.S. has  been attempting to combat the economic shock from the virus through different  monetary policy measures, they are experimenting with a dangerous strategy only  seen before in Europe and Japan involving negative interest rates. Looking at  an intraday price action chart in the June Gold Futures from May 7th  one can see an  explosive move higher when this phenomenon occurred.
At  this moment the 2 Year T-Note triggered another breakout in a more “organized”  trading session rather than what we saw back on March 16th. The 2  Year Yield also punched through the record low yield close hit in September of  2011, when it reached 0.157%. Simultaneously, Fed Funds futures which are used  to bet on Central Bank Policy signaled that the Fed could cut rates below ZERO.
From a  trading perspective we have been using multiple strategies to try and take  advantage of the expected long-term price appreciation in the precious metals  markets and other financial markets.  If you are unfamiliar with  strategies involving futures or options, we here at Blue Line Futures are here  to help. You can register for more information on our trade alerts program here GET TRADE ALERTS!
By now you have to ask yourself,  why would a country want negative interest rates?
Simply put, negative interest rates mean  that the depositor pays money, to save their money which is a reversal of  normal rules. Just like you and I keep a savings account at local banks, those  Banks hold their excess unused cash at central banks like the Federal Reserve,  ECB  or the BOJ. Under normal circumstances those banks receive a small  rate of interest in return. However, with negative rates the central banks  charge a fee and under that thought process banks will be discouraged from  saving and begin to lend more, spurring economic growth throughout the system.  The only problem is that no economic growth is happening due to the shutdown  meaning negative rates could be here to stay. This will in turn trigger  the next wave of safe asset buying like we saw last Thursday due to temporary  “cracks” in the system. Like a dam, once too many cracks keep forming,  eventually the levee breaks and there is no stopping what happens next.
From a trading perspective have been using multiple  strategies to try and take advantage of the expected long-term price  appreciation in the precious metals markets.  If you are unfamiliar with  strategies involving futures or options, we at Blue Line Futures are here to  help.
Remember there are many factors that  could affect the direction of the metals markets so be sure to stay up to date  on the developments by registering for a Free two-week trial of the Blue Line  Futures Morning Express Research Reports by clicking on the link here: The Blue Line Express  Two-Week Free Trial Sign up
