NYSE Gold Stock DRD Quadruples In Price In 4 Months: Mines Reopen As South African Covid-19 Cases Drop
Macro view of a shiny golden bar. Fine gold ingot close up. Financial success, business investment ... [+] and wealth concept. 3D illustration
A New York Stock Exchange-traded gold mining stock just hit a new 52-week high and, so far, leads other precious metals stocks — easily — this year. DRD is re-opening operations in their South African mines at reduced levels as that nation’s Covid-19 cases “drop considerably,” according to a company press release .
The news caused DRD stock to blast upward to the higher highs for the year while other gold and silver stocks tended to continue in sideways to down patterns. The company says the re-opening will be done “in a way that ensures the health and safety of the staff.”
Typically, the gold and silver mining stocks tend to move together in the same direction as a group. It’s unusual for one of the miners to break suddenly higher like this while leaving the others mostly behind. When one hits higher highs, the others are likely to be hitting them as well. Not so this time.
DRD’s daily price chart looks like this:
From the mid-March low of 3 up to the current price of 12, a quadruple in 4 months, not bad and something you don’t see too often among New York Stock Exchange equities. Note how the buying volume has picked up dramatically compared to the December/January period.
DRD’s weekly price chart looks like this:
The May, 2019 low is 1.50. DRD had already begun to move quite well through the rest of that year up until the Covid-19 panic of February and March. From the low of that period, the move to new highs has been spectacular. Note how the Ichimoku cloud bottomed in late 2019 and has continued skyward steadily. You can see the pick-up in volume, too, along the bottom of the price chart.
DRD’s monthly chart looks like this:
This week’s higher high up there at 12.82 takes out the 2008 Great Recession peak of 11. What’s most significant is that this action puts DRD ahead of the other NYSE mining stocks. To a price chart analyst such a break-out above a years old high might be considered quite bullish.
For example, take a look at Newmont’s daily price chart:
This is the heavily traded mining company that large institutions typically go to first when considering adding gold stock positions. You can see that Newmont peaked in early May and has had trouble continuing to rally as it moved into June. Note how different this is from the daily DRD price chart.
This is not a buy recommendation — just noting that the first of the precious metals stocks to break to higher highs is this South African company where Covid-19 rates are reported to have dropped substantially. When or if the other miners catch up remains to be seen.
I do not hold positions in these investments. No recommendations are made one way or the other.  If you're an investor, you'd want to look much deeper into each of these situations. You can lose money trading or investing in stocks and other instruments. Always do your own independent research, due diligence and seek professional advice from a licensed investment advisor.
