HONG KONG, June 29, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- OP Investment Management ("OPIM"), Asia's leading fund platform, is pleased to announce its partnership with MPM Capital Management ("MPM Capital") to launch Marshall Precious Metals Fund SP (the "Fund"), a segregated portfolio established under Sunrise SPC, a Cayman-domiciled fund offered to professional investors only.
The Fund seeks to achieve medium and long-term capital appreciation by opportunistically investing in listed and unlisted gold and other precious metal mining companies globally. The Fund's strategies include early deployment for seed funding of land packages, early to late-stage exploration projects, mine re-start projects and mine development/construction opportunities.
MPM Capital was established in May 2020 through a partnership between cornerstone investor Zhaojin Mining (1818.HKSE), one of China's leading gold producers, and other Founding Partners led by Mr. David Garofalo. As the CEO and Chairman of MPM Capital, David Garofalo has accumulated extensive management experience. He was the President and CEO of Goldcorp from 2016 to 2019, before its $30 billion merger with Newmont, creating the world's largest gold company.
"With the current unprecedented economic and monetary backdrop, gold and other precious metals equities are extremely well-positioned to outperform other asset classes in the short to medium term. Our team at MPM Capital brings together a truly unique combination of global precious metals industry networks, technical/geological expertise and deal-making capabilities to help our clients get access to high-quality global precious metals opportunities otherwise unavailable to generalist investors. We believe our specialist niche strategy is well-positioned to help our clients achieve their investment objectives through both absolute return and portfolio diversification," Mr. Garofalo remarked.
Alvin Fan, Chief Executive Officer of OPIM added, "Combining both technical and market expertise into an actively managed product, Marshall highlights OPIM's commitment to institutional grade alternatives with unique access. We couldn't be more thrilled to work with the MPM Capital team on this very special release."
About OP Investment Management Ltd.
OPIM is a leading Hong Kong based asset management company established and licensed since 2004 with Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission (the "SFC") to carry out Type 4 (advising on securities) and 9 (asset management) regulated activities under the provisions of the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap.571) (the "HK SFO"). The company is also a member of the Oriental Patron Financial Group and associate of OP Financial Investments Ltd. (Hong Kong publicly listed 1140.HK). OPIM partners with emerging managers to develop innovative strategies for institutional and professional investors. OPIM's institutional fund platform attracts both managers and investors from around the world working with the industry's best business partners in alternative asset management.
Founded in 1993, Oriental Patron Financial Group is an independent financial services group based and fully licensed in Hong with the Hong Kong Securities and futures Commission (the "SFC"). Oriental Patron provides a diverse range of financial securities from Advisory to Investing, Financing to Securities and Research.
This document is issued by OP Investment Management Limited ("OPIM"). This document, and the website of OPIM ( www.opim.com.hk ) has not been reviewed by the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong. This document is solely for information purposes and is not intended as an offer, a solicitation of offer or a recommendation, to deal in shares of securities or any financial instruments. Past performance and the predictions, projections, or forecasts on the economy, securities markets or the economic trends of the markets are not necessarily indicative of the future or likely performance of OPIM, any funds managed by OPIM, or any future funds to be launched under the Sunrise SPC Platform. Information herein is believed to be reliable at time of publication but OPIM does not warrant its completeness or accuracy and is not responsible for error of facts or opinion nor shall be liable for damages arising out of any person's reliance upon this information. Any opinion or estimate contained in this document may subject to change without notice. This document may not be published, circulated, reproduced or distributed without the prior written consent of OPIM.
