TORONTO, March  20, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Plateau Energy Metals Inc. (“Plateau” or the "Company") (TSX-V:PLU | OTCQB:PLUUF) announces that it has filed an independent National Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure for Minerals Projects (“NI 43-101”) technical report (the “Report”) for the preliminary economic assessment (“PEA”) on the Company’s Falchani Lithium Project in Peru, announced on February 4, 2020 (the “News Release”). The PEA demonstrates the Falchani Project’s ability to become a large, long life producer of low cost, low impurity, battery quality lithium carbonate.
The Report effective February 4, 2020, was prepared by DRA Global, as principal consultant, and is titled “Falchani Lithium Project NI 43-101 Technical Report – Preliminary Economic Assessment” and will be available at the Company’s website www.plateauenergymetals.com or under the Company’s profile on SEDAR www.sedar.com . There are no material differences in the NI 43-101 Report from the information disclosed in the News Release.
A recap of the PEA Highlights as disclosed in the February 4, 2020 News Release:
Battery grade, low impurity lithium chemical allows complete onsite production, maximizing the Company’s share of the value chain
Future development work to evaluate opportunities such as:
The PEA identifies several opportunities which may greatly enhance the economics and include:
Revenue opportunities: further evaluation of additional revenue streams, not included in the PEA, such as SOP fertilizer (K2SO4), caesium sulfate (Cs2SO4) and rubidium sulfate (Rb2SO4). Preliminary metallurgical test work is currently underway.
Capital optimization: alternative acid plant and processing plant/equipment sourcing, including evaluating options for “over the fence” acid and power purchase from a third-party operator.
Operating cost optimization: long-term contracts for major consumables, reduction in processing consumables and/or costs through process model optimization.
Readers are cautioned that the PEA is preliminary in nature and includes inferred mineral resources that are considered too speculative geologically to have the economic considerations applied to them that would enable them to be categorized as mineral reserves. There is no certainty the results of the PEA will be realized. Mineral resources are not mineral reserves and do not have demonstrated economic viability. Additional work is required to upgrade the mineral resources to mineral reserves. In addition, the mineral resource estimates could be materially affected by environmental, geotechnical, permitting, legal, title, taxation, socio-political, marketing or other relevant factors.
The Falchani Project PEA presents a “Base Case” scenario inclusive of both the Falchani and Ocacasa 4 concessions and an “Alternative Case” scenario which represents only the Falchani concession to demonstrate the economic value as if the Falchani concession were a standalone or phase 1 project in light of the current administrative and judicial processes regarding the validity of the Ocacasa 4 concession. Please refer to the Cautionary Note Regarding Concessions at the end of this news release.
On March 16, 2020, the government of Peru declared a national state of emergency requiring a 15-day period of national mandatory social isolation. Work to advance the Falchani Lithium Project is ongoing during this time, with the results of our initial by-product metallurgical program expected in the near-term, however non-essential activities at site have been adjusted in adherence with measures being implemented in Peru, respecting all government efforts to safeguard the health of their citizens.
Additionally, following the advice of health authorities, we temporarily ceased all travel and have transitioned to working remotely in an effort to ensure that we’re doing our small part to help slow the spread of the virus.
The outbreak of Covid-19 has had a negative impact on global macro-economic conditions generally. The situation is rapidly evolving, and the ultimate duration of these restrictions and market impacts are uncertain. At this time Plateau is not in a position to determine the impact to the advancement of our projects in Peru for 2020. In coordination with our team on the ground and following the advice from government and regulatory health agencies, we will continue to monitor and adapt to the situation as it unfolds, and the Company will continue to regularly assess the impact to the business, if any. Right now, we are grateful that none of our team currently have any reported symptoms of Covid-19. The health and wellbeing of all members of our team, host communities and stakeholders remain of paramount importance during this time.
Plateau Energy Metals Inc ., a Canadian exploration and development company, is enabling the new energy paradigm through exploring and developing its Falchani Lithium Project and its Macusani Uranium Project in southeastern Peru. The Company has significant and growing lithium resources and all published uranium resources known in Peru, all of which are situated near infrastructure.
Mr. Ted O’Connor, P.Geo., a Director of Plateau, and a Qualified Person as defined by NI 43-101, has reviewed and approved the scientific and technical information contained in this news release.
John Joseph Riordan, BSc, CEng, FAuslMM, MIChemE, RPEQ, of DRA Pacific (Pty) Ltd., the primary author of the Report titled “Falchani Lithium Project NI 43-101 Technical Report – Preliminary Economic Assessment”, and is an Independent Qualified Person as defined by NI 43-101 Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects.
