NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION TO U.S. NEWSWIRE SERVICES OR FOR DISSEMINATION IN THE UNITED STATES.
TORONTO, April  08, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Plateau Energy Metals Inc. (“Plateau” or the “Company”) (TSX-V: PLU | OTCQB: PLUUF) announces a non-brokered private placement (the “Offering”) of up to C$1,400,300. The Offering is being led by current cornerstone shareholders of the Company.
The Offering is also available to existing shareholders of the Company, subject to certain limitations discussed below, to ensure all shareholders may have the opportunity to participate.
“The continuing support of our major shareholders during these unprecedented times demonstrates their strong backing and belief in our projects and the work the Company is doing to add long-term value at Falchani and Macusani,” stated Alex Holmes, CEO. “The Company has introduced several cost saving measures, including corporate salary reductions, to extend essential operations and ensure that key obligations are met in 2020 in anticipation of the financial markets and Peru returning to more normalized conditions in the future.”
The Offering will be for up to 7,370,000 units (the “Units”) at a price of C$0.19 per Unit for gross proceeds of C$1,400,300. Each Unit will consist of one common share in the capital of the Company (a “Share”) and one common share purchase warrant (a “Warrant”) exercisable to acquire one Share at an exercise price of C$0.40 per Share for a period of four years from the date of issuance. If, at any time after the date that is four months and one day after the date of issuance of the Warrant, the closing price of the Company’s common shares on the TSX-V (or such other stock exchange on which the common shares may be traded from time to time) is at or above C$0.80 per share for a period of 20 consecutive trading days (the “Triggering Event”), in which event the Company may, within 10 days of the Triggering Event, accelerate the expiry date of the Warrants by giving notice via press release to the holders of the Warrants. The Warrants will expire on the first day that is 30 business days after the date on which notice has been provided by the Company announcing the Triggering Event.
The Offering is not subject to a minimum subscription amount and the securities issued under the Offering will be subject to a statutory hold period of four months and one day.
In accordance with the requirements of the Existing Shareholder Exemption (as defined below), the proposed use of the proceeds from the Offering will be used for general corporate purposes and to maintain its properties as follows: annual concession payments ($400,000); Peru concession related activity ($440,000); and working capital including general corporate overhead ($560,000). Although the Company intends to use the proceeds of the Offering as described above, the actual allocation of net proceeds may vary from the uses set forth above, depending on future operations or unforeseen events or opportunities.
The Offering is subject to certain conditions customary for transactions of this nature including, but not limited to, the receipt of all necessary approvals, including the approval of the TSX Venture Exchange (“TSX-V”).
The Company may pay a 6% finder's fee on certain subscriptions in units on the same terms as Units of the Offering.
Shareholders of record of the Company as at April 7, 2020 (the “Record Date”), who are not Accredited Investors, are eligible to participate in the Offering under the “Existing Shareholder Exemption”, available under Canadian securities laws. The Existing Shareholder Exemption limits a shareholder to a maximum investment of C$15,000 in a 12-month period from the date of closing of the Offering, unless the shareholder has obtained advice regarding the suitability of the investment and, if the shareholder is resident in a jurisdiction of Canada, that advice has been obtained from a person that is registered as an investment dealer in the jurisdiction. Any person who becomes a shareholder of the Company after the Record Date is not permitted to participate in the Offering using the Existing Shareholder Exemption, however other exemptions may still be available to them. Non-Accredited shareholders who became shareholders after the Record Date should consult their professional advisors when completing their subscription form to ensure that they use the correct exemption. The Company confirms there is no material fact or material change relating to the Company that has not been generally disclosed.
Subscriptions received from existing shareholders relying on this exemption will be treated on a first come first serve basis. In the event of an oversubscription to the Offering, the company may seek TSX-V approval for such oversubscription or may allocate Units on a pro-rata basis amongst all subscribers qualifying under all available exemptions.
Any investor or existing shareholders should contact the Company no later than April 15, 2020 at offering@plateauenergymetals.com if they have any questions or have an interest in participating in the Offering.
Certain insiders of the Company may acquire Units in the Offering. The subscription by insiders pursuant to the Offering is considered to be a related party transaction subject to Multilateral Instrument 61-101 (“MI 61-101”). The Company intends to rely on exemptions from the formal valuation and minority shareholder approval requirements provided under sections 5.5(a) and 5.7(a) of MI 61-101 on the basis that participation in the Offering by insiders will not exceed 25% of the fair market value of the Company's market capitalization.
Plateau Energy Metals Inc ., a Canadian exploration and development company, is enabling the new energy paradigm through exploring and developing its Falchani lithium project and Macusani uranium project in southeastern Peru, both of which are situated near significant infrastructure.
