Gold had a very good 2019 and started 2020 on good form rising to $1700/Oz before being entangled in the general sell off which was triggered by the coronavirus.
Silver faired a lot worse than gold which is sometimes the case having flirted with the $19.00/Oz level, it fell to below $12.00/Oz at one time.
The quality stocks were not spared, and they suffered a similar fate with millions being wiped off their value.
This is an aberration or a dip, and we need to take dips as serious buying opportunities, so a review of your watch list is due with the view of acquiring some of your favorite PM producers.
Global economies are in a state of turmoil, to put it mildly with billions of dollars being wiped off stock markets on an almost daily basis. Our focus is on the precious metals mining (PM) sector which has also been battered but a little too much in my very humble opinion. The underlying commodities are gold and silver, so we will start with a quick look at their performance to-date.
Gold had a very good 2019 and started 2020 on good form rising to $1,700/Oz before being entangled in the general sell off which was triggered by the coronavirus along with the price of oil collapsing. As the chart depicts, around $200/Oz was wiped off the value of gold in a matter of days. However, it now looks as though the sell off was overdone and gold has now turned and has made reasonable progress in the last few days.
Silver faired a lot worse than gold which is sometimes the case having flirted with the $19.00/Oz level, it fell to below $12.00/Oz at one time. This may be because it is also an industrial metal as well as a store of value as a precious metal, and therefore, it was assumed that its demand would evaporate in an economic downturn.
However, silver can whipsaw back up just as fast as it came down, so acquiring physical silver now could be a very good trade.
During the last 12 months, the producers as evidenced by the Gold Bugs Index (HUI) made steady progress until the sudden reversal of the S&P 500 triggered a selloff in the PM stocks. Gold and silver were also sold off hard, so it was a double whammy for the PM stocks, and they lost over 60% (250 down to 150) of their value during the carnage. The quality stocks were not spared, and they suffered a similar fate with millions being wiped off their value.
However, their earnings, on the whole, have been good, so some of these stocks now have a P/E of around 7 which is attractive when compared to the average P/E for the DOW which is, currently, around 21.
One of the reasons we like the PM stocks is because of the leverage they have to the movement of the metals. This, as clearly demonstrated above, works both ways, when the metals fall, the stocks fall twice as fast and it's pretty much the same when the metals rise.
The time to buy is when there is blood in the streets as the old adage goes and the PM stocks are bleeding right now.
A well thought out options strategy could pay off handsomely, but be aware that in times of great volatility, the premiums are much higher as the seller wants to reduce the risk of being on that side of the trade.
This is an aberration or a dip, and we need to take dips as serious buying opportunities, so a review of your watch list is due with the view to acquiring some of your favorite PM producers.
Got a comment, then please fire it in whether you agree with us or not, as the more diverse comments we get, the more balance we will have in this debate and hopefully, our trading decisions will be better informed and more profitable.
If you are not already a Follower and wish to see our posts on gold, silver, and the associated stocks, then please hit the follow button in order not to miss out as this is a fast-moving market.
Disclosure: I/we have no positions in any stocks mentioned, and no plans to initiate any positions within the next 72 hours. I wrote this article myself, and it expresses my own opinions. I am not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). I have no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.
Additional disclosure: Disclaimer: gold-prices.biz  makes no guarantee or warranty on the accuracy or completeness of the data provided. Nothing contained herein is intended or shall be deemed to be investment advice, implied or otherwise. This letter represents our views and replicates trades that we are making but nothing more than that. Always consult your registered adviser to assist you with your investments. We accept no liability for any loss arising from the use of the data contained in this letter. Options contain a high level of risk that may result in the loss of part or all invested capital and therefore are suitable for experienced and professional investors and traders only. Past performance is neither a guide nor a guarantee of future success.
