President Steven Goldman Just Bought 197% More Shares In Comstock Metals Ltd. (CVE:CSL)
Even if it's not a huge purchase, we think it was good to see that Steven Goldman, the President of Comstock Metals Ltd. ( CVE:CSL ) recently shelled out CA$60k to buy stock, at CA$0.075 per share. Even though that isn't a massive buy, it did increase their holding by 197%, which is a arguably a good sign.
Notably, that recent purchase by Steven Goldman is the biggest insider purchase of Comstock Metals shares that we've seen in the last year. Even though the purchase was made at a significantly lower price than the recent price (CA$0.13), we still think insider buying is a positive. Because it occurred at a lower valuation, it doesn't tell us much about whether insiders might find today's price attractive.
In the last twelve months insiders purchased 933.33k shares for CA$70k. But they sold 197600 shares for CA$30k. In total, Comstock Metals insiders bought more than they sold over the last year. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
There are always plenty of stocks that insiders are buying. So if that suits your style you could check each stock one by one or you could take a look at this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
Another way to test the alignment between the leaders of a company and other shareholders is to look at how many shares they own. I reckon it's a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. Our data indicates that Comstock Metals insiders own about CA$181k worth of shares (which is 6.3% of the company). Whilst better than nothing, we're not overly impressed by these holdings.
So What Do The Comstock Metals Insider Transactions Indicate?
The recent insider purchases are heartening. We also take confidence from the longer term picture of insider transactions. However, we note that the company didn't make a profit over the last twelve months, which makes us cautious. We would certainly prefer see higher levels of insider ownership but analysis of the insider transactions suggests that Comstock Metals insiders are expecting a bright future. So while it's helpful to know what insiders are doing in terms of buying or selling, it's also helpful to know the risks that a particular company is facing. To help with this, we've discovered 5 warning signs (3 can't be ignored!) that you ought to be aware of before buying any shares in Comstock Metals.
But note: Comstock Metals may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
