Bezant Resources PLC (LON:BZT) has reached an agreement to acquire 100% of Virgo Resources Ltd, picking up a big interest in the Hope Copper-Gold Project in Namibia. Virgo’s subsidiary Hepburn Resources owns majority stakes (70%-80%) in Namibian companies which in turn hold the licences that comprise the Hope project.
Jubilee Metals Group PLC (LON:JLP) said it has secured the rights to around 150mln tonnes of copper containing tailings to be refined at its Sable refinery in Zambia. The metals processing firm said the magnitude of the resource offered a “long term sustainable earnings profile” for its Zambian business, adding that the project holds the potential to produce copper concentrates in excess of the Sable refinery’s capacity of 14,000 tonnes per annum of copper cathode.
Regency Mines PLC (LON:RGM) has struck a deal to acquire a 50% interest in Weirs Drove Development Ltd (WDD), a developer of energy storage and solar projects in the UK.
Panther Metals PLC (LON:PALM) has completed an open-file desktop review of its wholly-owned Marrakai Gold Project in the Northern Territory, Australia. Panther said the geological review, completed while the tenement was out of bounds because of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic travel restrictions, highlights the potential for further gold mineralisation within the Marrakai project.
Panther also launched a high-resolution airborne electromagnetic (AEM) and magnetics geophysics survey on the Big Bear gold project in Ontario, Canada.
Emmerson PLC said it is shifting its focus to moving the Khemisset potash project towards what the company calls "shovel ready" status, following completion of the recent feasibility study. This new stage of work will include building operational capability, undertaking front end engineering and design, detailed design and sourcing financing.
Alien Metals Ltd (LON:UFO) is about to commence two consecutive underground sampling programs on its core silver projects in Mexico, San Celso and Los Campos. The company is also completing final legal due diligence to acquire the rights to a strategic adjacent permit east of the current San Celso project area.
Salt Lake Potash Ltd (ASX:SO4) (LON:SO4) (OTCMKTS:WHELF) chief executive officer Tony Swiericzuk and chairman Ian Middlemas have shown their confidence in the company's sulphate of potash (SOP) strategy through participation in a A$20 million placement.
Earlier, Salt Lake released a virtual site presentation which showcases progress on its process plant site, Lake Way Village, trench network and various construction works at the Lake Way Sulphate of Potash (SOP) Project in Western Australia’s northern Goldfields region.
Berkeley Energia Ltd (LON:BKY) said it is presently advancing permitting efforts for its uranium mine development project in western Spain and it has been putting increasing emphasis on its presence in Spain.
Danakali Limited's (ASX:DNK) (LSE:DNK) (OTCMKTS:SBMSF) maiden sustainability report has extolled the future virtues of Colluli Sulphate of Potash (SOP) Project to the East African nation of Eritrea.
European Metals Holdings Ltd (LON:EMH) (ASX:EMH) has been granted an updated preliminary mining permit for the eastern part of the Cinovec lithium deposit by the Czech Ministry of the Environment. The permit has been issued for a period of eight years.
Salt Lake Potash Ltd (ASX:SO4) has awarded EPC and EPCM contracts to GR Engineering Services Ltd (GRES) (ASX:GNG) for construction of the process plant and non-process infrastructure (NPI) at its Lake Way Project in the Goldfields region of Western Australia.
AfriTin Mining Ltd (LON:ATM) said mining operations at the Uis tin mine have now returned to full scale following the easing of coronavirus (COVID-19) lockdown measures in Namibia.
Ncondezi Energy Limited (LON:NCCL) said it has agreed additional work requirements and updated its development programme which has been submitted for approval to the state-owned Electricidade de Moçambique (EDM) for its coal-fired power project and coal mine in Tete, Mozambique.
Thor Mining PLC (LON:THR)(ASX:THR) has completed the field component of the due diligence for its acquisition of American Vanadium Pty Ltd, a company which holds interests in uranium and vanadium-focussed projects in Colorado and Utah.
Ariana Resources PLC (LON:AAU) has renewed its operating licence on the Ivrindi gold project, which is 100% held by the company and based outside of the Red Rabbit joint venture in Western Turkey.
Altona Energy Plc (LON:ANR) interim chief executive Christian Taylor-Wilkinson said the company is engaging with a consultancy which is acquiring mining rights for rare earths in southern Malawi, while also speaking with owners of other of alternative projects and examining various funding solutions.
Bezant Resources PLC (LON: BZT) has received an update from Mining and Minerals Industries Holding (MMIH) regarding its preparations in respect of the proposed listing of MMJV, the subsidiary that holds its 80% of the Mankayan copper-gold project in the Philippines, of which Bezant owns the other 20%.
Metal Tiger PLC (LON:MTR) noted that its 17.1% owned associate Southern Gold Limited has updated on its drill programme, which is confirms gold-containing mineralisation. Southern Gold said that three new holes were drilled at the Aphae project and all have intersected significant sulphide and/or silica flooded vein breccia and base metal sulphide veining. Detailed assay results are pending.
Contango Holdings PLC (LON:CGO) shares were on the up after restarting trading after completing the reverse takeover of a 70% interest in the Lubu coal project in Zimbabwe.
