(1) All the new analytical results reported in this release and in this table, are presented in core length and uncut. True width is estimated between 65 to 95 % of core length.
About the Cadillac Break East Option Property:
On November 28, 2016, Probe entered into an option agreement with Alexandria Minerals Corporation, now O3 Mining , whereby Probe may earn 60% interest in the Cadillac Break East Property by spending an aggregate of $5,000,000 on exploration expenditures over 4 years. Probe may earn an additional 10% (total of 70%) interest in the Property by completing a pre-feasibility study, incurring an additional $2,000,000 in exploration expenditure and issuing 200,000 common shares to O3 Mining on completion of the 70% earn-in requirement. To-date, Probe has completed exploration activities representing expenditures of over $4.3 million on the Property. Owing to the closure of non-essential business from March 24 to May 11 by the Quebec Government, the winter drill program was interrupted. O3 Mining and Probe agreed to extend the expenditure obligation under the option agreement to April 28, 2021. Following the identification of a new gold-mineralized zone, Probe will continue the drilling program on the new gold zone during the 2020-2021 winter season. Probe is the operator of exploration programs on the Property.
The Property is relatively underexplored, and it is generally recognized that the geological environment shows potential for both gold and base metals. The Property is underlain by mafic to felsic volcanic rocks and related sills of the Malartic Group, underlying the north half of the property, in contact with sedimentary rocks of the Pontiac Group, to the south. The contact between the two geologic terrains is the Cadillac Break Deformation Zone, a major geologic fault zone that controls the location of many gold deposits over a distance of 300 kilometers in Quebec and Ontario.
Located along the north edge of the property is the Sleepy gold deposit, which hosts a Current Resource of 1,855,300 tonnes @ 5.1 g/t gold, for a total of 307,350 ounces of gold, uncapped (see Alexandria Minerals Press Release, October 22, 2014). The gold resources occur as disseminated gold-pyrite mineralization hosted in the Vicour Sill, a differentiated, 7 kilometre long gabbro-diorite sill. Beyond the Sleepy area, exploration work since the 1920’s has consisted of primarily early stage exploration programs consisting of geophysical surveys and limited drilling. Geophysical programs include airborne geophysical surveys, principally magnetic, VLF and electromagnetic (EM) surveys, as well as local surface magnetic, EM, and Induced Polarization surveys. The property has also been the subject of overburden drilling campaigns, local soil geochemistry surveys and prospecting. Historically, bedrock drill campaigns have generally been small in number and size, ranging from single holes to six holes at any given time.
The technical content of this press release has been reviewed by Mr. Marco Gagnon, P.Geo, who is a "Qualified Person" within the meaning of NI 43-101, and Executive Vice-President and a director of Probe.
During the last drilling program, assay samples were taken from the NQ core by sawing the drill core in half, with one-half sent to a certified commercial laboratory and the other half retained for future reference. A strict QA/QC program was applied to all samples, which includes insertion of mineralized standards and blank samples for each batch of 20 samples. The gold analyses were completed by fire-assays with an atomic absorption finish on 50 grams of materials. Repeats were carried out by fire-assay followed by gravimetric testing on each sample containing 3.0 g/t gold or more. Total gold analyses (Metallic Sieve) were carried out on the samples which presented a great variation of their gold contents or the presence of visible gold.
Probe Metals Inc. is a leading Canadian gold exploration company focused on the acquisition, exploration and development of highly prospective gold properties. The Company is committed to discovering and developing high-quality gold projects, including its key asset the Val-d’Or East Gold Project, Quebec. The Company is well-funded and controls a strategic land package of approximately   1,000-square-kilometres of exploration ground within some of the most prolific gold belts in Quebec. The Company was formed as a result of the sale of Probe Mines Limited to Goldcorp Inc. in March 2015. Newmont Corporation currently owns approximately 12% of the Company.
On behalf of Probe Metals Inc.,
