Read This Before Selling New Pacific Metals Corp. (CVE:NUAG) Shares
Simply Wall St November 21, 2019
We’ve lost count of how many times insiders have accumulated shares in a company that goes on to improve markedly. On the other hand, we’d be remiss not to mention that insider sales have been known to precede tough periods for a business. So we’ll take a look at whether insiders have been buying or selling shares in New Pacific Metals Corp. ( CVE:NUAG ).
Most investors know that it is quite permissible for company leaders, such as directors of the board, to buy and sell stock in the company. However, such insiders must disclose their trading activities, and not trade on inside information.
We don’t think shareholders should simply follow insider transactions. But it is perfectly logical to keep tabs on what insiders are doing. As Peter Lynch said, ‘insiders might sell their shares for any number of reasons, but they buy them for only one: they think the price will rise.
In the last twelve months, the biggest single purchase by an insider was when Independent Director John McCluskey bought CA$236k worth of shares at a price of CA$2.30 per share. Even though the purchase was made at a significantly lower price than the recent price (CA$4.26), we still think insider buying is a positive. While it does suggest insiders consider the stock undervalued at lower prices, this transaction doesn’t tell us much about what they think of current prices.
Happily, we note that in the last year insiders paid CA$437k for 226250 shares. But insiders sold 136200 shares worth CA$272k. In total, New Pacific Metals insiders bought more than they sold over the last year. They paid about CA$1.93 on average. It is certainly positive to see that insiders have invested their own money in the company. However, we do note that they were buying at significantly lower prices than today’s share price. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
New Pacific Metals is not the only stock that insiders are buying. For those who like to find winning investments this free list of growing companies with recent insider purchasing, could be just the ticket.
We have seen a bit of insider selling at New Pacific Metals, over the last three months. Independent Director John McCluskey sold CA$91k worth of shares in that time. But CA$29k was spent on buying, too, . While it’s not great to see insider selling, the net amount sold isn’t enough for us to want to read anything into it.
Many investors like to check how much of a company is owned by insiders. Usually, the higher the insider ownership, the more likely it is that insiders will be incentivised to build the company for the long term. Insiders own 8.9% of New Pacific Metals shares, worth about CA$56m. This level of insider ownership is good but just short of being particularly stand-out. It certainly does suggest a reasonable degree of alignment.
So What Do The New Pacific Metals Insider Transactions Indicate?
Unfortunately, there has been more insider selling of New Pacific Metals stock, than buying, in the last three months. On the other hand, the insider transactions over the last year are encouraging. We like that insiders own a fair amount of the company. So we’re happy enough to look past some selling. If you are like me, you may want to think about whether this company will grow or shrink. Luckily, you can check this free report showing analyst forecasts for its future .
Of course New Pacific Metals may not be the best stock to buy. So you may wish to see this free collection of high quality companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
