Read This Before Buying Aqua Metals, Inc. (NASDAQ:AQMS) Shares
Simply Wall St April 26, 2020
We often see insiders buying up shares in companies that perform well over the long term. On the other hand, we’d be remiss not to mention that insider sales have been known to precede tough periods for a business. So we’ll take a look at whether insiders have been buying or selling shares in Aqua Metals, Inc. ( NASDAQ:AQMS ).
It’s quite normal to see company insiders, such as board members, trading in company stock, from time to time. However, such insiders must disclose their trading activities, and not trade on inside information.
Insider transactions are not the most important thing when it comes to long-term investing. But it is perfectly logical to keep tabs on what insiders are doing. For example, a Columbia University study found that ‘insiders are more likely to engage in open market purchases of their own company’s stock when the firm is about to reveal new agreements with customers and suppliers’.
The CEO, President & Director, Stephen Cotton, made the biggest insider sale in the last 12 months. That single transaction was for US$140k worth of shares at a price of US$0.71 each. We generally don’t like to see insider selling, but the lower the sale price, the more it concerns us. The good news is that this large sale was at well above current price of US$0.58. So it may not shed much light on insider confidence at current levels.
In the last twelve months insiders purchased 34.55k shares for US$57k. But they sold 321976 shares for US$225k. In total, Aqua Metals insiders sold more than they bought over the last year. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
If you are like me, then you will not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
Have Aqua Metals Insiders Traded Recently?
The last three months saw some Aqua Metals insider selling. CEO, President & Director Stephen Cotton sold just US$5.2k worth of shares in that time. Neither the lack of buying nor the presence of selling is heartening. But the selling simply isn’t sufficiently substantial to be of much use as a signal.
For a common shareholder, it is worth checking how many shares are held by company insiders. I reckon it’s a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. Our data suggests Aqua Metals insiders own 3.5% of the company, worth about US$1.2m. We prefer to see high levels of insider ownership.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Aqua Metals Insiders?
While there has not been any insider buying in the last three months, there has been selling. But given the selling was modest, we’re not worried. Recent sales exacerbate our caution arising from analysis of Aqua Metals insider transactions. And usually insiders own more stock in the company, according to our data. So while it’s helpful to know what insiders are doing in terms of buying or selling, it’s also helpful to know the risks that a particular company is facing. Our analysis shows 5 warning signs for Aqua Metals (2 don’t sit too well with us!) and we strongly recommend you look at them before investing.
But note: Aqua Metals may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
