Reminder to Shareholders of Clean Air Metals of Virtual AGM June 25, 2020
Toronto, Ontario--(Newsfile Corp. - June 10, 2020) -  Clean Air Metals Inc. (TSXV: AIR) (the "Company" or "Clean Air Metals") is pleased to remind its shareholders that a "hybrid" annual and special meeting (the "Meeting") of the shareholders of Clean Air Metals Inc. (formerly Regency Gold Corp.) (the "Company") will be held on Thursday, June 25, 2020, at the hour of 2:00 p.m. (Eastern time).
Due to constantly evolving circumstances surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company is conducting a hybrid shareholder meeting, which allows participation both online and in person. Attendance by virtual may take place online at https://web.lumiagm.com/256964569 , or in-person at the office of Irwin Lowy LLP, located at Suite 401, 217 Queen Street West, Toronto, Ontario M5V 0R2 with appropriate COVID-19 PPE protocols in place, for the following purposes:
To receive and consider the audited consolidated Financial Statements of the Company for the year ended January 31, 2020 and the report of the auditors thereon;
To elect the directors of the Company. Standing for re-election to the Board are MaryAnn Crichton, Dean Chambers, Jim Gallagher and Abraham Drost. Nominated to the Board is Ewan Downie.
To appoint the auditors of the Company and to authorize the directors to fix their remuneration;
To consider and, if deemed advisable, pass, with or without variation, a resolution to confirm the repeal of all existing by-laws of the Company and to enact a new By-law No. 1 of the Company;
To consider and, if deemed advisable, to pass, with or without variation, an ordinary resolution of shareholders approving and confirming the Stock Option Plan of the Company; and
To transact such other business as may properly come before the Meeting or any adjournments or postponements thereof.
A copy of the new By-law No. 1 referred to in Item 4 above is attached as Schedule B to the management information circular (the "Circular") of the Company dated May 27, 2020, posted to the Company's profile on SEDAR at www.sedar.com and mailed to all shareholders of record on May 29, 2020.
Registered Shareholders (as defined in the accompanying Circular) and duly appointed proxyholders can attend the Meeting in person at the office of Irwin Lowy LLP, located at Suite 401, 217 Queen Street West, Toronto, Ontario M5V 0R2, or online at https://web.lumiagm.com/256964569 where such Registered Shareholders and duly appointed proxyholders can participate, vote, or submit questions during the Meeting's live webcast.
Shareholders are encouraged to complete proxies where possible or appropriate before considering attending the Meeting in person. Registered Shareholders and duly appointed proxyholders can participate in the Meeting by clicking "I have a login" and entering a Username and Password before the start of the Meeting, as follows:
Duly appointed proxyholders - Computershare Trust Company of Canada will provide each duly appointed proxyholder with a Username after the voting deadline has passed. The password to the meeting is "cleanair2020".
Voting at the Meeting will only be available for Registered Shareholders and duly appointed proxyholders. Non-registered shareholders who have not appointed themselves may attend the meeting by clicking "I am a guest" and completing the online form. Please refer to the section titled "Participating in the Virtual Meeting" in the Circular for additional details regarding the virtual Meeting.
If any shareholder has not received their Circular package in the mail, please contact the Company's transfer agent and registrar, Computershare Trust Company of Canada at:
By Regular Mail - Computershare Investor Services Inc.
Abraham Drost, Chief Executive Officer of Clean Air Metals Inc.
Abraham Drost, Chief Executive Officer of Clean Air Metals Inc.
Neither TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in the policies of the TSX Venture Exchange) accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release.
The information contained herein contains "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of applicable securities legislation that relates to use of proceeds, tax treatment of the flow-through shares, closing of the offering and receipt of TSXV approval. Forward-looking statements relate to information that is based on assumptions of management, forecasts of future results, and estimates of amounts not yet determinable. Any statements that express predictions, expectations, beliefs, plans, projections, objectives, assumptions or future events or performance are not statements of historical fact and may be "forward-looking statements." Forward-looking statements are subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties which could cause actual events or results to differ from those reflected in the forward-looking statements, including, without limitation: risks related to the TSXV approval, risk related to the failure to obtain adequate financing on a timely basis and on acceptable terms; risks related to the outcome of legal proceedings; political and regulatory risks associated with mining and exploration; risks related to the maintenance of stock exchange listings; risks related to environmental regulation and liability; the potential for delays in exploration or development activities or the completion of feasibility studies; the uncertainty of profitability; risks and uncertainties relating to the interpretation of drill results, the geology, grade and continuity of mineral deposits; risks related to the inherent uncertainty of production and cost estimates and the potential for unexpected costs and expenses; results of prefeasibility and feasibility studies, and the possibility that future exploration, development or mining results will not be consistent with the Company's expectations; risks related to commodity price fluctuations; and other risks and uncertainties related to the Company's prospects, properties and business detailed elsewhere in the Company's disclosure record. Should one or more of these risks and uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those described in forward-looking statements. Investors are cautioned against attributing undue certainty to forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are made as of the date hereof and the Company does not assume any obligation to update or revise them to reflect new events or circumstances, except in accordance with applicable securities laws. Actual events or results could differ materially from the Company's expectations or projections.
To view the source version of this press release, please visit https://www.newsfilecorp.com/release/57560
