May not foot due to rounding.
Price information is shown after netting the cost of freight incurred to deliver the product to the customer.
CSS achieved operating income in the third quarter of $7 million, compared to $4 million in the second quarter. On a sequential basis, operating performance benefited from margin expansion as a result of lower costs for steel-making raw materials, coupled with slightly higher average net selling prices for finished steel products. Finished steel sales volumes in the quarter were only 4% lower sequentially, as the impact on construction demand in our West Coast markets from COVID-19 was limited. Higher utilization and benefits from productivity initiatives also contributed to the sequentially improved operating performance.
In the third quarter of fiscal 2020, consolidated financial performance included Corporate expense of $10 million and adjusted Corporate expense of $8 million, compared to $10 million and $9 million, respectively, in the second quarter of fiscal 2020. The Company’s effective tax rate for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 was a benefit of 28%.
The Company has substantially implemented ahead of schedule the productivity initiatives announced in October 2019 targeting realized benefits of $15 million in fiscal 2020 and annualized benefits of $20 million. Consolidated results in the third quarter reflected an estimated $6 million of benefits from these measures, with total benefits achieved through the first nine months of fiscal 2020 of approximately $12 million. In connection with ongoing productivity initiatives, the Company incurred restructuring charges and other exit-related costs of approximately $3 million in the quarter.
In the third quarter, the Company generated positive operating cash flow of $39 million. Total debt at the end of the quarter was $428 million and debt, net of cash, was $121 million (for a reconciliation of adjusted results and debt, net of cash, to U.S. GAAP, see the table provided in the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section). The Company has a revolving credit facility of $700 million and CAD$15 million which matures in 2023. In order to preserve financial flexibility in light of uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak, during the quarter the Company increased its borrowings under the revolving credit facility by $250 million, contributing to its cash position of $308 million as of May 31, 2020.
During the third quarter, the Company returned capital to shareholders through its 105th consecutive quarterly dividend. Capital expenditures were $22 million in the quarter and $59 million year to date, including investments for advanced metal recovery technologies and other growth projects.
A conference call and slide presentation to discuss results will be held today, July 1, 2020, at 11:30 a.m. Eastern and will be hosted by Tamara L. Lundgren, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, and Richard Peach, Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Chief Strategy Officer. The call and the slide presentation will be webcast and accessible on the Company’s website under Company > Investors > Event Calendar at www.schnitzersteel.com/events .
Summary financial data is provided in the following pages. The slide presentation and related materials will be available prior to the call on the above website.
Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. is one of the largest manufacturers and exporters of recycled metal products in North America with operating facilities located in 23 states, Puerto Rico and Western Canada. Schnitzer has seven deep water export facilities located on both the East and West Coasts and in Hawaii and Puerto Rico. The Company’s integrated operating platform also includes 50 stores which sell serviceable used auto parts from salvaged vehicles and receive approximately 5 million annual retail visits. The Company’s steel manufacturing operations produce finished steel products, including rebar, wire rod and other specialty products. The Company began operations in 1906 in Portland, Oregon.
