Sensex, Nifty end over 2% higher; Banking, Metals and Realty surge on heavy buying
Equity benchmark Sensex jumped over 1,250 points and the Nifty climbed 441 points during the day, but came off day's high toward closing session due to mild profit taking by traders and investors.
The market rally was led by gains in Metal, Banking, IT, Auto, Realty, Financial Services and FMCG stocks.
The positive outlook and a rise in major global peers also influenced the mood. Global stocks logged gains amid signs of easing tension between the US and China while signs of recovery in China's economy supported sentiment.
Asian shares pushed to three-month highs on Monday as progress on opening up economies helped offset jitters over riots in US cities and unease over Washington’s power struggle with Beijing.
There was also relief that while President Donald Trump began the process of ending special US treatment for Hong Kong to punish China, he left their trade deal intact, a Reuters report said.
The 30-share BSE barometer ended higher by 879.40 points or 2.70 per cent, at 33,303.52.
Similarly, the NSE Nifty was up 245.85 points, or 2.57 per cent, at 9,826.15.
On the NSE, 400 stocks had hit the upper circuit today, while the number of stocks that had hit lower band cirucit were just 46.
On a net basis, foreign portfolio investors bought equities worth Rs 1,460.71 crore in the capital market on Friday, provisional exchange data showed
Indian rupee erased some of its intraday gains but ended higher at 75.54  per dollar, amid buying seen in the domestic equity market.
Kaveri Seed Company has posted a net profit of ₹9.35 crore in the quarter ended March 31, 2020, as against a loss of ₹11.44 crore in the comparable quarter last year.
The company had net sales of ₹51.92 crore in the fourth quarter as against ₹44.72 crore in the comparable quarter last year, showing a rowth of 16 per cent.
The positive outlook and a rise in major global peers influenced the mood amid short-covering by traders. Global stocks achieved gains amid signs of easing tension between the US and China while signs of recovery in China's economy supported sentiment.
Asian shares pushed to three-month highs on Monday as progress on opening up economies helped offset jitters over riots in US cities and unease over Washington’s power struggle with Beijing. There was also relief that while President Donald Trump began the process of ending special US treatment for Hong Kong to punish China, he left their trade deal intact, a Reuters report said.
Nifty decisively surpassed the crucial 9,500-mark on May 29 amid US-China tensions.
The charts is giving a buy signal triggered by the MACD indicator on the daily charts. However, it can be said that since the rally was too fast, the Nifty may witness a correction anytime, but the bullishness is still intact, said an analyst.
IDBI Bank shares on Monday zoomed 20 per cent to its highest trading permissible limit for the day after the company posted a profit of Rs 135 crore in the quarter ended March.
The lender reported a profit after 13 straight quarters of net losses.
The rupee appreciated 15 paise to 75.47 against the US dollar on Monday supported by the government’s reopening plan for the domestic economy.
Forex traders said foreign fund inflows, weak American currency and positive opening of domestic equities also boosted investor confidence.
The rupee opened at 75.32 at the interbank forex market and then gained further ground to touch a high of 75.29, up 33 paise over its last close.
It had settled at 75.62 against the US dollar on Friday.
The government on Saturday said a phased exit would begin on June 1 from the over-two-months-long nationwide lockdown.
Deepak Fertilisers shares went up 2.50 per cent today after the company said in its release to the BSE that it is gradually resuming operations at ANP, NPK, TAN, IPA and ammonia plants along with its Dahej facility.
For the weak Nitric Acid, the downstream industry remains under the lockdown and has impacted its production other than for its captive use.
The stock was quoted at Rs 105.05, up by Rs 2.55, or 2.50% on the BSE today.
Shares of Bajaj Finance surged Rs 182.25, or 9.30 per cent, to Rs 2,134.95 on Monday on the BSE today.
The stock went up sharply as  the government decided to phased reopening of economy from June 1. Its performance is directly linked to the lifting of the nationwide lockdown.
The company is better placed and the phased reopening is quited advantageous to the company under the current situation.
The company had reported better-than-expected quarterly results last Tuesday.
