Simply Wall St December 24, 2019
It’s been a soft week for Metals Exploration plc ( LON:MTL ) shares, which are down 19%. On the other hand, over the last twelve months the stock has delivered rather impressive returns. We’re very pleased to report the share price shot up 161% in that time. So it may be that the share price is simply cooling off after a strong rise. More important, going forward, is how the business itself is going.
Metals Exploration wasn’t profitable in the last twelve months, it is unlikely we’ll see a strong correlation between its share price and its earnings per share (EPS). Arguably revenue is our next best option. Generally speaking, companies without profits are expected to grow revenue every year, and at a good clip. That’s because it’s hard to be confident a company will be sustainable if revenue growth is negligible, and it never makes a profit.
Metals Exploration grew its revenue by 27% last year. That’s a fairly respectable growth rate. The revenue growth is decent but the share price had an even better year, gaining 161%. Given that the business has made good progress on the top line, it would be worth taking a look at its path to profitability. But investors need to be wary of how the ‘fear of missing out’ could influence them to buy without doing thorough research.
If you are thinking of buying or selling Metals Exploration stock, you should check out this FREE detailed report on its balance sheet .
It’s good to see that Metals Exploration has rewarded shareholders with a total shareholder return of 161% in the last twelve months. Notably the five-year annualised TSR loss of 26% per year compares very unfavourably with the recent share price performance. We generally put more weight on the long term performance over the short term, but the recent improvement could hint at a (positive) inflection point within the business. It’s always interesting to track share price performance over the longer term. But to understand Metals Exploration better, we need to consider many other factors. For example, we’ve discovered 5 warning signs for Metals Exploration (of which 2 are major) which any shareholder or potential investor should be aware of.
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of companies we expect will grow earnings.
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on GB exchanges.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
