Simply Wall St January 1, 2020
Some Bass Metals Limited ( ASX:BSM ) shareholders are probably rather concerned to see the share price fall 44% over the last three months. But that doesn’t change the fact that the returns over the last five years have been very strong. Indeed, the share price is up an impressive 274% in that time. To some, the recent pullback wouldn’t be surprising after such a fast rise. Of course, that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s cheap now. Unfortunately not all shareholders will have held it for five years, so spare a thought for those caught in the 63% decline over the last three years: that’s a long time to wait for profits.
Bass Metals recorded just AU$1,328,326 in revenue over the last twelve months, which isn’t really enough for us to consider it to have a proven product. So it seems that the investors focused more on what could be, than paying attention to the current revenues (or lack thereof). For example, investors may be hoping that Bass Metals finds some valuable resources, before it runs out of money.
Companies that lack both meaningful revenue and profits are usually considered high risk. There is almost always a chance they will need to raise more capital, and their progress – and share price – will dictate how dilutive that is to current holders. While some such companies do very well over the long term, others become hyped up by promoters before eventually falling back down to earth, and going bankrupt (or being recapitalized). Bass Metals has already given some investors a taste of the sweet gains that high risk investing can generate, if your timing is right.
Bass Metals had liabilities exceeding cash by AU$2.9m when it last reported in June 2019, according to our data. That makes it extremely high risk, in our view. So we’re surprised to see the stock up 62% per year, over 5 years , but we’re happy for holders. It’s clear more than a few people believe in the potential. The image below shows how Bass Metals’s balance sheet has changed over time; if you want to see the precise values, simply click on the image. You can see in the image below, how Bass Metals’s cash levels have changed over time (click to see the values).
In reality it’s hard to have much certainty when valuing a business that has neither revenue or profit. One thing you can do is check if company insiders are buying shares. It’s usually a positive if they have, as it may indicate they see value in the stock. Luckily we are in a position to provide you with this free chart of insider buying (and selling).
While the broader market gained around 26% in the last year, Bass Metals shareholders lost 55%. However, keep in mind that even the best stocks will sometimes underperform the market over a twelve month period. Longer term investors wouldn’t be so upset, since they would have made 30%, each year, over five years. If the fundamental data continues to indicate long term sustainable growth, the current sell-off could be an opportunity worth considering. While it is well worth considering the different impacts that market conditions can have on the share price, there are other factors that are even more important. For example, we’ve discovered 5 warning signs for Bass Metals (of which 3 are major) which any shareholder or potential investor should be aware of.
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of companies that have proven they can grow earnings.
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on AU exchanges.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
