Silver, Platinum Missed Much of the Commodities Rally. Prices May Catch Up in 2020.
Year to date, silver futures are up about 10%, underperforming the gain of more than 15% for gold.
Silver, platinum, and other industrial metals, laggards among commodities in 2019, could take the spotlight in the years ahead.
The S&P GSCI Industrial Metals Total Return Index has seen a modest rise of about 2% this year as of mid-December, compared with a gain of nearly 17% for the S&P GSCI Total Return Index, which tracks 24 commodities. Zinc, typically used as a coating for iron and steel and as an alloying metal for bronze and brass, actually fell.
Industrial metals were left out of the commodities rally, “as investors continued to worry about global growth,” says Chris Gaffney, president of World Markets at TIAA Bank. However, growth expectations are on the rise, and most major central banks are taking cues from the U.S. in looking to hold rates steady through 2020.
“The lower rates, along with supportive central bank policies should support global growth and with it manufacturing, which will be positive for the price of industrial metals,” says Gaffney.
Among industrial metals, silver and platinum have “some catching up to do,” as these metals typically have better performance when global growth prospects heat up, he says. Year to date, silver futures are up about 10%, underperforming the gain of more than 15% for gold.
One standout in industrial metals this year is palladium, up a sharp 62% so far this year on tight supply. Palladium is used in gasoline-powered vehicles’ emission-controlling catalytic converters. Platinum, needed for the same gear in diesel-powered vehicles, is also up but by much less—about 16%.
Longer term, the outlook for palladium remains upbeat. Steven Dunn, head of ETFs at Aberdeen Standard Investments, says the metal’s supply deficit is expected to persist for the next several years. Still, “palladium is considered precious as it has characteristics that are hard to replicate,” Dunn says.
Technology and innovation “should be major headwinds for most commodities” over the long term, says Gregory Leo, chief investment officer at IDB Bank of New York. “Electric vehicles are still expensive, but improvements in battery technology and charging infrastructure have spurred demand.” That could lead to more demand for commodities such as copper and nickel, which are key components in electric vehicles, he says.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
Improvements in alternative energy sources should also “limit our dependency on oil,” says Leo. He expects energy prices to face headwinds in 2020, with slowing demand and alternative sources among the factors keeping a ceiling on oil prices .
In the years ahead, global economic growth may dictate the outlook for commodities. “While we may see a rebound in 2020, the challenge is the moderation in global economic growth over the next few years,” says Rob Haworth, senior investment strategist at U.S. Bank Wealth Management. “Aging populations are dampening global growth prospects. While inflation prospects may tick slightly higher this year, and perhaps even over the next few years, this is not enough to rekindle fundamental demand growth that could lift prices.”
And “despite commodity prices being very inexpensive relative to financial assets, without a rekindling of end-user demand growth through rising real economic growth, we anticipate commodity prices, on average, [to] still underperform stocks over the next business cycle,” says Haworth.
Silver, Platinum Missed Much of the Commodities Rally. Prices May Catch Up in 2020.
Silver, platinum, and other industrial metals, laggards among commodities in 2019, could take the spotlight in the years ahead.
