Chris Vermeulen Thursday May 21, 2020 14:07
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Precious metals have been on our radar for many  months and, if you've been paying attention, you probably already know our  research suggests Gold and Silver are one of the best investments you can make  right now.  Recently, we shared this article suggesting Gold would need to rally above our proprietary Fibonacci Price  Amplitude Arc (GREEN Arc) level near $1745 before it would attempt a bigger  upside price move.  Additionally, just a few days ago we published this article suggesting Silver  would begin to rally even faster than gold .
Today, both Gold and Silver are making bigger  upside price moves with Silver up over 3% while Gold is up 1.3%.  We  believe this nearly 250% faster Silver advance may be the start of what we have  been predicting for many months – an incredible parabolic upside price advance  in BOTH Gold and Silver.
Earlier research by our team suggested that a  set up would happen in Precious Metals where Silver began advancing much faster  than Gold and that this move would likely prompt a downside move in the Gold to  Silver Ratio targeting the 50 to 65 level.  Our earlier research suggests  when this move/setup begins, we could begin to experience a nearly 250% to 350%  rally in gold, targeting $3750 or higher, and a 550% to 650% rally in Silver,  targeting over $70, over a 12+ month span of time.  This article, today,  is alerting our readers that we believe this SETUP is happening right now and  the upside rally in precious metals should begin to really accelerate over the  next 5+ months.
This Gold to Silver ratio chart (including GOLD  and SILVER price levels) clearly illustrates what happens when the Gold to  Silver ratio starts to collapse.  In 2009, the BLUE Gold to Silver ratio  level began to collapse from 85 to 32 – well over 50 points (58%).  The  current Gold to Silver ratio high is nearly 120. Another 58% collapse from that  level would suggest the Gold to Silver ratio could fall to 50 (or further)  which would indicate that both Gold and Silver could rally extensively  throughout the next 12+ months.
This Daily Gold chart highlights our proprietary  Fibonacci Price Amplitude Arc system as well as our Fibonacci price modeling  system.  Our researchers believe once Gold rallies above the GREEN Arc, it  should begin to skyrocket higher in a series of upside price advances over the  next few months or longer.  This 1.618 Fibonacci Price Amplitude Arc is  acting as a strong resistance level currently.  Once Gold breaks above  this level, a big rally may take place in Gold – which will drive further a  bigger rally in Silver.
This Weekly Gold chart shows you what we expect  to see happen over the next 30 to 60 days.  First, once Gold breaks the  GREEN Arc level, a rally will take place driving Gold up to near $1999.   Then, Gold prices should stall and rotated downward a bit – targeting the $1900  to $1920 level.  After that, Gold will begin another upside price rally  targeting $2100 or higher.
Ultimately, our upside price target for Gold is  $3750 (many months into the future).  Yet we continue to believe this move  in precious metals could be one of the biggest and fastest upside price moves  in over 100 years.  We believe once this move really gets started, it will  be almost impossible to accurately predict where the top will setup in Gold and  Silver.
This Weekly Silver chart highlights the  Pennant/FLAG formation that recently APEX'ed.  We suggested this setup  would prompt a fairly strong upside price move in Silver targeting the $21 to  $22 – establishing a new price high.  Just after the Apex completed,  Silver stalled a bit before beginning a bigger upside move.  We believe  this is the start of a Parabolic upside price move in metals that should not be  overlooked by skilled technical traders.
If there is one thing you should understand  about this setup and the potential for the future is that between 2008 and  2011, Gold rallied over 300% while Silver rallied over 600% just after the  Credit Crisis event. The current COVID-19 global economic crisis is likely much  bigger than the 2008-09 Credit Crisis event and that is why we believe this is  an incredible opportunity for skilled technical investors.
