Neils Christensen Monday March 16, 2020 14:53
( Kitco News )  - Growing panic in financial markets continues to drag precious  metals prices down across the board, but growing recession fears are  particularly weighing on silver and palladium prices, according to analysts.
Monday, silver prices fell to a nearly 11-year low with many  analysts saying that lower industrial demand for the precious metal is weighing  on prices. Meanwhile palladium, which has been the best performing asset in the  precious metals space, has dropped nearly 50% from its February all-time highs.  Palladium is trading back below gold prices.
May silver futures last traded at $13 an ounce, down more than 10%  on the day. June palladium futures last traded at $1,469.20 an ounce, down more  than 2.5% on the day.
Although silver and palladium have lost significant ground in the  last few days and weeks, some market analysts are not ruling out lower prices  in the near-term.
“Silver trading below $15 definitely has a lot of bad news priced  in but the question investors are asking is: ‘How bad is bad,” said David  Madden, senior market analyst at CMC Markets. “The bad news can still be worse.”
Madden noted that the current market environment is irrational as  investors are liquidating safe-haven assets like gold. In this environment  silver doesn’t stand a chance to attract investor interest.
“Right now, the feeling among investors is that if you own an  asset that isn’t cash then you need to get out,” he said.
Not only has silver’s safe-haven allure tarnished but Madden  noted that recent global economic data has significantly missed already beaten  down expectations. He added that as the coronavirus continues to spread,  economic data will continue to weaken.
“I think we are going to see a lot more dire economic data before  we hit a bottom,” he said. “That will continue to weigh on assets like silver  and palladium. Palladium demand will be there after the virus is gone but right  now with investors stuck in their homes they just don’t care about catalytic  converters.”
Madden said that looking at China as an example, Europe is about  three weeks away from “peak virus panic.” Meanwhile, the U.S. is about another  three weeks behind Europe.
“When Ireland closes its pubs you know things are bad and only  going to get worse,” he said.
Despite some grim expectations in the marketplace, some analysts  aren’t giving up especially on silver.
In an email to Kitco News, Mike McGlone, senior commodity analyst  at Bloomberg Intelligence said silver fortunes are tied with gold and with the  Federal Reserve cutting interest rates in an emergency move Sunday, the yellow  metal’s future looks bright.
“Gold is fundamentally bullish and more so, now that the Fed  has shifted to zero rates,” he said. “Silver will follow gold and is more  likely to have a sharp recovery when the stock market rebounds.”
