Sky Metals (SKY) was up more than 200 per cent this morning after results were returned from its maiden drilling program at the Cullarin Gold Project.
Sky's maiden drilling program at the Hume Prospect was completed in January 2020 with two diamond core holes drilled approximately 200 metres apart.
The aim of the drilling was to test and extend the scale and tenor of gold mineralisation recorded in historic drilling.
Both holes, HUD001 and HUD002, intersected a broad package of strongly altered volcaniclastic rocks with associated zinc and lead sulphides.
Mineralisation in hole HUD002 was visibly stronger and included visible gold.
Results from this hole indicate the potential for a significant high-grade gold system at Hume.
Hole HUD002 also included zones of significant core loss in the shallow sections which is associated with mineralisation.
Analysis was undertaken in order to determine whether there was an association of core loss with higher gold grade, however, no association between grade and low recoveries was indicated.
Follow-up drill planning is now underway and low core recoveries are expected to be set right with wider core diameters and slower drill rates.
"These are outstanding results from our maiden drill programme and a very strong validation of the Sky gold strategy and targeting methodology," CEO Mark Arundell said.
"These drill results, combined with soil results, upgrade both the potential tenor and scale of the Hume Target. The management and exploration team are justifiably proud of these exceptional results and we are tremendously excited by the possibilities of the next stage of exploration," he added.
The Hume Prospect is located at the southern end of the Cullarin Project which is located 20 kilometres west of Goulburn in NSW.
Whilst previous drilling had intersected gold mineralisation, the exact location of the drill holes and sampling details remain uncertain.
Highlights from previous drilling in 1989 include 14.6 metres at 5.1g/t gold from 16.2 metres and 12 metres at 4.4g/t gold from 25.9 metres.
Sky is currently evaluating results in detail and planning of a drill focused exploration program is well advanced.
Sky's share price has fallen below the 200 per cent mark but is still up a significant 171 per cent and is trading shares for 28.5 cents apiece at 11:35 am AEST.
