As the economies tumble and benchmark interest rates are in negative territory in many countries, gold becomes more important in the portfolio of global investors, who also increasingly eye Brazil’s potential .
Yet, gold production in the country will contract 30% versus 2019 due to the pandemic, which is increasingly affecting remote areas in the gold-producing states of Mato Grosso and Pará, according to precious metals association Abramp.
Brazil is a leading global iron ore producer but takes 13th position for gold.
This picture could change, however, as the government is encouraging research in remote areas to gain better knowledge of the country’s gold reserves.
And two recent developments showed that investors are ready to move in.
First, Valterra Resource Corporation increased the amount to be raised from a private placement of shares to US$1.4mn from US$1mn. The proceeds will be used to buy a gold project in Mato Grosso state’s Poconé municipality.
"Brazil has favorable geology with several major Archean greenstone and Proterozoic sedimentary-hosted gold districts, which has attracted major miners including Kinross , Vale , Anglogold Ashanti , Lundin Mining , Yamana , and Great Panther and has resulted in significant annual gold production. Brazil is highly regarded as a mining jurisdiction with regulations providing favorable mineral title and foreign ownership," Valterra said in a release.
The company priced each share of the IPO at 820 reais (US$154) and expects to raise at least 790mn reais from the offer. Aura’s shares will debut on the local exchange on July 6.
BNamericas takes a look at Brazil’s largest gold projects as listed in the BNamericas projects database.
Owned by Eldorado Gold , a construction decision for the US$442mn Tocantinzinho gold project , spanning 14,000ha in the Tapajós gold province, is pending.
Eldorado completed an updated technical report for the project during 2Q19. Highlights of the study at an estimated gold price of US$1,300/oz include an internal rate of return (IRR) of 13.4% and net present value (NPV) of US$216mn at a 5% discount rate.
At an estimated gold price of US$1,500/oz, IRR is 19.7% with an NPV of US$409mn at a 5% discount rate, Eldorado Gold said.
Adjacent to the Xingu river, southeast of Altamira city, Pará state, the US$298mn Volta Grande project entails the construction of an open-pit mine, a gold recovery process facility, water and tailing management and support infrastructure.
Current mineral resources are subdivided into the North Block and the South Block. The former includes the Ouro Verde, Junction, Grota Seca, and Greia zones.
The South Block is about 10km to the south.
A feasibility study was completed in March 2015. Proven and probable reserves are 3.8Moz of gold.
TriStar Gold 's US$184mn Castelo de Sonhos (CDS) gold project in Pará state is about 20km from the town of Castelo de Sonhos. It is a paleoplacer gold deposit with 19km of conglomerate outcrop. Large upside potential remains with only around 60% of the prospective area drilled thus far.
Owned by OZ Minerals , the US$155mn CentroGold project is considered one of the largest undeveloped gold projects in Brazil.
CentroGold is in northern Maranhão state, between the cities of Belém and São Luis and close to existing infrastructure including sealed roads, power, water, but also skilled labor.
To continue reading, subscribe to BNamericas to get all the information in this article and access to related news items and reports.
