"If China's emergence from COVID-19 lock down is anything to go by, then H220 should see strong consumer demand. In China a V-shaped recovery appears underway as consumers flock back to showrooms (property, automotive and household goods)," it said.
"Our expectation is that rest of world demand bounces back in H220 and that production risks in emerging markets restrict supply. Chile (copper) and Brazil (iron ore) bear watching."
UBS now prefers base metals over precious metals and bulks, having lifted its 2020 forecasts for base metals by 10-20%.
Its preferred stocks are BHP, Alumina, South32, OZ Minerals and IGO in base metals, and Saracen Mineral Holdings and Newcrest Mining in gold.
RBC Capital Markets also includes South32, IGO and Saracen in its top picks, as well as OceanaGold Corp and Gold Road Resources.
Among the quarterly reports due out this month, Evolution Mining and Perseus Mining previously hinted the June quarter may bring record performances.
Northern Star Resources is also one to watch given the company was one of few to withdraw guidance. COVID-19 cases are surging in Alaska, home to its Pogo mine.
Still in gold, Bellevue Gold is expected to report a maiden indicated resource for its namesake mine in Western Australia.
The project already has an inferred resource of 2.2 million ounces at 11.3 grams per tonne gold.
Canaccord Genuity is "conservatively" expecting a maiden indicated resource of 550,000-650,000oz at 8-10gpt, while Argonaut Securities is tipping 600,000-800,000oz.
Mincor Resources could make a final investment decision for its Kambalda nickel restart after raising A$60 million last week.
On the exploration front, assays are awaited from promising drill hits reported by Western Areas in South Australia and Kincora Copper and RareX in New South Wales.
July will also see some new names hit the ASX.
The board of Alkane Resources approved the demerger of its Dubbo zirconium project in New South Wales.
Spin-off company Australian Strategic Materials is expected to list this month.
New gold producer Manuka Resources will list mid-month after closing its initial public offering early.
SSR Mining will also list on the ASX this month once it wraps up its merger of equals with Alacer Gold.
Diggers & Dealers is likely to release its 2020 program this month after getting the formal go-ahead to proceed with a full physical event in October as Western Australia lifts all restrictions on July 18.
The only restriction to remain in place is the hard border, which could prevent interstate delegates if not lifted by then.
Still, Diggers has 53 confirmed presenting companies and the two marquees are fully subscribed, with a total of 154 companies planning to exhibit.
Noosa Mining Virtual will also be held this month, with the physical event rescheduled for November.
Finally, the nominees for the 2020 MNN Awards will be released next week. The nominees will be profiled throughout the month before winners are announced.
