Sultan Resources Ltd ( ASX:SLZ ), the Gold and base metals explorer from Western Australia, announced the expansion of its portfolio with the completion of 100% acquisition of Colossus metals and its Macquarie Arc Copper-Gold Project in the Lachlan Fold Belt.
With the completion of the Colossus Metals acquisition, Sultan now controls highly prospective mineral opulent tenure extending to almost 330 square-kilometres in the world-renowned Lachlan Fold belt.
Sultan Goes Stronger with LFB Exposure; Delivered 90% Returns to Investors in 6 Months: Must Read
So far, Sultan has already released the soil and rock chip sampling program results at the Big Hill and Tucklan deposits indicating presence for potentially large-scale Cu-Au porphyry system. The soil and rock chip sampling program from the Ringaroo prospect are ongoing, and the results are expected soon.
Regional Location Map – Big Hill, Tucklan and Ringaroo over the prospective Macquarie Arc sequence Source: Sultan Resources
The Macquarie Arc project is located between Alkane Resources’ ( ASX:ALK ) Boda discovery and Newcrest Mining’s ( ASX:NCM ) Cadia-Ridgeway Gold Copper operations.
Lake Grace Ni-Cu-Au Project stretches across 690 square kilometres and 5 tenements. The project area is further divided into 2 major sub-divisions, including Lake Grace Gold and Lake Grace Nickel-Cobalt project. A recent 911 metres drilling program uncovered widespread gravity anomalies.
The project shares the mining neighbourhood with various established precious and battery metals operations, including Ramelius Resources’ ( ASX:RMS ) Tampia Gold project and Golden Mile Resources’ Quicksilver Ni-Co project.
Thaduna Gold Copper Project holds 2 granted tenements stretching over 22 square kilometres in the Murchison Goldfields.
East Tallering Gold Project extends over 67 square kilometres in the Tallering Greenstone belt. The mining project is located in close proximity to Adaman Resources’ Snake Well Gold Project.
Dalwallinu Gold project stretches over 167 square kilometres along the 20 kms long strike of the Yerlering fault corridor.
Sultan is currently progressing on negotiations with landowners to advance on the field exploration programs at the East Tallering and Dalwallinu Gold projects.
Sultan strengthens its presence in Lachlan Fold Belt: Read Here
The acquisition of Colossus Metals required a one-time exclusivity payment of $50,000 towards the prospective copper-gold project. Further, the acquisition agreement included several other key terms-
Issuance of fully paid 10 million ordinary shares, at an issue price of $0.075 a share, as a payment in the capital of the company contingent on a voluntary escrow period 6 months from the signing of the binding agreement.
Sultan will also be liable to issue 1 million fully paid ordinary shares as payment for identification of the project and their role in acquisition negotiation to Xcel Capital and Arq Capital. Additionally, a 2% NSR (Net Smelter Royalty) would be paid to the vendors or their nominees for their corresponding tenements.
The board and management mark the completion of the acquisition as a milestone for the explorer and is excited to pursue the exploration play on the Colossus’s project. Sultan aims the acquisition in the LFB to expand its portfolio and complement the current portfolio.
Sultan is well placed to undertake and deliver results from exploration plays such as the Macquarie Arc Gold Copper project.
On 30 June 2020, Sultan closed at $0.135 a share with a market capitalisation of $7.91 million.
All financial figures pertain to Australia Dollars unless stated otherwise.
This website is a service of Kalkine Media Pty. Ltd. A.C.N. 629 651 672. The website has been prepared for informational purposes only and is not intended to be used as a complete source of information on any particular company. The above article is sponsored but NOT a solicitation or recommendation to buy, sell or hold the stock of the company (or companies) under discussion. We are neither licensed nor qualified to provide investment advice through this platform.
All pictures are copyright to their respective owner(s).Kalkinemedia.com does not claim ownership of any of the pictures displayed on this website unless stated otherwise. Some of the images used on this website are taken from the web and are believed to be in public domain. We have used reasonable efforts to accredit the source (public domain/CC0 status) to where it was found and indicated it below the image.
There is no investor left unperturbed with the ongoing trade conflicts between US-China and the devastating bushfire in Australia.
Are you wondering if the year 2020 might not have taken the right start? Dividend stocks could be the answer to that question.
As interest rates in Australia are already at record low levels, find out which dividend stocks are viewed as the most attractive investment opportunity in the current scenario in our report.
