The New York Stock Exchange traded stock had a 17% upward blast on Friday accompanied by increased volume. Coeur easily took out the earlier April highs and closed well above the Ichimoku cloud for the first time since the beginning of the year.
is NYSE-listed with silver mining operations in Alaska, Idaho and in Mexico.
Hecla Mining daily price chart, 5 15 20.
The stock closed 13% higher at the close of trading on Friday. Hecla managed to jump above the late April highs easily and the next resistance (where sellers took over from buyers) is up at the 3.5 level.
Fortuna Silver Mines is Canadian-based and trades on the New York Stock Exchange.
Fortuna Silver Mines daily price chart, 5 15 20.
This low priced miner is moving higher with force. Fortuna is more than a double now coming off the lows of the highly-volatile mid-March selling. Friday’s 17.8% gain is accompanied by heavy volume. The earlier in the year peak up near 4.2 might provide significant resistance.
traded and headquartered in Vancouver, British Columbia.
Pan American Silver daily price chart, 5 15 20.
The stock is higher on Friday by 11.5% as it broke above the previous resistance level from April. The 2020 peak in February at 26 is the likely target for bulls. A break above that level might be significant.
The Global X Silver Miners ETF looks like this:
Global X Silver Miners ETF daily price chart, 5 15 20.
Yes, there is an exchange traded fund of nothing but silver mining stocks and it trades on the New York Stock Exchange. Friday showed a nice 7% up move for the ETF and a substantial increase in volume which sometimes tends to confirm such moves. Note how the rally took out the previous high of late February.
These are not buy recommendations. The suddenness of the increase in silver and silver stocks may be an indication that some investors are concerned with the possibility of higher levels of inflation. These are low-priced, sometimes volatile equities — caution is always warranted.
If you’ve saved silver dimes from your youth, it might be a good time to remember where you kept them.
For another, different type of inflation hedge, please take a look at this earlier Forbes Probabilities blog article .
I do not hold positions in these investments. No recommendations are made one way or the other.  If you're an investor, you'd want to look much deeper into each of these situations. You can lose money trading or investing in stocks and other instruments. Always do your own independent research, due diligence and seek professional advice from a licensed investment advisor.
