Despite weaker consumer sentiment as a result of the recent recession, the electric car market is expected to see a healthy rebound in growth, said Neal Brewster, manager of strategy consulting at Roskill.
Like this: “Electric vehicle (EV) sales are actually doing pretty well, and I think those will come back much more quickly. I guess we might see governments actually encourage EV sales, so for those particular markets, I’m actually quite bullish, [and see] good drivers longer-term,” Brewster said. (show less)
Despite weaker consumer sentiment as a result of the recent recession, the electric car market is expected to see a healthy rebound in growth, said Neal Brewster, manager of strategy consulting at Roskill.
Like this: “Electric vehicle (EV) sales are actually doing pretty well, and I think those will come back much more quickly. I guess we might see governments actually encourage EV sales, so for those particular markets, I’m actually quite bullish, [and see] ... (read more)
Your browser does not support inline frames or is currently configured not to display inline frames. Content can be viewed at actual source page: /news/video/latest?show=Mines--Money-Online-Connect-2020.
In response to COVID 19, Mines & Money is launching a brand new virtual event series. Mines and Money Online Connect will be the same high quality Mines and Money events that you know well, now in a virtual and online format.
Disclaimer: The content on this website, including, without limitation, news, videos, interviews and commentaries, is provided by Kitco Metals Inc. ("Kitco") for informational purposes only and is not intended as any form of advice, whether legal, accounting, investment, financial or tax advice. Therefore, it cannot be relied upon as such. Should you require such advice, contact a licensed professional. The content provided herein is provided on an "as is" basis without any warranty of any kind, whether express or implied and your use of the information provided in said content is entirely at your own risk. In no event will Kitco be held liable for any indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages arising out of the use of the content on this website.
