This Insider Has Just Sold Shares In SilverCrest Metals Inc. (TSE:SIL)
Simply Wall St January 10, 2020
We’d be surprised if SilverCrest Metals Inc. ( TSE:SIL ) shareholders haven’t noticed that the Independent Chairman of the Board, Graham Thody, recently sold CA$178k worth of stock at CA$8.92 per share. On the bright side, that sale was only 4.6% of their holding, so we doubt it’s very meaningful, on its own.
Over the last year, we can see that the biggest insider sale was by the Executive Vice President of Business Development, Nicholas Campbell, for CA$632k worth of shares, at about CA$8.50 per share. That means that an insider was selling shares at around the current price of CA$8.07. While we don’t usually like to see insider selling, it’s more concerning if the sales take place at a lower price. Given that the sale took place at around current prices, it makes us a little cautious but is hardly a major concern.
Happily, we note that in the last year insiders paid CA$1.2m for 327.80k shares. But insiders sold 295005 shares worth CA$2.1m. All up, insiders sold more shares in SilverCrest Metals than they bought, over the last year. They sold for an average price of about CA$7.21. It’s not particularly great to see insiders were selling shares at below recent prices. But we wouldn’t put too much weight on the insider selling. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
If you like to buy stocks that insiders are buying, rather than selling, then you might just love this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
For a common shareholder, it is worth checking how many shares are held by company insiders. Usually, the higher the insider ownership, the more likely it is that insiders will be incentivised to build the company for the long term. SilverCrest Metals insiders own about CA$39m worth of shares. That equates to 4.6% of the company. We’ve certainly seen higher levels of insider ownership elsewhere, but these holdings are enough to suggest alignment between insiders and the other shareholders.
So What Does This Data Suggest About SilverCrest Metals Insiders?
We note a that there has been a bit of insider buying recently (but no selling). Overall the buying isn’t worth writing home about. Recent sales exacerbate our caution arising from analysis of SilverCrest Metals insider transactions. But we do like the fact that insiders own a fair chunk of the company. If you are like me, you may want to think about whether this company will grow or shrink. Luckily, you can check this free report showing analyst forecasts for its future .
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
