This story was provided by a client for commercial purposes.
Clear Air Metals is focused on palladium and platinum, two crucial metals needed in pollution-control
Clean Air Metals raised $15 million on Bay St. in Feb. 2020, with Eric Sprott as the lead order
The climate change imperative is driving worldwide demand for a carbon-free transportation sector. This will require increased and sustainable production of certain strategic minerals and commodities going forward to meet critical demand, which is where Clean Air Metals Inc. (TSXV: AIR) comes in with its focus on palladium and platinum.
The company is engaged in the advanced exploration of a high-grade Norilsk-style PGE-Ni-Cu magma conduit system containing the pollution-controlling catalytic conversion minerals platinum and palladium in a 1:1 ratio. It also contains nickel, a battery metal, and copper, the lifeline of electric vehicles.
In this interview, Omar Khafagy, CFA, client success specialist at TMX Group, speaks with Abraham Drost, CEO of Clean Air Metals, about the company’s recent listing, its growth plans and exploration projects.
Drost explains how both palladium and platinum are extremely useful as pollution-control catalysts. He also mentions how these metals are the commodities of the times, as governments are looking to control harmful pollutants and decarbonize the transportation sector.
He then discusses the two main projects that Clean Air is working on in the Thunder Bay area of Ontario. The Thunder Bay North Current Lake Deposit is the first he mentions, which has a Historical Indicated mineral resource of 741,000 oz PtEq. (9.8mT @ 2.3gpt PtEq) based on 2012 metal prices. The second is Escape Lake which was originally discovered by Rio Tinto and was previously drilled in a high-grade zone.
When it comes to the Thunder Bay North Current Lake Deposit, Drost mentions that the company plans on commencing Phase I drilling this year into 2021, and then do a global resource estimate.
Exploration vector–massive sulphides in the current lake deposit. Supplied
Clean Air Metals recently listed on the Venture Exchange and was able to raise $15 million through Bay Street in Feb. 2020. Drost notes that being listed on the exchange is phenomenal because it provides the company with liquidity and more access to capital, as well as the association of working with a world-class trading platform.
With the move towards cleaner energy and more stringent global auto emission standards coming into play, palladium and platinum are looking to make waves, and investors should take note.
For more views from the C-Suite, click here .
This story was provided by Market One Media Group for commercial purposes.
