As silver prices continue to rally higher, investors are turning their attention to the top silver producers in order to gain exposure to what could be an explosive move to the upside. Below is a list of the top silver producers based on their percentage of revenue from silver production:
1) FIRST MAJESTIC SILVER ( TSX: FR ) (NYSE: AG)
First Majestic Silver owns and operates three producing mines in Mexico. The company has a market cap of approximately C$2.8 billion and generates roughly 61% of its revenue from silver. In 2019 First Majestic Silver produced over 25.6 million silver equivalent ounces, which was a 15% increase over its 2018 production. Shares of First Majestic offer significant leverage to rising silver prices.
2) SILVERCORP METALS ( TSX: SVM )
Silvercorp Metals operates two producing mines in China. The company has a market cap of approximately C$1.04 billion and silver production represents roughly 54% of its revenue. Silvercorp is a good opportunity to gain access to the silver market, however it operates in the politically risky jurisdiction of China.
3) ENDEAVOUR SILVER ( TSX: EDR )
Endeavour Silver operates three silver mines in Mexico. The company has a market cap of around C$381 million and generates roughly 47% of its revenue from silver. This makes Endeavour Silver a solid opportunity to leverage rising silver prices, however its actual silver output was less than 4.1 million ounces in full year 2019.
4) PAN AMERICAN SILVER ( TSX: PAAS ) (NASDAQ: PAAS)
Pan American Silver has nine mining operations across North and South America. The company currently has a market cap of approximately C$8.5 billion, but its silver production accounts for less than 30% of overall revenue.
5) COEUR MINING ( NYSE: CDE )
Coeur Mining operates five mines throughout North America. The company has a market cap of approximately US$1.4 billion, however silver production represents less than 26% of its overall revenue.
Junior Mining Network ("JMN") is not a financial advisory or advisor, investment advisor or broker-dealer and does not undertake any activities that would require such registration. The information contained herein is not intended to be used as the basis for investment decisions and should not be considered as investment advice or a recommendation, nor is the information an offer or solicitation to buy, hold or sell any security. JMN does not represent or warrant that the information posted is accurate, unbiased or complete and make no representations as to the completeness or timeless of the material provided. JMN receives fees for producing content on financial news and has been compensated by Market Jar Media Inc. to publish this content. Investors should consult with an investment advisor, tax and legal consultant before making any investment decisions. All materials are subject to change without notice.
Please review our Disclaimer and Privacy Policy before subscribing.
Great Bear Resources is a Canadian exploration company focused on its 100% owned, royalty-free Dixie gold project located in the prolific Red Lake mining district of Ontario. To date five high-grade gold discoveries have been confirmed along a 2.3km strike within a large-scale 10km target. The system at Dixie has returned multiple high-grade drill intercepts including 16.35m of 26.91 g/t gold and 7.00m of 68.76 g/t gold. Great Bear is fully funded to complete 200,000m of drilling... LEARN MORE
Copyright © 2020 Junior Mining Network. All Rights Reserved.
