Trade Alert: The Chairman of the Board Of Dundee Precious Metals Inc. (TSE:DPM), Jonathan Goodman, Has Just Spent US$227k Buying Shares
Simply Wall St March 13, 2020
Potential Dundee Precious Metals Inc. ( TSE:DPM ) shareholders may wish to note that the Chairman of the Board, Jonathan Goodman, recently bought CA$227k worth of stock, paying CA$5.35 for each share. That’s a very solid buy in our book, and increased their holding by a noteworthy 12%.
In fact, the recent purchase by Jonathan Goodman was the biggest purchase of Dundee Precious Metals shares made by an insider individual in the last twelve months, according to our records. That means that even when the share price was higher than CA$4.60 (the recent price), an insider wanted to purchase shares. It’s very possible they regret the purchase, but it’s more likely they are bullish about the company. We always take careful note of the price insiders pay when purchasing shares. As a general rule, we feel more positive about a stock if insiders have bought shares at above current prices, because that suggests they viewed the stock as good value, even at a higher price. We note that Jonathan Goodman was also the biggest seller.
In the last twelve months insiders purchased 52.38k shares for CA$249k. But insiders sold 199680 shares worth CA$1.1m. Over the last year we saw more insider selling of Dundee Precious Metals shares, than buying. The average sell price was around US$5.48. We don’t gain confidence from insider selling near the recent share price. But we don’t put too much weight on the insider selling, since sellers could have personal reasons. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
If you like to buy stocks that insiders are buying, rather than selling, then you might just love this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. I reckon it’s a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. From our data, it seems that Dundee Precious Metals insiders own 0.9% of the company, worth about CA$7.2m. We do note, however, it is possible insiders have an indirect interest through a private company or other corporate structure. We do generally prefer see higher levels of insider ownership.
What Might The Insider Transactions At Dundee Precious Metals Tell Us?
Unfortunately, there has been more insider selling of Dundee Precious Metals stock, than buying, in the last three months. Zooming out, the longer term picture doesn’t give us much comfort. Insiders own relatively few shares in the company, and when you consider the sales, we’re not particularly excited about the stock. As the saying goes, only fools rush in. In addition to knowing about insider transactions going on, it’s beneficial to identify the risks facing Dundee Precious Metals. For example – Dundee Precious Metals has 2 warning signs we think you should be aware of.
But note: Dundee Precious Metals may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
