Trade Alert: The Chief Financial Officer Of Lion One Metals Limited (CVE:LIO), Tony Young, Has Just Spent CA$62k Buying Shares
Simply Wall St February 28, 2020
Even if it’s not a huge purchase, we think it was good to see that Tony Young, the Chief Financial Officer of Lion One Metals Limited ( CVE:LIO ) recently shelled out CA$62k to buy stock, at CA$1.89 per share. While we’re hesitant to get too excited about a purchase of that size, we do note it increased their holding by a solid 50%.
Notably, that recent purchase by Tony Young is the biggest insider purchase of Lion One Metals shares that we’ve seen in the last year. That means that an insider was happy to buy shares at above the current price of CA$1.35. It’s very possible they regret the purchase, but it’s more likely they are bullish about the company. To us, it’s very important to consider the price insiders pay for shares is very important. It is encouraging to see an insider paid above the current price for shares, as it suggests they saw value, even at higher levels. Tony Young was the only individual insider to buy shares in the last twelve months. Notably Tony Young was also the biggest seller.
In total, Lion One Metals insiders sold more than they bought over the last year. The average sell price was around CA$1.43. We don’t gain confidence from insider selling near the recent share price, being about CA$1.35. Since insiders sell for many reasons, we wouldn’t put too much weight on it. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. By clicking on the graph below, you can see the precise details of each insider transaction!
I will like Lion One Metals better if I see some big insider buys. While we wait, check out this free list of growing companies with considerable, recent, insider buying.
Another way to test the alignment between the leaders of a company and other shareholders is to look at how many shares they own. A high insider ownership often makes company leadership more mindful of shareholder interests. Insiders own 14% of Lion One Metals shares, worth about CA$23m. While this is a strong but not outstanding level of insider ownership, it’s enough to indicate some alignment between management and smaller shareholders.
What Might The Insider Transactions At Lion One Metals Tell Us?
The stark truth for Lion One Metals is that there has been more insider selling than insider buying in the last three months. Despite some insider buying, the longer term picture doesn’t make us feel much more positive. Insiders own shares, but we’re still pretty cautious, given the history of sales. So we’d only buy after careful consideration. I like to dive deeper into how a company has performed in the past. You can access this interactive graph of past earnings, revenue and cash flow for free .
But note: Lion One Metals may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
