Nov 5 - Nov 6, 2020
Following the huge success of our virtual event in May, we are now going to be running the physical event in Geneva on the 5-6th of November.
TXF Global Commodity Finance 2020 will be a hybrid event, offering people the chance to join physically or virtually depending on what feels safe for each individual. We will also ensure we follow all safety measures for all physical attendees.
Do not miss the chance to join us at the end of the Commodity week to cover all hot topics and interact in a safe environment.
If you wish to get access to the content we had at the virtual event, please drop us a message at marketing@txfmedia.com .
Mitsubishi Corp.- UBS Realty Inc.
Mitsubishi Corp.- UBS Realty Inc.
Mitsubishi Corp.- UBS Realty Inc.
Head of Marketing & Origination, West Africa
Best industry event- relevant and cutting edge content, excellent networking in a modern style
TXF Global Commodity Finance 2020 will be taking place in the beautiful Hotel President Wilson in the heart of Geneva, in close proximity to all the major city landmarks.
The venue address is Hotel President Wilson, Quai Wilson 47, 1211 Genève, Switzerland .
We're pleased to say we've secured a preferential rate at the Hotel President Wilson TXF guests. However, these rooms are sold on a first-come, first-served basis. Once they're gone - they're gone!
Further details to come, but if you're interested in securing your room, email operations@txfmedia.com .
Genève Aéroport is a 10-minute car journey or 30-minutes on public transport.
Each year at TXF Global Commodity Finance we present our coveted Perfect 10 Deals of the Year Awards in commodity finance and this year is no different!
The Perfect 10 represent the most innovative, market influencing transactions of the year. They are shortlisted and voted for by the market, and therefore represent an accolade that is highly prized by the industry and an incredible achievement.
The Perfect 10 Award Virtual ceremony was held on 28 May 2020. View all winning deals here
