NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION TO UNITED STATES NEWSWIRE SERVICES OR FOR RELEASE, PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION OR DISSEMINATION DIRECTLY, OR INDIRECTLY, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, IN OR INTO THE UNITED STATES
TORONTO, April  29, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Innovation Metals Corp. (“IMC” or the “Company”) is pleased to announce that the Company and its shareholders have executed a binding Share Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Ucore Rare Metals Inc. (“Ucore”) (TSXV: UCU ) (OTCQX: UURAF ) dated April 25, 2020, whereby Ucore will acquire 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of IMC (the “Acquisition”). Management and the Board of Directors of both IMC and Ucore unanimously support the Acquisition.
Under the terms of the Purchase Agreement, Ucore has agreed to acquire 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of IMC for an aggregate purchase price of C$5,801,000 (the “Acquisition Consideration”). The Acquisition Consideration will be made up of 45,383,412 common shares of Ucore (the “Acquisition Shares”) and C$1,000 in cash. In accordance with the Purchase Agreement, the Acquisition Shares were deemed to have a value of C$0.1278 each, which is equal to the 5-day volume weighted average price (“VWAP”) of Ucore’s common shares on the TSX Venture Exchange (“TSXV”) as at the close of trading on April 24, 2020 with no discount being applied. Additionally, upon the closing of the Acquisition, Ucore will provide IMC with a C$500,000 non-interest-bearing intercompany loan for the immediate continued development of IMC’s RapidSX™ separation technology. On April 27, 2020, Ucore announced the Acquisition in addition to receiving funding commitments pursuant to a concurrent C$2.8 million financing (the “Financing”). The Financing will be used to progress the development and deployment of the RapidSX™ technology and the related further advancement of Ucore’s M3 Plan of Action .
The Acquisition is an independent and arm’s-length transaction. No member of IMC’s Board of Directors and none of IMC’s shareholders are related parties to Ucore. The Acquisition is expected to close on or before May 8, 2020 (the “Acquisition Closing Date”) and is subject to customary closing conditions, including the receipt of all necessary regulatory approvals, including the approval of the TSXV.
IMC Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Gareth Hatch stated, “This will be a transformational milestone for IMC and its shareholders that we believe positions IMC as a potential leading near-term, low-cost REE technology provider for the bulk commercial separation and purification of REEs. With the leadership of Ucore’s Chairman Pat Ryan, coupled with Ucore’s financial strength and strategy, we believe that IMC will now have the ability to fully realize the commercial potential of RapidSX™ for the separation and purification of critical metals. More than ever, we are committed and determined to fulfill our collective mission of establishing an alternative supply chain for REEs, and now also for lithium, nickel, cobalt, and other critical materials.”
Developed with USD$1.8 million in assistance from the U.S. Department of Defense (“DoD”), RapidSX™ is an accelerated solvent-extraction-based separation technology successfully tested at the pilot scale for the separation of rare-earth elements (“REEs”) — for both heavy REE (“HREE”) and light REE (“LREE”) feedstocks — as a means of producing commercial-grade rare-earth oxides (“REO”) with potentially significant technical and economic efficiencies relative to existing technologies.
IMC President and Chief Operating Officer, Patrick Wong stated, “One of the key advantages to the RapidSX™ technology is that it utilizes the same, time-proven solvent-extraction (“SX”) chemistry to be found in all conventional commercial REE separation plants – but combined with IMC’s proprietary column-based technology which will lead to significant reductions in plant footprint and time to process completion process time. The result is expected lower capital and operating costs.”
Co-founded by Mr. Wong and Dr. Hatch, IMC subsequently applied the RapidSX™ technology to the separation and purification of other critical metals including nickel-cobalt (“Ni-Co”) and lithium (“Li”) brines.
In addition to test work on REE feedstocks produced and/or procured by Ucore, IMC intends to continue to progress the Company’s relationships with several other potential end users — on five continents — for REE separation using RapidSX™.
CAPEX: Based on previous piloting work undertaking by IMC, the Company estimates that the considerably reduced number of separation stages per circuit and the resultant smaller physical plant footprint associated with RapidSX™ compared to conventional SX facilities, could potentially result in start-up capital cost savings. These expectations are contingent on the specific feedstock utilized and resulting REE products and purities desired.
Rapid Equilibrium: As a result of the significantly increased kinetics of the RapidSX™ technology, the time to achieve equilibrium and separation is accelerated — from days/weeks (as is typical in the case with conventional SX) to hours/days with RapidSX™.
OPEX: Based on previous pilot-scale work undertaken by IMC, the Company estimates that the significantly reduced RapidSX™ separation times, reduced reagent and power consumption, reduced manpower requirements, and reduced in-process metal inventories, compared to utilization of conventional SX, could potentially result in reduced operating costs, depending on the feedstock and resulting REE products.
Feedstock Agnostic: Due to its modular configuration and reduced number of stages, RapidSX™ is capable of being configured for separating LREE-rich, HREE-rich and potential blends of mixed REE feedstocks.
Commercially Available: All construction materials for the RapidSX™ technology — including all associated equipment and chemical reagents — are readily commercially available.
Scalable and Modular: The RapidSX™ technology’s process lines are modular and scalable, providing future expected licensees with the opportunity to scale commercial production capacity.
