S.A. a multi-national stainless steel manufacturing group based in Madrid,
Spain, has acquired VDM Metals GmbH, Werdohl, Germany, in transaction
valued at €532 million. VDM Metals is a global supplier of metals which, among
its products, offers a range of metal powders for Additive Manufacturing. The
acquisition has received approval from the European, US and Taiwanese
in their respective fields are said to compliment each other, and the
transaction will have clear manufacturing, sales and distribution benefits for
manufacture of special nickel alloys, as well as high-performance stainless
steels, as well as an R&D and innovation benchmark in the industry.
circumstances we are currently living, this acquisition makes more sense than
ever, since it diversifies our risk, adds a business line and establishes a
strategy that we believe will be successful, in addition to strengthening the
taking on this challenge,” stated Bernardo Velázquez, CEO of
seven production plants in Germany and the USA and employs almost 2,000. In
2018/19, VDM achieved sales of €852 million and EBITDA of €97 million. Its
Sino-Euro Materials Technologies of Xi’an Co., Ltd., Xi’an, China, a subsidiary company of the NIN Group, reports that its SS-PREP® SMT-Co25Cr... »
CNPC Powder, headquartered in Vancouver, Canada, and having production facilities in China, reports that its recently established Automated Metal P... »
Dyndrite Corporation, headquartered in Seattle, Washington, USA, has reported a successful first edition of its virtual Digital Manufacturing Inves... »
AM Powder Plus (AMP+), the corporate network established by Assonic Dorstener Siebtechnik GmbH, Solukon Maschinenbau GmbH and ULT AG in 2019, which... »
Our latest issue is now available to view online or download in PDF format.
As well as an extensive AM industry news section, this 184-page issue includes articles and reports on:
Cheaper powders, faster build speeds and no thermal stresses? How AM is going supersonic at SPEE3D
Current perspectives on metal AM: Hype, volume manufacturing and the geographies of production
From lightweighting and material efficiency to energy consumption: Where are we on AM’s sustainability journey?
The free to access Metal Additive Manufacturing magazine archive offers unparalleled insight into the world of metal Additive Manufacturing from a commercial and technological perspective through:
All past issues are available to download in PDF format, in either single page format or as double-page “spreads” for viewing on large monitors. All downloads are free of charge. Go to archive...
