Michael Ramirez will help manage the company’s financial planning, financial operations, accounting, risk management and information technology.
Venture Metals International , a provider of high-touch recycling solutions based in Dallas, has announced that it has appointed Michael Ramirez to serve as executive vice president and chief financial officer (CFO). Venture Metals is a portfolio company of Mill Rock Capital , a private investment firm based in New York.
In the new position, Ramirez will report to CEO Mike Uhrick. He will be responsible for financial planning, financial operations, accounting, risk management and information technology (IT) as well as for integrating the financial functions of Venture Metals and Versatile Processing Group, which Venture Metals acquired in partnership with Mill Rock Capital earlier this year.
Ramirez has more than 30 years of experience in finance as well as experience in the recycling and metals industries, according to a news release from Venture Metals. Prior to joining the company, he was executive vice president and CFO of Strategic Materials Inc. , a large glass recycler based in Houston. Before that, he was executive vice president and CFO of PSC LLC , a North American industrial, environmental and metal services company based in Houston.
“This is an important time in the Venture Metals story,” says Wayne Hale, chairman and chief operating officer of Venture Metals and senior partner at Mill Rock Capital. “We are fortunate to have a leader of Mike’s caliber at the financial helm of the organization, and I look forward to working with him.”
“I am honored to join this team at such an exciting juncture for Venture Metals,” Ramirez adds. “At a time of rising demand for increased transparency between generators and consumers of recycled metal, as well as a growing call for more environmentally sourced raw materials, Venture Metals offers an unmatched value proposition to the marketplace.”
Venture Metals International was founded in 1986 and procures, processes and sells nonferrous and other metals for recycling and remelting purposes. It has five facilities in the United States and one office in Seoul, South Korea.
The Helsinki-based company plans to reconfigure business units to create a Packaging Materials division.
The company also made several management-level appointments.
Stora Enso , Helsinki, plans to merge its containerboard business in the Packaging Solutions division with the Consumer Board division to create a new Packaging Materials division. The remaining business in Packaging Solutions along with Stora Enso’s recently created fiber unit will form a more focused Packaging Solutions division, the company reports in a news release on this reorganization.
The change will be effective on Jan. 1, 2020. With this transition, Hannu Kasurinen will be appointed executive vice president and head of Packaging Materials as of Jan. 1. According to Stora Enso, Kasurinen was previously senior vice president of Liquid Packaging and Carton Board in the Consumer Board division at the company. He has held several leadership positions in Stora Enso, including group treasurer, senior vice president of strategy and executive vice president of the Wood Products division.
“I am looking forward to continuing to build our Packaging Materials business together with our customers. Circularity is an integral part of Stora Enso’s business and a key driver for our product development. We will continue to innovate and answer consumers’ expectations for renewable, recyclable, fiber-based packaging materials with a low carbon footprint,” Kasurinen says about the new position.
In addition, Gilles van Nieuwenhuyzen will leave his position as executive vice president of Packaging Solutions Dec. 6 to pursue new career opportunities outside of the company. Stora Enso reports that the search for a new divisional head for Packaging Solutions will be initiated. David Ekberg, currently senior vice president and head of the Business Unit Corrugated Nordics in the division, is temporarily taking on the role acting as head of Packaging Solutions as of Dec. 6.
“I thank Gilles van Nieuwenhuyzen for his valuable contributions in developing our packaging business during his years with Stora Enso,” says Stora Enso President and CEO Annica Bresky.
She continues, “As the development towards a circular bioeconomy is accelerating in society, we are creating an organization that further strengthens our ability to drive innovation and sustainability with a common agenda. The Packaging Materials division will provide an even stronger customer offering for converters, brand owners and retailers containing both virgin and recycled board material. For Packaging Solutions, we are increasing our focus on growing new services and packaging solutions as well as innovation collaborations throughout the value chain for developing new renewable packaging. One example is our new formed fiber business, which will be included in the Packaging Solutions division. We will also be able to focus more on renewable packaging design.”
New York's Department of Environmental Conservation completes a study to help determine whether the state should expand its bottle deposit system to include glass wine and liquor bottles.
The New York Department of Environmental Conservation analyzed the feasibility of expanding the bottle deposit system to include wine, liquor bottles.
The New York Department of Environmental Conservation has completed a study on the state’s bottle bill in November to help determine whether the state should expand the program to include wine and liquor bottles. The Department of Environmental Conservation commissioned a study on expanding the state’s bottle bill through the help of the Rochester Institute of Technology’s Pollution Prevention Institute .
The study includes details on potential costs and benefits of expanding the program to include wine and liquor bottles.
“From an environmental standpoint, expanding the number of containers included in the bottle bill would very likely increase recycling rates of these containers, relieve approximately 164 [material recovery facilities] MRFs from a portion of a low-value and difficult-to-manage material and provide opportunity for nearly 315,000 tons of additional container glass to make its way through the redemption system where it has a much higher likelihood of being used in new container manufacturing and other higher use recycling outlets,” the Pollution Prevention Institute states in its conclusion of the report. “Initial estimates indicate that from a purely capacity-related standpoint, regional glass manufacturers have capacity to use the amount of additional cullet that may be made available if wine and liquor bottles were included in the deposit system.”
According to the study, adding a nickel deposit on liquor and wine bottles could help to divert these glass bottles from municipal recycling and waste streams. The study reports that this could also help to increase recycling rates of wine and liquor bottles by about 65 percent.
However, the study reports that a deposit would impose costs to liquor and wine sellers, including the expense of buying or renting reverse vending machines (RVMs), which could cost up to $36 million annually. The report states that retailers of wine and liquor “would incur significant costs by being required to become either a deposit initiator or dealer for the first time. Many of these businesses are small independently run enterprises that would incur these costs individually and not benefit from any economies of scale that larger chain establishments might.”
The Pollution Prevention Institute advised at the end of the report that this topic warrants further research and consideration before expanding the state’s bottle deposit program to include wine and liquor bottles. Some topics to further research include determining consumer willingness to return containers to a second set of locations such as wine and liquor stores; the capacity of third-party pick-up agents to transport and clean additional bottle bill glass; research into the feasibility of other options to increase glass recycling such as extended producer responsibility (EPR); in-depth cost-benefit analysis that determines variability across business type, size and location; and investigating the possible underreporting apparent from the discrepancy between the Container Recycling Institute sales data and that of the Department of Taxation and Finance.
Currently, Iowa, Maine and Vermont are the only states that include wine and liquor bottles in their bottle deposit systems, the study reports. If New York adopts this expansion, it would likely be the state with the largest volume of bottles included in a bottle deposit system due to its size.
New York’s Department of Environmental Conservation paid $27,000 to conduct this report. To view the report, click here .
