The results will feed into the JV’s ongoing exploration approach and broader understanding of the Youanmi project area.
Venus Metals Corporation Ltd ( ASX:VMC ) and joint venture partner Rox Resources Ltd ( ASX:RXL ) have delivered high-grade gold recoveries from initial metallurgical test-work at the Youanmi Gold Project in Western Australia.
The results demonstrate that the gold mineralisation at Youanmi, and especially at Grace, can be treated by conventional cyanide extraction methods.
With the Youanmi project host to several styles of mineralisation, 81 samples were selected for test-work from 32 reverse circulation holes.
Rox Resources is managing the Younami Gold Project on behalf of the joint venture partners.
Venus believes the results from the oxide, transitional and fresh zones at the Grace prospect are ‘exceptionally’ encouraging with gold recoveries averaging 97%, 94% and 95% respectively.
Rox Resources' managing director Alex Passmore said: “The main lode ore body at Youanmi that was mined historically was renowned as being refractory at depth.
“This first-pass metallurgical test work demonstrates that different primary mineralisation styles within the Youanmi project area such as the granite-hosted gold at Grace are clearly non-refractory, delivering excellent recoveries with conventional methods.”
Shares have been as much as 14% higher to 33 cents intra-day.
The outcomes achieved will feed into the company’s ongoing exploration approach and broader understanding of the Youanmi project with two drill rigs on site continuing work at the Grace prospect.
Intervals were selected to cover a range of gold grades, mineralisation styles and a degree of weathering and oxidation.
Samples were then analysed by the LeachWELL Accelerated Cyanide Leach technique to determine the cyanide extractable gold through this industry-standard method and provide an indication of the potential recoveries in standard gold processing circuits.
In conjunction with the exploration results that have been delivered within the project area over the last 12 months, Venus believes the results serve to reshape the perspectives on Youanmi to a highly prospective area with non-refractory mineralisation.
Metallurgical performance appears strongly related to the style and setting of gold mineralisation.
