Gold soared amid continued worries on the Coronavirus front. The worst of the Covid-19 pandemic is yet to come, the World Health Organization (WHO) has warned. WHO director Tedros Ghebreyesus claimed that the spread of the virus was actually speeding up, despite lockdowns being loosened around the world. Gold rose even as the US equities rallied and tested fresh eight year high above $1800 per ounce mark. However, Gold eased from these levels as steady equities and worries over demand at such elevated prices weighed on the metal. In a key update for Gold, the US Federal Reserve officials agreed in their previous meeting to deploy their full arsenal to help the US economy recover from the coronavirus-induced downturn. The central bank released minutes from its virtual gathering held on June 9 and 10, during which policymakers left interest rates near zero, and in their post-meeting statement, reiterated previous guidance that the benchmark federal fund rate will remain at a range between 0% and 0.25% it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. However, while this is largely supportive for the metal, these statements were mostly already factored in the prices in their move to eight year highs this week. The yellow metal eased under at $1790 per ounce. US-based Pfizer Inc said a COVID-19 vaccine being developed with German biotech firm BioNTech showed promise and was found to be well-tolerated in early-stage human trials. While rising stocks and upbeat news on the vaccine front are ideally supposed to be negative factors for Gold, the metal is still witnessing buying on ideas that the massive monetary easing globally would keep the metals value buttressed. MCX Gold futures also moved in tandem with the global prices though elevated levels above Rs 48K were given a muted reaction on lack of buying in retail markets. MCX Gold futures ended at Rs 48050 per 10 grams after approaching Rs 49K mark.
