What Kind Of Shareholder Owns Most New Pacific Metals Corp. (CVE:NUAG) Stock?
Simply Wall St March 5, 2020
Every investor in New Pacific Metals Corp. ( CVE:NUAG ) should be aware of the most powerful shareholder groups. Institutions often own shares in more established companies, while it’s not unusual to see insiders own a fair bit of smaller companies. Warren Buffett said that he likes “a business with enduring competitive advantages that is run by able and owner-oriented people.” So it’s nice to see some insider ownership, because it may suggest that management is owner-oriented.
With a market capitalization of CA$770m, New Pacific Metals is a small cap stock, so it might not be well known by many institutional investors. Our analysis of the ownership of the company, below, shows that institutional investors have bought into the company. We can zoom in on the different ownership groups, to learn more about New Pacific Metals.
What Does The Institutional Ownership Tell Us About New Pacific Metals?
Many institutions measure their performance against an index that approximates the local market. So they usually pay more attention to companies that are included in major indices.
As you can see, institutional investors own 5.5% of New Pacific Metals. This implies the analysts working for those institutions have looked at the stock and they like it. But just like anyone else, they could be wrong. It is not uncommon to see a big share price drop if two large institutional investors try to sell out of a stock at the same time. So it is worth checking the past earnings trajectory of New Pacific Metals, (below). Of course, keep in mind that there are other factors to consider, too.
We note that hedge funds don’t have a meaningful investment in New Pacific Metals. Silvercorp Metals Inc. is currently the largest shareholder, with 29% of shares outstanding. Next, we have Pan American Silver Corp. and Rui Feng as the second and third largest shareholders, holding 17% and 6.9%, of the shares outstanding, respectively. Rui Feng also happens to hold the title of Chairman of the Board.
Our analysis suggests that the top 3 shareholders collectively control 53% of the company’s shares, implying that they have considerable power to influence the company’s decisions.
While studying institutional ownership for a company can add value to your research, it is also a good practice to research analyst recommendations to get a deeper understand of a stock’s expected performance. There are a reasonable number of analysts covering the stock, so it might be useful to find out their aggregate view on the future.
The definition of an insider can differ slightly between different countries, but members of the board of directors always count. Management ultimately answers to the board. However, it is not uncommon for managers to be executive board members, especially if they are a founder or the CEO.
Insider ownership is positive when it signals leadership are thinking like the true owners of the company. However, high insider ownership can also give immense power to a small group within the company. This can be negative in some circumstances.
Our most recent data indicates that insiders own some shares in New Pacific Metals Corp.. As individuals, the insiders collectively own CA$69m worth of the CA$770m company. This shows at least some alignment. You can click here to see if those insiders have been buying or selling.
With a 40% ownership, the general public have some degree of sway over NUAG. While this size of ownership may not be enough to sway a policy decision in their favour, they can still make a collective impact on company policies.
Public companies currently own 46% of NUAG stock. This may be a strategic interest and the two companies may have related business interests. It could be that they have de-merged. This holding is probably worth investigating further.
While it is well worth considering the different groups that own a company, there are other factors that are even more important. For example, we’ve discovered 6 warning signs for New Pacific Metals (1 can’t be ignored!) that you should be aware of before investing here.
If you would prefer discover what analysts are predicting in terms of future growth, do not miss this free report on analyst forecasts .
NB: Figures in this article are calculated using data from the last twelve months, which refer to the 12-month period ending on the last date of the month the financial statement is dated. This may not be consistent with full year annual report figures.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
