Who Has Been Buying Spectrum Metals Limited (ASX:SPX) Shares?
It is not uncommon to see companies perform well in the years after insiders buy shares. On the other hand, we'd be remiss not to mention that insider sales have been known to precede tough periods for a business. So shareholders might well want to know whether insiders have been buying or selling shares in Spectrum Metals Limited ( ASX:SPX ).
Most investors know that it is quite permissible for company leaders, such as directors of the board, to buy and sell stock in the company. However, most countries require that the company discloses such transactions to the market.
Insider transactions are not the most important thing when it comes to long-term investing. But equally, we would consider it foolish to ignore insider transactions altogether. For example, a Columbia University study found that 'insiders are more likely to engage in open market purchases of their own company’s stock when the firm is about to reveal new agreements with customers and suppliers'.
insider Anthony Barton made the biggest insider purchase in the last 12 months. That single transaction was for AU$233k worth of shares at a price of AU$0.024 each. We do like to see buying, but this purchase was made at well below the current price of AU$0.089. Because it occurred at a lower valuation, it doesn't tell us much about whether insiders might find today's price attractive.
Happily, we note that in the last year insiders paid AU$314k for 13.12m shares. But insiders sold 3800000 shares worth AU$91k. Overall, Spectrum Metals insiders were net buyers last year. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
Spectrum Metals is not the only stock insiders are buying. So take a peek at this free list of growing companies with insider buying.
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. We usually like to see fairly high levels of insider ownership. Insiders own 11% of Spectrum Metals shares, worth about AU$13m, according to our data. We do note, however, it is possible insiders have an indirect interest through a private company or other corporate structure. Overall, this level of ownership isn't that impressive, but it's certainly better than nothing!
What Might The Insider Transactions At Spectrum Metals Tell Us?
It doesn't really mean much that no insider has traded Spectrum Metals shares in the last quarter. But insiders have shown more of an appetite for the stock, over the last year. Insiders do have a stake in Spectrum Metals and their transactions don't cause us concern. To put this in context, take a look at how a company has performed in the past. You can access this detailed graph of past earnings, revenue and cash flow .
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
