Will the Silvercrest Metals Inc (TSE:SIL) share price keep rising?
Despite the market volatility, shares in Silvercrest Metals Inc ( TSE:SIL ) have been in an uptrend in recent months. The question now for investors is whether that price strength will continue.
Finding stocks with the potential to break-out as their popularity grows is a strategy used by some of the world’s most successful traders.
Knowing what drives relative strength in share prices can help you find profitable momentum trades...
How has the Silvercrest Metals Inc (TSE:SIL) share price performed?
Silvercrest Metals Inc operates in the Precious Metals & Minerals industry and in terms of relative price strength the stock has performed well against the market over the past year:
Relative strength is a useful tool in the armoury of technical traders and investors. It’s an instant measure of how a stock has performed in comparison with a benchmark.
And while there are no certainties about which way a stock will move next, research shows that price trends like this often persist.
Studies by leading experts on momentum show that stocks with the strongest price strength tend to keep up the pace for anywhere up to one year, as investors increasingly buy into them.
Silvercrest Metals Inc is currently among the stocks with the strongest six-month and one-year relative price strength in the market. A look at its StockReport could offer more insight into what’s driving the momentum in its share price - and whether that might continue.
To find more stocks like Silvercrest Metals Inc, you'll need to equip yourself with professional-grade data and screening tools. This kind of information has traditionally been closely guarded by professional fund managers. But our team of financial analysts have carefully constructed this screen - Stockopedia’s Price Momentum - which gives you everything you need. So why not come and take a look?
As per our Terms of Use, Stockopedia is a financial news & data site, discussion forum and content aggregator. Our site should be used for educational & informational purposes only. We do not provide investment advice, recommendations or views as to whether an investment or strategy is suited to the investment needs of a specific individual. You should make your own decisions and seek independent professional advice before doing so. Remember: Shares can go down as well as up. Past performance is not a guide to future performance & investors may not get back the amount invested.
