ROSEMONT, Ill.--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Wynnchurch Capital, L.P. ("Wynnchurch"), a leading middle market private equity firm, announced today that Michael Salgat has joined the firm as a Managing Director focused on operations and portfolio management, and Jerry Gao has joined as a Senior Associate.
Prior to joining Wynnchurch, Mr. Salgat was an Operating Partner with New State Capital Partners focused on financial leadership at portfolio companies. Mr. Salgat began his career as an Investment Banker at Candlewood Partners and Donnelly Penman & Partners. He later served as Chief Financial Officer at Sipi Metals Corp and Vice President of Strategy and Finance at Tecumseh Products Company. Mr. Salgat earned his B.S. in Finance at John Carroll University. Mr. Gao recently completed his M.B.A. at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and has worked at Palladium Equity as an Associate and Houlihan Lokey as a Financial Analyst.
Chris O'Brien, Managing Partner at Wynnchurch, said, “We are excited to have Michael and Jerry join the Wynnchurch team. Michael brings twenty years of experience in various financial and portfolio operations leadership positions and Jerry has spent nearly five years in private equity and investment banking focused on developing investment theses across a variety of sectors. They are great additions to Wynnchurch and will contribute meaningfully to our continued growth.”
Wynnchurch Capital is actively seeking investment opportunities for its $2.277 billion Fund V. In February, Wynnchurch acquired Pennsylvania Machine Works, a fully integrated manufacturer of high pressure forged fittings and branch connections. Other recent Wynnchurch investments include: Clyde Industries, a leading designer and manufacturer of sootblowers, a critical component within recovery, power, and steam boilers; Eastern Metal Supply, a leading value-added distributor of aluminum extrusions and related products; MPL Holdings, a leader in cultured marble products for the hospitality and multi-family housing markets; and two closed-die forging facilities of Allegheny Technologies that produce high-value, complex forgings for OEMs.
Wynnchurch Capital, L.P., headquartered in the Chicago suburb of Rosemont, Illinois, with offices in California and Canada, was founded in 1999, and is a leading middle-market private equity investment firm. Wynnchurch’s strategy is to partner with middle market companies in the United States and Canada that possess the potential for substantial growth and profit improvement. Wynnchurch Capital manages a number of private equity funds with $4.2 billion of committed capital under management and specializes in recapitalizations, growth capital, management buyouts, corporate carve-outs and restructurings. For more information, please visit: https://www.wynnchurch.com.
