This week on global stocks was absolutely brutal. We dropped from almost all-time highs to the lowest levels since October. Almost 4 months of rises wiped out in a week. That has to hurt.
This week on global stocks was absolutely brutal. We dropped from almost all-time highs to the lowest levels since October. Almost 4 months of rises wiped out in a week. That has to hurt. On the Forex Market, we have the dominance of safe heaven currencies: CHF and JPY. In this analysis, I will analyze the situation on the Japanese Yen.
First, Yen Index. First signs of power appeared on Monday, when the index confirmed the false breakout below important mid-term support (827). Other steps were made on Wednesday and Thursday, when the price broke the mid-term down trendline and the horizontal resistance on the 837. Yesterday’s candle just made everything clear – buyers are fully controlling the situation at the moment. Sentiment for Japanese currency is currently positive.
Now, USDJPY , which we analyzed recently. In our previous analysis we pointed out the giant symmetric triangle and the breakout to the upside. In theory, that was a great buy signal. Just in theory though as in practice, the price met a worthy opponent – highs from the 2019. This is were the price reversed and created a false breakout pattern. Now we are back below the upper line of the triangle, which is a very negative signal for the nearest future.
Now, everyone’s favorite, one and only – GBPJPY . Here, the situation is pretty clear. The price broke the 141 support, which automatically switched the sentiment into a negative one. This level was a crucial resistance from October to December 2019 and later a crucial support, till yesterday. Price staying below this area is definitely pessimistic.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
