(Bloomberg) -- A Federal Reserve yield-curve control policy would likely weigh on the dollar-yen, with the length of its target maturity dictating the pressure on the pair, according to Japan’s currency strategists.
Tokyo market players -- long used to trading under a YCC regime -- suspect the Fed will likely aim for the three-to-five year sector, where yields have modest room to decline. But a target further out the curve could weaken the greenback toward the 100 per yen level as investors react to the impact of increased dollar liquidity, higher fiscal spending and expected lower yields, they said in a series of interviews.
“Fixing the target at the medium-term zone will make it clear there is no upside to the dollar/yen,” said Daisuke Karakama, chief market economist at Mizuho Bank Ltd. in Tokyo. “It will be more surprising if it’s set at 10 years, and the impact will be bigger to push the pair’s core range below 105 from 105-110 currently.”
Despite the slump in U.S. yields this year, the yen is up just 1% against the greenback to around the 107.50 level, and slipped 0.4% in the second quarter. Volatility in the pair has settled down after significant swings during the jump in coronavirus fears in March.
How Fed Could Goose Economy via Yield-Curve Control: QuickTake
Investors are debating whether the Fed will adopt a yield-curve control policy to help support the U.S. economy -- setting a target yield for a specific Treasuries maturity -- later this year, with officials showing no readiness at their June meeting to commit to the strategy. The Bank of Japan has used yield-curve control as part of its monetary stimulus program since 2016.
Economists expect the Fed to target two- or five-year maturities should it implement YCC, a recent Bloomberg survey showed.
Here’s how Japanese strategists see the potential Fed move:
A $2.9 trillion stimulus that accounts for 15% of U.S. gross domestic product means “there is no reason why the dollar should strengthen if there is so much of it out there”
Osamu Takashima, chief FX strategist at Citigroup Global Markets Japan Inc.
“Given the lack of dollar/yen sensitivity to interest-rate differentials now, the impact would be marginal” at one yen or so, as past cases show a 1% change in yields results in about a 10 yen move on average
YCC may spark an adjustment in the valuation imbalance, as the dollar-yen around 107 now is too high in light of a U.S. policy rate near zero
“It comes down to how the U.S. draws in foreign funds. If it can’t offer higher yields, then it would need to appeal to investors with a cheap dollar. It is basically a factor for a weaker dollar and higher yen”
“It’s unclear to what extent markets are pricing in YCC, but if it is implemented, it will be a surprise and will add to dollar selling pressure over the longer run”
“It will add to the dollar selling trend which is becoming clear now and likely drive the dollar-yen below 105” as falling yields slow inflows to the U.S.
Yujiro Goto, head of foreign-exchange strategy at Nomura Holdings Inc.
Another focus is whether it will target a range like the BOJ, which aims for 10-year yields 20bps above and below zero
While there is risk of YCC reducing volatility, the Fed is probably studying the BOJ which changed the band to boost trading. So there will be some moves in the dollar-yen
Missing BloombergQuint's WhatsApp service? Join our Telegram channel or activate Website Notifications.
