For all the angst about trade wars, geopolitics and a sputtering and overly indebted global economy, 2019 might just be the best year investors have ever had.
The numbers are staggering. Global stocks have piled on more than $US10 trillion ($14.4 trillion), bonds have been on fire, oil has surged almost 25 per cent, former crisis spots Greece and Ukraine have top-performed, and even gold has sparkled.
World markets have had a year to remember.
Wall Street and MSCI's near 50-country world index have both stormed to record highs after 30 per cent and 24 per cent leaps. The Australian sharemarket is up around 20 per cent. Europe, Japan, China and Brazil are all up at least 20 per cent in dollar terms too. Not exactly shoddy.
A mirror image of 2018, when almost everything fell? Perhaps. But there have been a couple of important drivers.
One was China showing it was serious about stimulus for its $US14 trillion economy. The other was the screeching change of direction by the world's top central banks, led by the Federal Reserve, which cut US interest rates for the first time since the financial crisis more than a decade earlier.
It has been a relentless rally across the board for tech over the last couple of months and it is possible that it continues into next year.
"Whereas a year ago the Fed was raising rates and earnings were rolling over, this year you have felt the Fed has been on your side," said James Clunie, who manages asset firm Jupiter's Absolute Return Fund.
"They are willing to do QE4 at a stock market (record) high, which is extraordinary," he added, referring to Fed efforts to bring down a spike in money market rates that some suggest could presage a fourth round of quantitative easing asset purchases.
That Fed shift and the worldwide blizzard of rate cuts that have come since have fired bond markets up like a rocket.
US Treasuries, the world's benchmark government IOU, have made a whopping 9.4 percent after yields plunged as much as 120 basis points. That followed a near 40 basis point fall the last quarter of 2018, after five quarters in which they had consistently risen.
German Bunds - Europe's safest asset - have had their best year in five years, making roughly 5.5 per cent in euro terms as the European Central Bank has reversed course too. The yield on 10-year debt dropped below zero percent for the first time since 2016 in March and dived as deep as -0.74 per cent in September.
Oil prices prices have soared around 25 per cent in 2019.
In commodities, oil has raced up almost 25 per cent following its best first quarter since 2009. That, plus key dividend rule changes, has made Russia's stock market the best in the world with a 40 per cent rise and also made the rouble a top three currency.
Metals have had a more mixed time. Copper is only 4 per cent higher after buckling badly when trade tensions flared in the middle of the year, and aluminium is down 2 per cent. But palladium, used in car and truck catalytic converters, has boomed 55 per cent, while gold has had its best year since 2010 with a 15 per cent jump.
A statistic likely to make most jaws drop is that Greek banks- remember all that euro debt crisis and capital controls stuff a few years back? - have been some of the world's best-performing stocks this year.
The country's biggest lender Piraeus Bank is up 250 per cent, as is smaller Attica Bank, helping make Athens Europe's strongest bourse this year. But even those gains look skimpy in comparison to Californian video streaming darling Roko, whose shares have risen 440 per cent this year.
Tech has remained top more broadly. Apple may just have lost its crown as world's most valuable firm to Saudi Aramco but it can console itself with its 77 per cent leap this year.
Facebook has surged 57 per cent, Microsoft 53 per cent, Google 30 per cent, Netflix 24 per cent and Amazon 19 percent. China's tech sector is right in mix too with a 64 per cent rally and online behemoth Alibaba up 53 per cent.
Cryptoassets have been typically wild. Bitcoin was up over up 260 per cent in June but it has been hauled back to around 85 per cent.
Riskier high-yield debt, corporate bonds and local currency emerging market bonds and have all brought in between 11 per cent-14 per cent while Ukraine's dollar bonds and Greece's euro bonds have piled on over 30 per cent.
