On hold: Live cattle export ship Yangtze Fortune is waiting to load off Portland.
UPDATE, 12.30pm: A federal Department of Agriculture spokesman confirmed the shipment of 5000 dairy heifers had been halted.
"On August 23, the Department of Agriculture directed an exporter to halt a consignment of breeder cattle for China," he said in a statement.
"This decision was due to the department's concerns that elements of China's strict export protocols had not been adhered to in relation to this specific consignment. This matter does not relate to Bluetongue zones.
" A joint investigation between the department and Agriculture Victoria is underway, and as such it would be inappropriate to provide any further details at this time.
"The department continues to engage with the Chinese authorities to provide regular updates.
"There are no current restrictions on the domestic movement of the cattle. This is a commercial decision for the exporter.
An Agriculture Victoria spokeswoman said there were currently no concern around the welfare of the cattle.
"Agriculture Victoria, together with our Commonwealth Department of Agriculture continue to work across the live export supply chain to ensure animals destined for live export meet the importation requirements," she said.
"Livestock traceability underpins Victoria's strong biosecurity system, providing the ability to rapidly trace livestock and contain disease in the event of an emergency disease outbreak.
An industry source said Agriculture Victoria was working closely with the Commonwealth Department of Agriculture and members of the livestock export industry to ensure cattle presented for live export to China met the importation requirements.
An investigation is currently underway after a consignment was stopped after concerns the cattle designed for live export did not meet China's import requirements.
During the 2018-19 financial year, 129,331 cattle were exported through Victorian ports to China, an important contributor to the Victorian economy.
The live export industry is worth $1.5 billion to the Australian economy and is a significant trade market for the livestock sector.
Trading partners expect excellent standards and high integrity in the certification of both boxed and live exports. Traceability forms a key part of this supply chain confidence.
The National Livestock Identification System provides for the national standards for the identification and tracking of livestock in Australia for biosecurity, food safety, product integrity, welfare and market access purposes.
The information on the NLIS database about livestock movements also provides assurances to customers about the veracity of the production history of livestock, including those destined for live export.
When live animals are being prepared for export, state and territory governments are requested to provide property of origin disease clearances, according the requirements of the particular country to which the animals are to be exported.
The Commonwealth, through the Department of Agriculture, has ultimate sign-off through its health certification process and is responsible for licensing export companies.
Earlier: About 5000 dairy heifers bound for China on an export ship have been in limbo for a month due to "traceability issues" - believed to relate to ear tags.
Port of Portland harbor master Jason Sweetman said a cattle export ship Yangtze Fortune was due at Portland on August 3 and the dairy heifers were to be loaded in the following days.
"We are still waiting for the vessel to have its documentation in order. There are no cattle onboard," he said.
"When the documentation is in order we expect the vessel in when there is a berth available, to be loaded and then sail.
"Until then the ship is just sitting out there in the ocean," he said.
It's understood the cattle, valued at about $10 million, are being cared for in feedlots near Portland and were in pre-export quarantine holding feedlots prior to the halt order.
Australian Livestock Exporters' Council chief executive officer Mark Harvey-Sutton said when a consignment was halted it was drastic action.
"The exact details are not known to ALEC as the investigation is still underway," he said.
On hold: Live cattle export ship Yangtze Fortune is waiting to load off Portland.
"It appears that the federal Department of Agriculture, along with Agriculture Victoria, are investigating integrity and traceability with the shipment and that China's export protocols have been adhered to in relation to this specific consignment.
"These systems are in place for a reason and should be adhered to at all times, as an industry transparency and traceability is essential.
"Obviously, the expense to the exporter is huge and our trade relationship with China important to maintain.
"We hope the department is able to conclude its investigation as quickly as possible," he said.
Questions have been asked of both the federal and state departments of agriculture today about the current position of the shipment.
