Availability: The app is available to download on Android and Apple devices.
App function: Allows individual farms to compare prices and receive quotes from multiple suppliers for feed, fuel, fertiliser, seed, chemicals and equipment.
Suppliers respond with competitive quotes within minutes and any transactions are carried out through the app.
The app logs transactions and displays them graphically, showing expenditure and savings made.
Availability: The app is available to download on Android and Apple devices.
App function: Registers calf births, manages breeding-cycle information, stores animal movements and holds individual health records.
Uses the smartphone camera to scan barcodes or QR codes to capture information such as medicine use, batch numbers and expiry dates for compliance purposes.
It includes optical character recognition technology, which enables the smartphone to read numbers and text, making it easier and safer to log livestock tag details at a distance.
The smartphone’s Bluetooth capability is also exploited to integrate with other smart devices such as EID systems and weigh scales.
Availability: The app is available to download on Android and Apple devices.
App function: Enables farmers to record farm data on breeding, herd health, cattle movements and field records.
The app connects to government databases and uses Bluetooth-connected EID readers and weigh heads to log records.
Data can be stored using the voice recorder to save time and keep the phone cleaner.
All information is cloud-based, allowing users to view records anywhere and synchronise data when internet access is available.
Cost: App needs a FarmWizard software account to run.
The whole software package, including the app, is a minimum of £299/year and is dependent on herd size.
Availability: The app is available to download on Android and Apple devices.
App function: Smartphone-based version of AHDB’s Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) offering best-practice guidance on the application of mineral fertilisers, manures and slurries to crops and grassland.
The app includes automatic updates on new advice or governing policy, a note-taking facility and video content.
The content is available without a mobile connection once downloaded.
Availability: The app is available to download on Android and Apple devices.
App function: The full version allows farmers to monitor grass growth and provides advice on management actions required.
The app was developed by Aberystwyth University and calculates yield and usage from a number of parameters, including sward height, grazing system, stock type and previous grass measurements.
Feedback is provided in a traffic-light graphic indicating whether a field is producing the optimal yield for stock or too much or too little grass.
Availability: The app is available to download on Android and Apple devices.
App function: The app is linked to Shearwell’s NLMD online management software and connects to BCMS to send cattle births, movements and deaths.
It can also record medicine stocks, treatments and procedures, along with cattle performance by logging weights and growth rates.
Cost: Free for limited functionality or three-month trial version. Full version £30/year
Availability: The app is available to download on Android and Apple devices.
App function: The app is designed to simplify feed management by calculating total forage available in both fresh weight and dry matter from clamped and baled stocks.
The user inputs the dry matter and the clamp dimension or bale weight along with the forage required during housing.
The app then determines if the farmer has a sufficient forage stock or needs to source more feed.
