13 breakthrough technologies support sustainable, efficient livestock industry
As consumers continue to demand better animal welfare and improved sustainability across the livestock sector, new innovations are emerging that enable producers to monitor herd health in real time, prevent disease outbreaks, and optimize nutrition. Thirteen of these breakthrough technologies will be spotlighted at the Animal AgTech Innovation Summit in San Francisco on March 16, 2020. Solutions range from a nonantibiotic treatment for bovine mastitis to autonomous livestock monitoring.
Armenta (Israel). This company has developed the first nonantibiotic treatment for bovine mastitis using acoustic pulse technology (APT). Mastitis causes annual losses of over $6 billion in the U.S. and Europe. Infected cows treated with APT have shown 70% cure rates and consequently 10% increase in milk yield.
BinSentry (Canada). An agricultural IoT company, this start-up is solving a 40-year-old problem in the animal feed industry – reliable inventory monitoring of on-farm feed bins. BinSentry’s IoT sensor enables feedmills and vertical integrators to realize significant cost savings by enabling dramatic increases in operational efficiency.
CattleEye (Ireland). This start-up has created the world’s first autonomous livestock monitoring platform, which will improve the lives of farmers as well as their livestock. Its deep learning AI platform is designed to interpret visual imagery of livestock from web cameras and extract valuable insights about those cows.
Faromatics (Spain). By employing robotics, artificial intelligence, and big data, this company is working to increase animal welfare and farm productivity in intensive animal production. Its flagship product, the ChickenBoy, is the world’s first ceiling-suspended robot that monitors ambient conditions, health and welfare, and equipment function for broiler chickens.
FarrPro (USA). This start-up was founded to change the way the world rears pork. Its Haven platform reduces piglet mortality, saves energy, and improves sow welfare by creating a microclimate environment for piglets to stay safe, warm, and healthy. The platform is the first step in the company’s roadmap to bring traceability and automation to the pork industry and provide the insight and control required to prevent disease outbreaks, rapidly develop vaccines, and safeguard the pork supply chain.
General Probiotics (USA). This company is developing innovative cellbots and antimicrobial probiotics that eliminate harmful pathogens in livestock, enable the production of safe food, and reduce the current dependency on antibiotics. Its core competency is the precise engineering of advanced probiotics using synthetic biology and artificial intelligence.
H2OAlert (The Netherlands). This start-up has created the first uniquely wireless IoT real-time water control management system for dairy and beef cattle. The quality and quantity of the cattle drinking water is checked in real time, 24/7, for pollution and possible malfunctions in the water supply. In this way, the H2OAlert system and the data obtained will result in a direct contribution to animal welfare plus milk and meat production.
Hencol (Sweden). In order to give producers an optimized decision support system, this company is developing the next level of precision livestock farming with its big data and AI algorithms. Hencol enables digitalization of the entire value chain with significant benefits for all.
Jaguza Tech (Uganda). This company has developed an offline and cloud-IoT-based livestock management system, which features animal healthcare monitoring and recordings of IoT sensors, farm management systems, and animal livestock identification as well as utilizing animal smart tags and QR code readings via wireless technologies.
Moonsyst (Hungary). The smart monitoring system this start-up has created for progressive dairy and beef producers collects different parameters of livestock. This real-time data helps producers increase productivity and detect disease, stress, and heat.
Nextbiotics (USA). This company’s goal is to leverage cutting-edge synthetic biology tools and bacteriophage technology to provide unique solutions to the antibiotic resistance crisis. It offers solutions to destroy pathogenic (bad) bacteria. Its first product is a feed additive for animal producers to enhance animal nutrition and significantly reduce the use of antibiotics.
Roper (USA). This start-up is revolutionizing beef production with a solar-powered, GPS ear tag and companion mobile app. Roper’s technology provides geolocation and health monitoring of cattle in a pasture, which enables producers to cut management time by 30% and maximize fertility and nutrition, sustainably manage grazing, and pinpoint sick or distressed cattle.
Simple Ag Solutions (USA). A B2B, software-as-a-service company, this start-up is bridging the gap between animal health and production. Its platform was developed for livestock and poultry producers to help manage antibiotic use, optimize production, and facilitate audits.
The full program for the Animal AgTech Innovation Summit , including a list of speakers and registration information, can be found at animalagtech.com . An early bird offer is available until January 30, 2020, as well as special rates for start-ups, academics, NGOs, and government. The event is co-located with the World Agri-Tech and Future Food-Tech summits.
