The RNA Paddock to Palate competition may look a little different this year, but it has once again showcased some of the finest beef the industry has to offer.
Weight gain results of the prestigious competition presented by JBS Australia were announced on Wednesday, with Queensland beef producers taking a clean sweep of the first phase of competition and sharing in a total prize pool of almost $65,000.
The Bassingthwaighte family from Yarrawonga, Wallumbilla, were one of the most successful entrants, with their pens of six Santa Gertrudis cattle placing in each of the three classes they entered.
Meanwhile, Gyranda Pastoral Company from Theodore also placed well with Santa Gertrudis cattle. Their pen of six won Class 40, with one of those cattle claiming the highest individual weight gain award in the class.
Entering Santa Gertrudis cattle into the competition also paid off for Jabinda Pastoral Company, Tambo, after their pen of six won Class 37, while Palgrove Pastoral Company, Dalveen, secured the highest individual weight gain award for Class 37 with one of their Charolais/Angus-cross beasts.
A Charolais/Angus-cross beast from Palgrove Pastoral Company, Dalveen, secured the highest individual weight gain award for Class 37.
McIntyre Agriculture was also a standout entrant in the competition, winning the highest individual weight gain for Class 38 with one of their Angus cattle and placing second for their pen of six.
The St George-based company also entered Wagyu-cross cattle in the 2019/20 370 day Wagyu Challenge (Class 39), with their pens of six claiming second and third place.
However, it was Austpec Pastoral from Drillham who stole the show in Class 39, securing first place for their Wagyu-cross pen. One of those cattle scored the highest individual weight gain award.
RNA beef cattle committee chairman Gary Noller said it was pleasing to see 819 head of cattle entered in the competition this year.
"Our exhibitors suffered one of the worst droughts in Australian history last year, but many still held cattle over for our competition which is a real testament to not only their resilience but also to how valuable they see this competition in benchmarking their cattle," he said.
"The health and welfare of the cattle at both the Beef City (Classes 37,38 and 40) and Sapphire (Class 39) feedlots has been phenomenal, with the cattle gaining well across all four classes."
