The 44 Farms International Beef Cattle Academy is accepting applications for its 2020-2021 online certification program. Applications for this comprehensive certificate program, through Texas A&M AgriLife Extension, open June 20 and are due August 15.
“We’ve developed the strongest course offerings paired with industry-leading experts, and we anticipate our third program year to build on the success of the previous two years,” says Reinaldo Cooke, program coordinator and associate professor at Texas A&M University. “Students can quickly apply class learnings to their operation or business — that’s an instant return on investment.”
Prospective students should apply as soon as possible. An ideal student candidate is eager to learn and is passionate about driving the industry forward. Class size for the prestigious academy is limited to offer an exclusive and customized learning experience. The academy’s online learning format allows anyone from across the globe to participate.
Students currently enrolled in 2019-2020 offered these perspectives for future attendees:
“Because the classes are set up to be flexible, it’s really ideal for students who work during the day. I spend most of my day on the farm, so being able to participate at my own pace makes it much more valuable and worthwhile.” — Kazakhstan student
“For me and my operation, International Beef Cattle Academy has been a real game-changer. The materials and classes have opened my mind for so many opportunities and new approaches in our business.” — South American student
“My favorite course was the one over nutrition, but all of the courses were very valuable. I was able to learn even more than I did from my college classes.” — Romanian student
The 44 Farms International Beef Cattle Academy consists of eight courses at 30 learning hours per course. Classes are taught online with pre-recorded lectures. In addition to the pre-recorded lectures, there is a weekly interactive session for the student and instructor. The one-on-one sessions are customized based on individual student needs, says Ky Pohler, program coordinator and assistant professor at Texas A&M University.
