US website Crowd Cow offers a whole cow for purchase in 50 parts, all of which have to sell before the animal is slaughtered. It’s a scheme that is raising the steaks
Just hope these website guys aren’t, um, cowboys.
It had to happen at some point. You can use the internet to buy shares in crypto-currencies or to invest in someone having a potato salad for lunch . So, why not to buy shares in whole animals?
Crowd Cow is a new US project combining net entrepreneurship and what I’ll loosely call “farming”, to let people divvy up an entire cow online. The lucky animal is put up for bidding and people purchase different cuts, including flat-iron (butler’s) steaks for $10 (£7), shanks for $14 and short ribs for $30. Only once every single piece of the beast has been spoken for is the auction deemed successful, at which point, the cow (in their words) “tips”. The meat is then delivered to (wait for it) the “steak holders”.
The founders, Joe Heitzeberg and Ethan Lowry – two tech entrepreneurs from Seattle – came up with the scheme as a way to ensure people were able to cheaply purchase high-quality beef, direct from farmers. In addition – unlike with supermarket produce – they would also know exactly where the contents of their boeuf bourguignon had come from. Heitzeberg and Lowry have said they are railing against the “mystery meat” of supermarkets, that “people should know what they’re putting in their bodies”, and that beef “should be marketed, sold and experienced like a microbrew or like wine”.
As well as more popular cuts of meat, you can also buy the heart ($18), the tongue ($22) or a collection of bones that “can be simmered easily to create nourishing, delicious broths” ($9). The scheme has proved so popular that the 50 shares of each animal are often claimed within hours. Customers have to sign up to a mailing list to be in with a chance; the Crowd Cow website bears the warning that “cows sell out quickly”. But is it the kind of thing that would take off in Britain?
“I think it would work very well over here,” says James Smart, chef and co-founder of Save the Date cafe, a London eatery that serves meals made from ingredients other businesses have thrown away. “There are already a few schemes linking up businesses with their local farmers, but this model is so much more direct. The fact that you don’t waste any part of the animal is incredible, too. I’d sign up straight away!”
There’s a downside: it seems unlikely to launch in the UK any time soon. The founders’ next likely step appears to be California, according to Seattle local news . But given the growing frustration among British farmers over their treatment by supermarkets , this funding model could be the future. If it can help stop farmers being casualties of price wars between grocery chains then it can only be a good thing. You might even call it a cash cow.
This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information .
