While the cancellation of agricultural shows across the country has left thousands of cattle exhibitors disappointed, online competitions are filling the void.
When this month's Sydney Royal Easter Show was abandoned Matt and Shannon Sowden, cattle breeders from Kingaroy in Queensland, decided to stage the COVID-19 2020 Virtual Online Show.
"There's a lot of money, time and effort goes into preparing cattle, so we thought 'let's give these people an opportunity to show what they've got'," Mr Sowden said.
The online competition, run on the Sowden's Five Star Creative Promotions Facebook page, attracted more than 500 entries in the steer and stud categories.
"It was ridiculous, we thought if we get 200 to 250 that we'd be happy with that and the response that we've got has been unbelievable really," Mr Sowden said.
Coronavirus update: Follow all the latest news in our daily wrap.
The judges for each category, featuring international judges from Canada and the United States, were given one photo of each animal to make their assessment before deciding on the winners.
"It's like something out of a book really, you can sit there and assess the angles on the animal, the looseness of skin," Mr Sowden said.
"Obviously you don't see that mobility side of it and how they carry themselves when they walk, but you can pick any good animal of a photo if you've got an eye for cattle really."
The Tookawhile Charolais Stud at Rukenvale, on the New South Wales Far North Coast, heads into the Champion of Champions judging with two contenders after winning the Charolais Champion Bull and Champion Female.
The Nicholls family had been preparing Piccadilly Punch and Pitch Perfect, as well as a steer that placed second in Open Steer, for the World Charolais Congress at the Ekka in August.
"It was really disappointing because we were really looking forward to showcasing our cattle to the rest of the world," Nicole Nicholls said.
Stacey Clarke and Catherine Nicholls prepare Tookawhile Piccadilly Punch for his photo entry.
But the Charolais breeder and full-time dairy farmer said she felt honoured to be involved in the competition, and for her cattle to be acknowledged by the judges.
"They really liked the thickness and softness in our bull and the correctness in our cow," Ms Nicholls said.
"She's doing a really good job on her calf and she's just really structurally sound.
"We have had them on feed getting them prepared; they definitely weren't in show preparation because Ekka [was] still a fair way away but I presented them like I would on a show day really for the photographs."
Three years ago, at just 15 years old, Armidale's Kareena Dawson started Tintara Murray Greys, and it was the first bull she bred that brought her home the gold in the COVID-19 2020 Virtual Online Show.
"I broke him in and started taking him to all the local shows, and he was meant to go to Sydney [Royal]," Ms Dawson said.
"I went there last year with another stud, but this year would have been my first year going for myself."
Your questions on coronavirus answered:
