For the week ending 21 March, the all-prime GB deadweight cattle price stood-on from the week before at 335.4p/kg. Estimated prime slaughter was up 1,700 head on the week, to 36,600 head.
Overall, steers averaged 335.7p/kg, up just 0.3p on the week. Those meeting R4L spec averaged 346.9p/kg, unchanged on the week.
Heifers overall averaged 336.7p/kg, down 0.8p on the week, while those of R4L spec remained relatively unchanged on the week at 346.1p/kg.
Young bulls had a more positive week, with the overall price up nearly 5p on the week to average 319.4p/kg. Those of R3 spec averaged 331.8p/kg, up 0.7p from last week.
Cull cow prices rose by nearly 3p on the week to average 237.2p/kg, as estimated slaughter ticked up by 88 head on the week to 10,300 head.
Prices are reportedly holding at present because of heightened retail demand and “panic buying”. However, it is uncertain as to how long this might continue. Reports suggest some more expensive cuts are going into mincers to satisfy retail demand, although forequarter beef that was intended for foodservice has become available too, which has helped retail supplies. While short-term retail demand has been extremely positive, if too much is sold as mince without a rise in price for this product, then this may negatively affect carcase values. However, high mince demand may be offering continued support to cow prices.
You can subscribe to receive Beef and Lamb market news straight to your inbox. Simply fill in your contact details on our online form.
The UK wheat crop is expected to be smaller year-on-year, with UK crop conditions now varying across regions.
After several weeks of sharp rises, GB cattle prices were largely steady this week.
The drought in Australia has ended, and cattle farmers there are now looking to restock which limit production this year.
The post-coronavirus recovery of Ireland’s beef throughputs could cast uncertainty over GB prices.
Prime cattle supplies have picked up slightly, attracted by the higher prices, but also perhaps by farmers looking to take the pressure off available grazing.
In April, both UK imports and exports of fresh/frozen beef fell 15% year-on-year.
Overall the disruption and uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to continue for many more months. For a second consecutive year, global meat production is expected to contract.
Deadweight cattle prices continued to climb during the week ending 13 June.
UK beef and veal production in May totalled 67,700 tonnes, down 13% year-on-year.
The lack of rainfall, particularly across England and Wales, has started to seriously restrict grass growth.
The GB all-prime average price rose 8p in the week ending 6 June to 353.0p/kg.
Beef production in the EU was down 0.4% in March compared to the previous year.
Red meat demand appears to have bounced back and is now overall slightly up year-on-year. Beef and pork have both recorded growth, while lamb is steady.
Across the board GB deadweight cattle prices have continued on an upwards trend. During the week ending 30 May, the all-prime average measure increased 7.5p week-on-week.
The GB cattle population at 1 April 2020 was smaller than at the same point in 2019, according to data from British Cattle Movement Service. The total number of cattle under 30 months was back by around 74,500 head.
The UK retail market currently prices mince and top cuts slightly differently than other countries, including those operating in the global beef market.
There have been many significant challenges in the US beef market since March.
The continued lack of significant rainfall in the UK has raised concerns for the quality of the quality of the planted crop.
The all-prime GB average price rose 7.7p on the week, to average 337.6p/kg.
