Agriculture students that are passionate about nature friendly farming can apply for a bursary worth £5,000 to support them throughout their studies.
Jordans Cereals and The Prince’s Countryside Fund launched the Sustainable Agriculture Bursary in 2019, to actively care for nature and the future of our food system by supporting the next generation of sustainable farming pioneers.
Now in its second year, the bursary is open exclusively to agriculture undergraduates at the Royal Agricultural University and the University of Reading , starting in September 2020.
The Sustainable Agriculture Bursary offers six successful applicants £5,000 of funding support, expert mentoring, Alumni activity, a stand-out CV and much more. Each student will receive a £3000 cash award in their first year (provided by Jordans and The Prince’s Countryside Fund), and a further £1000 cash award (provided by their university) in both their second and third years of study.
Jordans Cereals work with 34 arable farms across the UK, pioneering a new model for sustainable farming through their Jordans Farm Partnership . At least 10 percent of land on each of the farmer’s land is managed for biodiversity with help from The Wildlife Trusts, with crop sustainability ensured through LEAF .
The Prince’s Countryside Fund, established by HRH The Prince of Wales in 2010, believes that the British countryside is our most valuable natural asset and its contribution to our everyday life cannot be underestimated.
Mia Hartwell, Sustainability manager at Jordans Cereals, said: “With over 70 percent of the UK being farmland, sustainable agriculture is crucial for the protection of nature in this country. By helping to support passionate, sustainable farmers of the future, we support a world rich in nature that is healthier for us all. Only by protecting and restoring nature can we create brilliant breakfasts for years to come.”
Keith Halstead, Executive Director of The Prince’s Countryside Fund said: “The Fund has been committed to supporting young people in British farming for a decade, and we are delighted to be working with Jordans Cereals, the Royal Agricultural University and the University of Reading on this exciting bursary. We look forward to seeing how six forward thinking agriculture students will help to create a more sustainable future for our British countryside. ”
Elena Chapman, a recipient of the 2019 Sustainable Agriculture Bursary studying at the Royal Agricultural University said:
“If agriculture is not sustainable, we will soon deplete the Earth’s natural resources to a point of no return. To prevent this, an effort should be made to maintain the Earth’s many, yet fragile ecosystems. Farming is part of the problem but can also be the solution. There is enough knowledge worldwide to integrate wildlife into agriculture while still making it profitable enough and high yielding. A change in mindset by both consumer and farmer will go a long way to improving sustainability.”
Prospective students are invited to apply through the Jordans Cereals website which will direct them to the relevant university portal. If successful, they will then be invited to a video or telephone interview with the selection panel and the notified of their success.
Due to COVID-19, the entry date for applications has been extended to 30 August 2020.
