The 1890s in Southern California was not that great of a decade.
The real-estate boom of the 1880s had gone bust and the after effects of so much bad land speculation were still being felt. Likewise, the cattle industry that had sustained much of California since Spanish times, was largely gone due to a number of factors, not the least of which was tumultuous land policies brought about by the switch from Mexican to American rule, and massive droughts.
One area that bucked the cattle trend, though, was Temecula.
In the 1880s, due to a couple of washouts of Temecula Canyon, Temecula became the “end of the line” for the railroad that once connected San Diego to San Bernardino. This made it a hub of sorts for smaller cattle operations that dotted the landscape from Temecula east, and included ranches in places like Sage, Aguanga, Anza and others in the mountains and desert beyond.
In 1905, a wealthy and successful cattle baron from Arizona named Walter Vail purchased most of the Temecula, Little Temecula, Pauba, and Santa Rosa Ranchos in southwest Riverside County and consolidated all those holdings into the Vail Ranch Company, which in total owned about 87,500 acres. Over the years, several thousand head of cattle were raised and exported from the Vail Ranch through Temecula.
To cater to the cattle trade and the many cowboys needed to drive the cattle, Temecula sported a number of hotels, a slaughterhouse, and, of course, many saloons. One famous saloon was Joe Winkel’s establishment, known as a “blind pig,” which operated at various times during Prohibition. According to early cowboy Lester Reed, in places like Winkel’s, “you could hand ‘em some money and they knew what you wanted.”
Temecula became a very typical “Wild West” town during the first half of the 20th century.
Another early cowboy, Fran Burnham, described the scene when cowboys came to Temecula: “When the cowboys from the Santa Rosa and the cowboys and ranch hands from the Pauba, plus the quarrymen, with an occasional bunch of Indian cowboys from Warner Ranch arrived on Saturday afternoons – then the little town really came alive. About midnight on Sunday or early Monday morning I could lie on my bed on the porch and hear the cowboys on their horses leaving town on a dead run, emptying their firearms in the air. Later the many wagons of the ranch hands would follow, all drunk and happy, heading for their respective ranches, yelling and singing at the top of their voices.”
