This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Beyond Meat Stock Can’t Hold Up to Covid-19 and Competition, Analyst Says
UBS analyst Steven Strycula doesn’t think grocery volume will make up for the loss of restaurant sales.
Beyond Meat stock has been on a strange stealth run . Shares rose 41% last week, breaking $100 a share again and closing at $108.78. What’s more, the stock is up almost 100% over the past three weeks. New partnerships as well as meatpacking turmoil are fueling gains.
It has been quite a run, but it is far enough for UBS analyst Steven Strycula. He downgraded shares on Monday to the equivalent of Sell from Hold. He thinks investors aren’t worried enough about the impact of Covid-19 , the recession and new competition for the alternative-meat startup.
“Stock rally + food service exposure + increased retail competition = downside risk,” is the investing equation Strycula wrote in Monday research report. Food service—restaurants and the like—are about half of Beyond Meat’s (ticker: BYND) business. With restaurant traffic plummeting because of coronavirus social distancing and shelter-in-place guidelines, he isn’t convinced a spike in grocery volumes can make up the slack.
His price target is now $73. It was $90 before the ratings change.
That is a near-term concern. Looking down the road, he still sees growth for Beyond Meat. “Plant based meat is poised to approach [about] $50 billion in industry sales by 2025,” he said. But valuation concerns trump potential growth. He doesn’t see any additional upside in shares at $110.
Wall Street, overall, appears to agree with Strycula. Only 20% of the 20 or so analysts covering the stock rate shares Buy, far below the average 55% average buy-rating ratio for stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average .
      The average analyst price target is about $80 a share which works out to about 10 times estimated 2020 sales.
Barron’s brings retirement planning and advice to you in a weekly wrap-up of our articles about preparing for life after work.
Investors don’t seem to care about high valuation or the downgrade. Shares were up 2.3% Monday morning. Year to date, the stock is up more than 45%, far better than the 12% decline of the S&P 500 .
Often times, Beyond Meat stock doesn’t trade solely on valuation. News matters a lot to investors. The stock recently jumped when the company announced a partnership with Starbucks (SBUX) to bring Beyond products into China.
New partnerships are a big part of the recent run. But today’s rally is due in part to another factor. All isn’t well in the traditional meat industry. Over the weekend, Tyson (TSN) warned that the meatpacking industry needs help to maintain meat supply amid the Covid-19 pandemic. Some meat-processing facilities around the country— including Tyson’s —have been closed by the outbreak.
That has created stress for the meat-industry value chain. Live cattle prices are down 30% year to date, due in part to a lack of processing capacity. There is a glut ahead of the slaughterhouse.
The ultimate impact on meat supply isn’t known. The U.S. is a large exporter of meat globally and there are enough animals for everyone as long as they can be processed.
It is a complex situation and investors will have a lot to talk about when Beyond Meat gives its first-quarter earnings report , which it hasn’t scheduled yet.
Beyond Meat Stock Can’t Hold Up to Covid-19 and Competition, Analyst Says
Beyond Meat stock has been on a strange stealth run.
