Scout Neece, 13, took down this massive 400lb feral hog while on a hunting trip  with his dad (Picture: Steve Neece/Facebook)
A 13-year-old boy took down an enormous 400lb feral hog that was terrorizing local farmers and their cattle.
Scout Neece killed the massive wild pig with one shot during a recent hunting trip with his father, Steve Neece, in Columbus, Texas. Steve Niece works in insurance but has a side business eradicating the invasive hogs that wreak havoc on farmers’ lands across the state, causing property damage and stealing cattle’s food.
‘I told him, “You will probably not see another feral hog that size, it’s one in several thousand.” The ones that are that size are really smart and hard to find. It was kind of a proud dad moment for me,’ Steve Neece told the Houston Chronicle .
Feral hogs have become a huge problem in the state and cause an estimated $52 million in agricultural damages every year, according to the Texas A&M Natural Resources. Neece said farmers have told him they lose up to $25,000 a month because of the destructive animals.
‘These hogs get in this cattle feed and just overrun the cattle. I think that’s why they are growing at this larger rate that no one has ever seen before,’ he said.
Steve Neece (right) has a side hunting business called Dirt Nap Outfitters, which he runs with a few of his friends. (Picture: Steve Neece)
‘You have to eradicate 70 (of a pack, known as a sounder, of feral hogs) just to keep up with the level that they reproduce,’ Neece continued, explaining that he prefers the word ‘eradicating’ to hunting.
‘That’s the way Texans should think about feral hogs. It’s a non-native, very invasive species. The numbers are staggering about what kind of damage they are causing landowners…and they are spreading toward the urban and metro areas.
A new state law allows people to hunt feral hogs on private property without a license as long as they get permission from the landowner. The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department estimates there to be 1.5 million feral hogs in the state which they consider to be unprotected, exotic non-game animals which ‘may be taken by any means or methods at any time of year.’
