Livestock prices are on the rise after the crucial return of some rain in parts of Queensland, New South Wales and now South Australia.
The latest area to receive a decent drop is pastoral country in South Australia.
Col Greenfield from Billa Kalina station said the rain was the best they have seen since the late 1990s.
"We had 60 millimetres, but in our immediate area they had up to 10mm [and] in a week's time there will be a carpet of green," he said.
The Eastern Young Cattle Indicator is up 77 cents in the past three weeks and is now sitting at its highest level since November 2017.
Adam Cheetham, a senior analyst at Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA), said that after one of the most challenging seasons on record some good rain and a short supply of livestock is having a big impact.
The Eastern Young Cattle Indicator, which is a guide to the overall direction of the market, has gone up 77c in January.
"We've been on a prolonged decline over the last two years so this recent rainfall has certainly reinstalled some confidence in the market for producers," he said.
Demand is still strong for Australian beef from overseas markets so prices are expected to remain high.
If the drought breaks it is possible that the prices will continue to go higher, according to Mr Cheetham.
Last year, the percentage of female slaughter reached record levels, driven by producers destocking amongst their core breeding herds.
"We're expecting the herd to fall below the 25 million head benchmark," Mr Cheetham said.
Prices surged at Wagga Wagga saleyards in the NSW Riverina when bidding hit $308 a head for heavy lambs on Thursday.
Wagga Wagga livestock agent and auctioneer Mark Logan is expecting the lamb and sheep market will continue to rise.
The top money went to the Rodham family from Uranquinty who sold a draft of 56 lambs weighing around 40kg dressed to Dubbo processor Fletcher International Exports.
And while the temperature nudged 40 degrees Celsius, it did not deter buyers from competing for the 44,000 head that were penned.
It was the third sheep and lamb sale for the year at Wagga Wagga, the largest sheep and lamb selling centre in Australia, and numbers are lifting week on week, up 6000 head this week.
Wagga Wagga livestock agent and auctioneer Mark Logan tipped the market would get dearer.
"As the lamb numbers yarded in Victoria at Hamilton and Ballarat decline the market will start to take off here," he said.
Dubbo farmer Phil Sheridan is waiting to see what happens to the season and the market before he buys more cattle.
The mutton market was also firm, with heavy crossbred ewes making up to $249 a head and heavy Merino ewes sold to $229.
Many farmers are waiting to see what happens with the weather and prices.
Dubbo farmer Phil Sheridan was happy to just watch the action at the saleyards last week.
He has done reasonably well from cattle in recent months, buying cheap in the spring and selling now during the high, but he warned the current prices may still not be enough for some farmers.
Drought-breaking rain across large parts of north Queensland has already seen prices for livestock rocket.
One of Australia's largest corporate cattle producers has had rain fall across most of its Queensland and Northern Territory properties.
The North Australian Pastoral Company (NAPCO) owns 14 large cattle stations, and its chief executive officer Richard Brimblecombe said the rain will mean a turnaround in fortunes after a very dry 2019.
"We're incredibly excited, we were really under the pump in 2019," he said.
Locals didn't mind the rain as livestock were auctioned off at the Blackall Cattle Saleyards.
Mr Brimblecombe said that while their cattle numbers were reduced, they probably would not need to dip into the market to restock.
"Our numbers are down from our peak at 175,000 head of cattle. We'd like to be around the 200,000 head mark," he said.
"But we've got a big crop of weaners coming on now so it is unlikely we will need to go into the market, so we've essentially kept our breeding herd intact."
With questions around the shortage of cattle now that rain has fallen, Mr Brimblecombe said he would expect female cattle to be at premium price.
"Any productive female is going to be worth a lot more money next week than last week," Mr Brimblecombe said.
With rain across some of the Northern Territory, the price of live export cattle continues to climb.
This week, lightweight steers out of the Port of Darwin are returning $3.40 a kilogram, historically very high prices.
Livestock agent and Longreach grazier Boyd Curran said there will be fewer numbers sent to saleyards, direct to the meatworks, or on ships.
"Everyone was hanging on for grim life to the stock that they had and feeding them was costing a fortune," he said.
"We probably had about five days worth of feed left and then we were in all sorts of trouble, so this rain could not have come at a better time. We were saved by the bell."
The Port of Townsville continues to be busy, with several large boats departing already this year including one of the largest shipments of slaughter cattle ever sent out of the Port to Vietnam in early January.
Elders livestock agent Tom Kennedy said the continued export demand and tighter cattle market meant buyers like him will have to look further afield for cattle to load onto ships.
"This rain has been widespread, its affected all of the north," he said.
Huge numbers of sheep have been processed in Tasmania due to high demand and dry conditions.
The market there is very dependent on what happens on the mainland, but prices are generally higher due to the quality, according to livestock reporter Richard Bailey.
"In Tasmania, sheep and lamb are going pretty well. Although we expect that come another four weeks we'll probably run into some shortages.
"In cattle we've been expecting some shortages for 18 months but it hasn't happened yet, although it does look like it could happen soon."
Prices have spiked 40c/kg across all categories in Victoria, with the best cows for processing making up to 268c/kg and bullocks up to 600kg making 312c/kg.
Demand from the feedlot sector is very strong and feed lotters have been outbidding processors at the saleyards, according to MLA Wodonga market reporter Nicole Varley.
She said it will be difficult to fill the increasing demand from export markets like China which jumped 45 per cent last year, raising the percentage of the meat production being export up to 70 per cent.
Merino wethers were in demand at the Wagga Wagga saleyards with meat processors paying up to $220 a head.
"It's going to be a really challenging time for us to meet the markets that we've taken on [given] we've expanded export-wise," she said.
Conditions are still quite dry and farmers are doing their best to keep breeders alive or deal with the impact of recent fires.
"There are people that are moving stock around from place to place trying to get them off farm, or [have] lost stock, and once again [there is] another hit on the overall herd size which is sitting under 25 million — which we haven't seen for years," Ms Varley said.
In Western Australia, livestock producers are expecting a spike in livestock prices and demand as conditions improve in other parts of the country.
Last year, about 410,000 sheep were sent east from WA and Landmark WA commercial sheep manager Tom Bowen expected the demand for the state's sheep to strengthen on the back of recent rains in other states.
"The demand coming from South Australia and Victoria is very strong. It really hasn't had an effect [on prices] here yet, but it will," Mr Bowen said.
He said WA's flock numbers had stagnated and producers were looking to sell as dry conditions intensified in southern parts of the state.
