For his protest against rising tourism, Utah rancher lets his cows do the, uh, talking
“We had quite a bit of pressure on both sides of the fence. We had pressure from people that wanted to see grazing there again. And we had pressure from people that didn’t want to see those allotments made available,” Harry Barber, the BLM’s monument manager, said when the plan was drafted last year. “In all honesty, it was because of public input and because of the information that we were receiving that we opted to take the main corridor out, but maintain as potentially available these [other] allotments.”
Barber is now the manager of the BLM’s newly constituted Paria River District, comprised of the reduced Grand Staircase monument, the lands removed from it and the lands administered by the Kanab field office, where he worked as a wildlife biologist at the time the Escalante allotments were retired.
He contends the BLM never agreed to permanently retire them but rather promised to keep livestock off that land until a grazing plan could be crafted for the entire monument. After a number of failed starts, that plan is now finalized and being implemented.
Barber emphasized that it requires the BLM to conduct site-specific environmental analyses on each of the allotments before making a final decision.
“A lot of work has to be done before we can determine whether or not we are actually going to graze these. It’s going to take some time,” Barber said. “A significant amount of data will have to be collected by our staff on these allotments to determine whether or not the forage is there, whether or not there’s a better use for these allotments. We may look at these and say, ‘You know what? These allotments, a portion, a segment of this group, maybe we don’t make those available. Maybe some others we do.’”
Around the same time as the allotments were retired, the BLM placed 15,000 acres in the Escalante watershed into “forage reserves,” areas that could be grazed only periodically under emergencies. Under the new monument plan, these areas could be returned to grazing year after year.
“We’re a multiple-use agency. We find that challenging, but we accept the challenge,” Barber said. “We’re trying to fit grazing in. We’re trying to fit recreation in. We’re trying to fit some mineral components in, and do it in such a way that we’re not negatively impacting our resources. That’s why I trust in my good and knowledgeable staff.”
The BLM is also looking to designate “river gaps” along the Escalante, where cattle may access the river to take pressure off other water sources. Environmentalists are dubious.
“They have not thought this through,” said John Leshy, a Grand Canyon Trust board member who played a key role in designating the monument in 1996 as an attorney in then-President Bill Clinton’s Interior Department. “If you let the cows in the tributaries, how are you going to keep them out of the river bottom?”
With its serpentine canyons and sandstone-sculpted mesas, the Escalante region is a scenic wonder, but it is also a difficult, dangerous place to ranch. Cattle get wedged in slot canyons, lost, or stuck in mud. They fall from ledges. Conservationists complain that they trample fragile plants and soils and congregate in streams, which they defile with their waste.
“Who is going to want to go into these steep and treacherous landscapes where they could get injured or lose their cattle?” asked Travis Bruner, the Grand Canyon Trust’s conservation director. “The damage that could be done in one season would undo those two decades of conservation.”
Buyouts like those brokered by the trust are a way to compensate ranchers looking to get out of the business or move their operations to more suitable locations, according to Bruner and Leshy.
“To reverse a two-decades-old agreement, with willing buyers and willing sellers, to retire permits puts a stranglehold on philanthropists interested in protecting the land, but also on the freedom of ranchers to decide their future for themselves,” Bruner said. “Funders won’t come forward if these closures are not permanent.”
Bruner believes the public has made a huge investment in restoring small parts of the monument that are now healing from historic grazing. Allowing cattle back negates that investment while providing minimal benefits.
Meanwhile, grazing persists on the vast majority of the monument. Retired allotments give monument managers a priceless look at what happens to this land when it is not grazed, according to trust conservationist Mary O’Brien.
However, putting land off-limits to cattle is controversial among Garfield County leaders, who see the region’s culture as deeply intertwined with ranching. Taking cattle off the land is akin to erasing heritage.
For his part, LeFevre would like to see cattle back in places where they had been evicted.
“It’s not doing anybody any good now,” he said. “I’m all for it in a lot of ways, but it’s going to be rough. They tore out the waterlines and the trails are overgrown. It’s a tough bank. You have to spend a lot of cowboy time to get to it.”
Given the challenges of ranching in Escalante country, it remains to be seen if there will be any takers if the BLM decides to welcome cattle back on retired allotments.
