Start dusting off the hat and boots. Photo by @TheMikeCharlton
Cattle Baron's Ball is on the move for the second time this year. Dallas' hottest society event of fall now will take place at Klyde Warren Park on October 17, organizers announced in an email to patrons.
"In this unique year, we have decided to embrace our roots, grab our boots and take our event outside," the June 24 email says.
Cattle Baron’s Ball is the premier fundraiser for the American Cancer Society in North Texas, and has raised more than $85 million since its inception in 1974. The ball is the largest single-night fundraising event for cancer research in the world.
Back in January, in the pre-coronavirus pandemic days, Cattle Baron's announced that the 2020 ball would move from its longtime home at Gilley's to The Star in Frisco — home of the Dallas Cowboys.
Country star Dierks Bentley was revealed as the Main Stage entertainer, and that has not changed, organizers say. Country singer-songwriter Cole Swindell will still be the VIP party entertainer at the new, alfresco location.
"The Cattle Baron's Ball will continue to be a private event, where access will only be granted if you purchase a table or ticket," organizers say. "Table placement within each level will continue to be assigned based on the date the contract is received. The evening will still embrace all the things you love about Cattle Baron’s Ball, including your best Western wear, cocktails, great food, raffle, silent and live auctions, and entertainment by Dierks Bentley and Cole Swindell."
Event chairs Diana Hamilton and Heather Randall chose the theme "Just Livin': Take Cancer by the Horns" for the 46th annual gala, and it seems especially resonant now during the ongoing COVID-19 crisis.
"As a leading health organization, the American Cancer Society acknowledges that your safety comes first, and we will follow all CDC guidelines in place at the time of the event," they say. "We will continue to provide updates related to CBB 2020 in the coming weeks."
