The relentless drought is seeing more breeding female cattle sent to slaughter, with industry leaders warning of significant price increases when the long dry does break.
The national herd has dropped to around 25 million head, a level not seen since the 1990s
And with the Bureau of Meteorology not forecasting any improvement until March, those relying on cattle for cashflow are bracing for tough years ahead.
"As of this week we've sold 124 breeders out of 150. And their calves, 104 calves we've sold," said Mick Cosgrove, a cattle producer from Bell, three hours north-west of Brisbane.
The cost of keeping cattle during the drought has beaten most, and the nearby Dalby saleyards recently had their biggest yarding in a decade.
Cattle at the Dalby saleyards have recently been dominated by cows, as farmers offload breeding herds due to the drought.
"There would be people's livelihoods being sold up at the moment, to make way for the lack of feed and water," auctioneer Peter Bird said.
Some pens of calves have been sold off for $10 a head, less than the saleyard fee.
"It's a forced sale, it's things we unfortunately have to do because of the weather," Mr Bird said.
In 2019, 58 per cent of all cattle slaughtered in Australia were female, up 10 per cent, according to Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA).
Darling Downs cattle farmer Lloyd Janetzki has been reluctantly selling cattle due to the drought.
"When it comes to purchasing heifers to replace them, that's when it'll start to bite," Jondaryn cattle farmer Lloyd Janetzki said.
Most of the Western Downs has been drought declared since 2014, and alongside many others, Mr Janetzki has been prematurely offloading stock.
As breeding herds are sold off, the reality of the years to come is becoming clearer.
"It takes nine months to breed a calf, to get a calf on the ground, and for that calf to be a saleable item, you're looking at 18 months," Mr Bird said.
Mick Cosgrove has been farming on his Spring Glen property for nearly 70 years.
The drought has seen the national herd drop to around 25 million head, a level not seen since the 1990s.
"The national herd's in contraction, and we're expecting the national herd to drop 5 to 6 per cent this year, on top of another 5 to 6 per cent last year," MLA analyst Scott Tolmie said.
After over 65 years of farming at Spring Glen, Mick Cosgrove says he's never seen it this dry before.
In 65 years of farming on his property Spring Glen, Mr Cosgrove has never seen his place like this.
"We've had dry years before, but this is the worst I've seen," he said.
Getting $2 to $3 a kilo for their cows, the recent sale puts money in the Cosgroves' bank and reduces the herd, but they will still be hand-feeding daily.
"Everybody's really doing it tough. It's not only the farmers doing it tough, it's the businesses in the town, they're all doing it very tough," Mr Cosgrove said.
"I honestly don't know, if we don't get rain until March or April, it's going to be a real mess."
Toowoomba butcher John Yeo says with the drought impacting supply there'll be an inevitable increase in the price of beef.
The effects of the drought will be felt down the supply chain.
"Cattle prices don't always directly lead to retail price increases, but over time these things are pretty strongly related," Mr Tolmie said.
The impact of the dry on the cattle market is being watched closely by local butchers.
"It obviously makes the procurement of beef, lamb and other meat products harder to source," Toowoomba butcher John Yeo said.
"With no rain for such a long period of time, we're in sort of uncharted territory."
While the price of beef has not spiked, it has been increasing, and that looks set to continue.
"I'd say for the foreseeable future, probably the year after, there'll certainly be increases in the price of beef. Hopefully it's not going to go where it becomes a luxury service," Mr Yeo said.
"It could go up even higher the year after, then again, it all hinges on the drought."
Mick Cosgrove has cut back his herd to just 70, and says he'll carry them through the drought so he has something left when it breaks.
Mr Cosgrove said that when it rained, Spring Glen was God's country.
"If we can keep these cattle alive, at least we'll have something to start with when the drought breaks," he said.
