“This gives courage to all of these farmers. They are encouraged by these public policies that are making it easier to get into the Amazon,” she continued.
The National Institute for Space Research (INPE) has recorded more than 74,000 fires so far this year, compared to over 40,000 fires which burned in the region last year – which constitutes an increase of 84 per cent compared to the same period in 2018. It’s the highest number since records began in 2013.
The second-worst year for forest fires was 2016 with almost 70,000 fires burning.
Environmentalists have blamed Bolsonaro, who has long been accused of neglecting global climate change and endangering the rainforest. The current president, who took office in January of this year, campaigned on a pro-business position.
“It has a big, big impact on global climate change because of all the emissions that are being released. We may reach inflection points, turning points, where the forest cannot regenerate anymore,” Ortúzar said.
Bolsonaro has suggested that the data showing the increase in wildfires isn’t accurate — even going as far as to blame NGOs without evidence for starting fires. He said his government is working to control the fires, but it’s not clear what measures the administration is taking.
“I am waiting for the next set of numbers, that will not be made up numbers,” he said this week. “If they are alarming, I will take notice of them in front of you.”
In addition to deforestation in the Amazon, climate scientists and agencies have expressed concerns about other environmental harm posed by cattle and livestock farming..
The complete process of livestock farming (including clearing land for pastures and crops, the transportation of meat products, etc.) contributes 18 per cent of human produced greenhouse gas emissions worldwide, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Ortúzar explained that there are a number of ways beyond deforestation that cattle ranching harms the environment.
“Apart from deforestation from the same cattle, there’s also deforestation from the soy they farm to feed the cattle. The cattle makes a lot of methane emissions, and methane is a climate enforcer that is much more harmful than CO2,” she said.
Kathy Hochstetler, an environmental science professor at the London School of Economics, said in a statement that while some of the soybean is used for cattle farming in Brazil, almost all of it will be exported and is used as animal feed in Europe, China and elsewhere — strengthening the link to cattle raising around the world.
In August, the United Nation’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) stated in a report that plant-based diets are a major opportunity for adapting to and mitigating climate change.
“It doesn’t mean one couldn’t ever eat beef, but that we collectively need to eat much less of it if we want to reduce the climate change and land degradation effects from it,” Hochstetler explained.
—With files from Reuters and Rachael D’amore.
© 2019 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc.
