Chicken Stocks Sink on Price-Fixing Indictments. It’s Been a Tough Year for Protein.
Raising chickens takes several months. It takes several years for beef cattle, a little less for hogs.
Current and former executives at two U.S. chicken processors were charged with price-fixing on Wednesday. Price collusion is a big no-no in open markets and stocks in several big protein producers plummeted as a result.
The Wall Street Journal reported that a federal grand jury in Colorado indicted current and former executives at Pilgrim’s Pride (ticker: PPC) and privately held Claxton Poultry Farms, for alleged collusion that took place between 2012 to 2017. The companies, according to the Journal have denied the allegations.
Pilgrim’s, which is controlled by Brazilian protein giant JBS (JBSS3.Brazil), is one of the nation’s largest chicken processors. Two other publicly traded processors that aren’t part of the legal action but whose stocks were being hit are Tyson Foods (TSN) and Sanderson Farms (SAFM).
Pilgrim’s and Tyson didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment from Barron’s. Sanderson declined to comment.
Pilgrim’s stock was bearing the brunt of the news, down about 12% late Wednesday afternoon. Sanderson fell 5.7%, while Tyson was down about 4%.
Tyson is the, larger, more-diversified producer of the three. Its market value is more than $21 billion. Pilgrim’s and Sanderson’s market values are about $4.4 billion and $2.2 billion, respectively. Those two process just chicken.
Agribusiness is pretty complicated, and any change in the industry that might result from the investigation won’t lower the cost of meat for U.S. consumers.
Protein pricing is highly dependent on grain costs. Export markets play a large roll, too. And the life cycles of America’s favorite proteins are vastly different. It takes several years to raise beef cattle, a couple of years to raise hogs, and several months to raise chickens. Supply can’t always respond quickly to demand.
What’s more, one protein can be readily substituted for another—by individual U.S. consumers and restaurants. And one cut of meat can be substituted for another cut. Ground beef, for instance, is cheaper than steak.
The complexity has caused consternation. “[Price-fixing] has been a perpetual claim by dairy and poultry buyers—hard to prove,” one agricultural buyer said in an interview. But “the poultry business is not transparent like pork and beef. Most of the poultry supply chain is owned by the major processors.”
Wednesday’s stock moves have wiped out about $1.6 billion in market value from the publicly traded protein sector. On the other hand, McDonald’s stock (MCD) was up about 3%, generating about $3.6 billion of market value. McDonald’s, a major buyer of chicken, commands about 4% of the total $1 trillion on food spent away from home—in a non-pandemic year. Chicken is one small piece of the food value chain.
Wednesday’s news adds to a tough year for protein processors. The sector has had trouble staying open amid the pandemic. Labor costs are rising and the shift from restaurants to at-home dining has strained supply chains.
Pilgrim’s, Tyson and Sanderson shares are down about 45%, 33% and 34% year to date, respectively. That is worse than 6% and 8% respective drops of the S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average .
“The dairy industry always thought Dean foods fixed prices,” the buyer interviewed by Barron’s said. “If it was true, they weren’t very good at it.” Dean foods went bankrupt in November 2019 .
The Dean situation goes to show just how complicated agribusiness can be. Consumer preferences, input costs and product pricing can change as frequently as the weather.
Chicken Stocks Sink on Price-Fixing Indictments. It’s Been a Tough Year for Protein.
Current and former executives at two U.
