SmallCapPower | April 11, 2019: The copper price has rallied ~15% since the beginning of the year, currently sitting at US$2.93/pound, up from US$2.57/pound at the beginning of January. The price increase has been fueled by the U.S.-China trade dispute. With a shortage of copper and a disagreement between the two countries, the trade deal could further push copper prices higher to potentially US$3.10/pound in the upcoming months. Today we’ve dug up four Canadian copper stocks that have seen strong price and volume momentum since the beginning of 2019. Price and volume momentum indicate bullishness, as increased share prices on higher volumes show heightened investor interest in a stock.
*Share prices as at close April 9, 2019, data obtained from S&P Capital IQ
Coro Mining engages in the acquisition, exploration, and exploitation of mineral properties and projects in Latin America. The Company focuses is efforts primarily on the exploration of copper, iron ore, and other base and precious metals. Coro Mining holds a 51% interest in the Marimaca copper oxide project in northern Chile. On February 19, the Company announced it has sold the Berta mining operation to Santiago Metals Proyecto 4 Limitada, a Chilean Company, for US$8.5M.
Copper Mountain Mining explores copper, gold, and silver deposits. The Company’s flagship asset is its 75% owned Copper Mountain Mine located in southern British Columbia. The mine produces 100 million pounds of copper equivalent per year. Copper Mountain Mining has permitted the development-stage  Eva Copper Project in Queensland, Australia, and a 397,000 hectare prospective land package in Mount Isa. On February 15, 2019, the Company announced its Q4/18 and year-end results, highlighting a 9.7% production increase in Q4 from the year prior to 24.5 million pounds of copper equivalent. Copper Mountain Mining also released it has met its full-year 2018 production guidance, with a production increase of 4.6% from the year prior to 92.4 million pounds of copper equivalent.
Ero Copper is a base metals producer focused on its Vale do Curaçá Property, located in Bahia, Brazil, which has been in production for 39 years. The Company mines copper from four mines on the property: the Pilar underground mine, the Surubim open pit mine, the R22W open pit mine, and the Vermelhos underground mine. Ero Copper also owns the Boa Esperanҫa development project, an IOCG-type copper project located in Pará, Brazil, and the NX Gold Mine, an operating gold and silver mine located in Mato Grosso, Brazil. The Company reported Q3/18 results on November 8, 2018. EPS was $0.12, which beat consensus estimates of $0.03. Revenues were $48.9M, slightly lower than estimates of $52.5M. Management has provided production guidance for F2019E, in which the Company is expecting to process ~2,050 kt of ore at a copper grade of 2.0%, with a projected cost of between US$1.00-$1.10/pound.
Hudbay Minerals is an integrated mining company that engages in the production of copper concentrate, molybdenum concentrate, and zinc metals. The Company has assets in North and South America, and is focused on the discovery, production, and marketing of base and precious metals. The Company owns three polymetallic mines, four ore concentrators, copper projects, and a zinc production. On February 19, the Company announced 2018 year-end results, reporting net revenue of $1.4M, a 5% increase from the previous year.
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
