4 Junior Resource Stocks with Big Volume, Price Increases
SmallCapPower | November 4, 2019: Commodities such as gold, silver, and copper have been performing well, as Hong Kong officially enters recession with protests going for almost eight months, the Chinese announcing that a long-term U.S. trade deal is unlikely, and the flattening yield curve driving investors into defensive assets. Gold, silver, and copper companies have been prospering from these increased commodity prices, with larger players receiving most of the attention. Today we have drilled down and discovered four Canada-listed junior resource stocks that have experienced increased price and volume momentum. Price and volume momentum are a good indicator of bullishness, as increased share prices on larger volumes show heightened investor interest in a stock.
*Share price data as at October 30, 2019, data obtained from S&P Capital IQ
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Sitka Gold is a junior gold and copper explorer focused on four properties -two in the U.S., Alpha Gold in Nevada and Burro Creek Gold in Arizona; and two in Canada, RC Gold in Yukon and the Coppermine River project in Nunavut. SIG is currently focused on expanding the existing historical mineral resource at Burro Creek and drill testing its Carlin-type gold target at Alpha Gold in Nevada, the world’s second-most prolific gold producing region with 84M oz/Au produced from the Carlin Trend. On October 31, 2019, Sitka announced that it had closed a $1.1M private placement to be used to conduct drill programs at the Company’s Burro Creek Gold property in Arizona and its Alpha Gold property in Nevada and for general working capital.
Auryn Resources is a Canada-based junior exploration company. The Company is focused on the acquisition, exploration and development of mineral resource properties in Canada and South America. The Company holds an interest in the Committee Bay Project in Nunavut, Canada and the rights to approximately two gold properties in the Tacna province of southern Peru: the Huilacollo, Sombero, and Curibaya properties. On October 15, 2019, the Company announced drill results from its Sombero property, citing samples of up to 31.6 g/t Au, 35.2 g/t Ag, and 5.25% Cu in the Ferrobamba limestone.
Copper Mountain Mining explores copper, gold, and silver deposits. The Company’s flagship asset is its 75% owned Copper Mountain Mine located in southern British Columbia. The mine produces 100 million pounds of copper equivalent per year. Copper Mountain Mining has permitted the development-stage Eva Copper Project in Queensland, Australia, and a 397,000 hectare prospective land package in Mount Isa. On August 1, 2019, CMMC announced production of 22.1M pounds of Cu equivalent and EPS of $0.01 on revenue of $65.1M. On October 15, 2019, Copper Mountain Mining announced an increase in the Measured and Indicated Resource by 836M pounds of Cu for its Blackard Deposit.
Sirios Resources is a Canada-based exploration company with operations in Quebec. The Company’s three major assets are Chechoo, Aquilon and Pontax. The Company’s flagship project is Chechoo, which covers ~75 square kilometers of land adjacent to Goldcorp’s Eleonore mine. The Company’s second asset, Aquilon, comprises 52 square kilometers, and is located 10 kilometers south of the LA-1 hydro-electrical complex in James Bay region, Quebec. Lastly, the Pontax property is located in James Bay, Quebec, approximately 350 kilometers north of Matagami. The property covers 250 square kilometers of land.
Ubika Research/SmallCapPower has received compensation from Sitka Gold Corp. ( CSE:SIG ) to provide analyst research coverage. For full disclosure please visit here >>
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
