Early exclusions were easy to make. Any company that I thought could face bankruptcy over 12 months I eliminated. Then I excluded properties where I thought economic recovery was at least 12 months out. Exclusions were easy. They embraced Ford Motor, U.S. Steel and Macy’s. On General Electric I felt the outlook for aerospace was troublesome because of Boeing
’s disasters with an order book growing thinner and thinner.
Finally, I excluded Alcoa because I didn’t care to be deeply involved in the materials sector. Here my GDP forecast which was muted came into play. I did buy Freeport because I believed it had balance-sheet strength to weather deeply-depressed quotes for copper.
Halliburton ended up my biggest recovery spec because management showed serious recognition of the deep-down cycle for oil drilling and field servicing that reigned. There was one last exercise in security analysis. I had to deal with the issue of an elongated-down cycle. Could the company’s balance sheet carry them through?
All this goes back to what I learned about balance-sheet analysis from Mike Milken. Here, the MAD ratio is applied to the property in question. This test invokes the market value of the stock in question to its debt outstanding.
What you want to see is no more than a one to one ratio, that the market value of the company at least equals the market value of balance sheet debt. A comfortable ratio suggests the harried company can raise more debt financing if called upon by operating losses.
A year ago, Halliburton’s ratio was a comfortable 2.5 to one. But when the stock traded to five bucks the MAD ratio stood at one to one. This was my cut off point, why I wouldn’t buy the stock at $5. Then, it rallied to $7 and I stepped in. A comparable analysis was made for Teva and Freeport. They could soldier through the worst scenario I could postulate, a bankruptcy.
Nothing’s easy. Daily price fluctuations of 10% need attention. Such goods are the playthings of the market. For all I know, the ratio of the stock valuation of Halliburton to an index of cyclical stocks could touch off a buy signal for a bunch of computer nerds monitoring their algorithms, minute-to-minute.
My final pic was Energy Transfer Partners which touched down at $3.75 from a high of $15.42. Current yield with the stock at $7.30 is 16%. I’m assuming yield could be halved if distributable cash flow isn’t covered by operations. Here I’m a captive of my apperceptive mass on energy master limited partnerships.
This was an energy industry sector that the major oil companies discarded because it wasn’t big enough to matter to them. A bunch of high-risk operators took over, leveraged balance sheets and built out oil and LPG pipelines and storage facilities. Now, they’ve cut back expansion plans and have learned to keep shareholder distributions within their distributable cash flow. Hell bent for leather exuberance is history and they can weather through low but not washed-out energy prices.
Ironically, I feel more comfortable with my handful of ragamuffins than I do with holdings in Amazon, Microsoft and Alibaba
. Who am I to pontificate what’s the proper price-earnings ratio for these market leaders? I can’t project their earnings power comfortably next three years. They may be just as risky, selling at huge multiples of operating cash flow and unpredictable-earnings power.
As I write this piece, Halliburton is over $10, a new-recovery high while Amazon is down 40 points. Then, I remembered buying Lehman Brothers at $4 and watched it struggle with too-much debt, after leveraging themselves to buy office buildings, whatever.
And now it’s time to fess up. The impetus for this column is my experience in the art world, specifically the abstract expressionism that dominated the early fifties. Moving forward, in 1982, Mary Boone, a great dealer, invited me down to see the work of a young kid who just came in off the streets and subways where he was covering everything in graffiti.
I subwayed down to West Broadway and stepped down into the cellar where Jean-Michel Basquiat was kept painting 14 hours a day. Six canvases rested against the wall and Mary said “You better buy one. They’re $2,500, a piece.” The canvases burst with life – color, geometrics, allusion to jazz singers, baseball heroes, whatever.
I said to Mary, “Why are you bothering me with all this? All I want to buy now is the German expressionists – Kiefer, Baselitz, Immendorf. I pass on all this, but it has possibilities.”
More than 35 years later, one of these pieces I had turned down sold at auction for $100 million. Think of it, I could’ve bought five Basquiats and made half a billion. Instead, I’m consigned to reading annual reports, 10Ks, proxy statements and 40 pages of research per diem. Nobody’s perfect.
Sosnoff and / or his managed accounts own: Amazon, Microsoft, Halliburton, Energy Transfer Partners, Ford Motor bonds, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, Freeport-McMoRan and Alibaba.
