A truck carrying 35,000 pounds of copper simply disappeared. Who can be sued? Apparently, no one
On Nov. 12, 2014, a truck carrying 35,000 pounds of copper left a scrap yard in Newark, N.J., bound for Reading, Pa.
Somewhere along the line, the truck, its load worth around $100,000 and the driver simply disappeared.
None of it has yet been found.
What is lingering, however, is a federal lawsuit filed over that mystery. This week, a federal appeals court might have put that to rest as well.
That ruling came from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 3rd Circuit. Judge Peter J. Phipps penned an opinion upholding a lower court’s ruling dismissal of a lawsuit the shipper of that copper, Pittsburgh-based AMG Resources Corp., filed against Ohio-based Wooster Motor Ways Inc and WMW Logistics Inc.
AMG claimed Wooster and WMW were liable for the shipment’s loss because they were charged with transporting the copper to Reading.
Not only was there no firm liability agreement for that shipment, he noted, there is no proof a Wooster or WMW truck and driver really picked up that load. The shipment agreement was arranged and a driver was secured entirely online, Phipps wrote.
All of the parties knew the copper was supposed to be picked up in Newark at 9 a.m. At that time, on the dot, “a truck with an unknown driver arrived and provided a purchase order number for the copper load,” the circuit judge wrote. “After illegibly signing the bill of lading, the driver left with the copper, which did not arrive at its destination and has never been located,” he added.
The problem with AMG’s suit, he found, is that under a federal commerce law dating to 1906 AMG never had a contract for the shipment that stated Wooster or WMW “assumed responsibility for non-delivery of the copper.”
“Without such an agreement, Wooster Motor Ways and WMW Logistics cannot be liable for breach of contract,” Phipps concluded.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
