Australian shares are set to open higher, bolstered by gains on Wall Street.
All three major US stock averages advanced, with the benchmark S&P 500 posting its fourth straight daily gain. US markets will be closed tomorrow for the July 4th holiday, set for Saturday.
ASX futures were up 35 points or 0.6% to 6048 near 7am AEST. The currency edged up.
In the coming weeks, US market participants will train their focus on second-quarter reporting season. In aggregate, analysts now expect S&P earnings to have dropped by 43.1% as companies grappled with plunging demand and disrupted supply chains.
Nine of the 11 major sectors in the S&P 500 rose. All but 6 of the Dow's 30 components were higher too.
Tesla jumped 8% after the electric car maker's second-quarter vehicle deliveries beat Wall Street estimates.
Nonfarm payrolls surged by 4.8 million jobs in June, the largest gain since the government started keeping records in 1939. Payrolls rebounded 2.699 million in May after a historic plunge of 20.787 million in April.
Economists polled by Reuters had forecast payrolls would increase by 3 million jobs in June. Still, employment is 14.7 million jobs below its pre-pandemic level.
The jobless rate fell to 11.1% in June from 13.3% in May. The Bureau of Labor Statistics, which compiles the employment report, said the unemployment rate would have been 12.1% without the misclassification problem. The rate is 7.6 percentage points above its February level.
Local: AiG performance of construction June, Retail sales May
TD Securities on retail sales: "May Retail Sales should be strong if the preliminary report is a guide. The preliminary print revealed a +16.3% seasonally adjusted bump following the 17.7% drop in April. The 16.3% m/m gain was the largest rise recorded in the 38yr history of the report with every industry recording gains as restrictions were lifted. Given the preliminary read captures 80% of the final outcome, we pencil in a 16% m/m rise."
AMP women stage revolt over Pahari promotion : Female employees at AMP explode at senior managers and the male-dominated board, calling for the sacking of Boe Pahari and for cultural change across the business.
In a world of bad options, stocks are the default choice : Even at reduced expected returns and high volatility, the ability of stocks to recapture most inflation and prosper when assets and governments are struggling, can make them seem like a haven.
Afterpay bangs on door of ASX20 : Fuelled by the rise and rise of Afterpay, the value of the All Tech sector has overtaken that of the oil, gas and coal companies that make up the energy index.
Fundstrat's Tom Lee on US equity volatility: "Arguably, one of the most significant developments this week is that equities did not really 'flinch' with the massive new highs in cases. In other words, this is the week the market made a 'pivot' to focus on 'deaths' over cases.
"The VIX is the best barometer of this. The VIX was tracking cases since late March, both moving together and even surged as US cases began to rise. But notice that VIX is now tracking 'deaths' more closely - Thursday is an example - Florida reports record cases and VIX is down.
"The VIX is the market's perception of future volatility. Hence, surging cases is not causing the VIX to expect greater volatility. Rather, it seems falling deaths is soothing VIX."
The US economy will see a slightly deeper contraction this year but a bigger rebound in 2021 than previously forecast, according to updated estimates from the Congressional Budget Office.
The non-partisan agency's latest economic projections on Thursday (Friday AEST) showed gross domestic product will shrink 5.9% in 2020 and grow 4.8% next year on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis. In its May 19 estimate, the CBO had projected a 5.6% decline this year and growth of 4.2% in 2021.
Bolton tells Australia: 'Stand up to China' : "If this is the way China behaves now, how will it behave if its position becomes even stronger?" wonders Donald Trump's former national security adviser in an interview with Jacob Greber.
In a separate report overnight, the Labor Department said initial claims for state unemployment benefits fell 55,000 to a seasonally adjusted 1.427 million for the week ended June 27. Including a program funded by the federal government, 2.3 million people applied for benefits last week.
The number of people receiving benefits after an initial week of aid rose 59,000 to 19.290 million in the week ending June 20. These so-called continued claims, which are reported with a one-week lag.
There were 31.5 million people collecting unemployment checks in mid-June, up 916,722 from the first week of the month.
With the measurement of the unemployment rate continuing to be distorted since March, economists recommend focusing on continuing claims and data on the total number of unemployment checks recipients to get a better view of the labour market.
"The risks to the labour market are clearly tilted to the downside," said Kathy Bostjancic, chief US financial economist at Oxford Economics in New York.
The pan-European STOXX 600 rose 2%, closing slightly off its trading day peak.
Banks were the top gainers in Europe, jumping 4.3% to mark their best day since June 5, while other cyclical sectors such automakers, chemicals and insurance companies gained between 2.5% and 3.4%.
Scandal-hit Wirecard slumped 35.4% after police and public prosecutors raided its headquarters in Munich and four properties in Germany and Austria.
Hong Kong stocks posted strong gains on Thursday, with the index tracking mainland stocks having its best day in more than three months, after a security law went into effect in the city this week.
The Hang Seng index rose 2.9%, to 25,124.19, while the China Enterprises Index, tracking mainland companies listed in Hong Kong, gained 3.1% to 10,056.86, logging its best session since March 25.
TD Securities view of the FX market: "The shortened week drew to a close with the BDXY snapping its three-week rally. This week's focus has been on rebalancing flows coupled with some perky steps in equities.
"Rather than benefiting the USD, better-than-expected US data has primarily helped the rest of the world, reflecting the inverse correlation of the USD to global equities."
Copper gained for a sixth straight session amid supply disruptions in the world's largest producer Chile and more signs of recovery in large economies.
Three-month copper on the London Metal Exchange was up 0.3% to $US6077.50 a tonne by 1644 GMT, after touching its highest since January 22.
Copper was on track for its seventh straight week of gains, which would be its longest winning streak in nearly three years.
"Lockdowns are easing in many economies and that should drive up demand," said WisdomTree analyst Nitesh Shah.
BHP Group said it would ramp down activity at its Cerro Colorado copper mine in Chile. The mine produced 71,700 tonnes of copper in 2019, accounting for about 1.2% of Chile's total.
This comes a week after Chile state miner Codelco said it would close its refinery and foundry operations at its Chuquicamata division to arrest the spread of the coronavirus.
Australian shares shot higher on Thursday, with Afterpay surging to a new record high and other tech stocks jumping as well, as the sector took a lead from a strong performance in the US tech sector.
The S&P/ASX 200 Index ended the day 1.7 per cent, or 98 points, higher at 6032.70. The gains in Australia followed a solid session overnight on Wall Street.
