Australian shares are poised to open higher.
ASX futures were up 42 points or 0.7% to 5945 near 7am AEST. The local currency edged higher.
Shares were mixed in New York. The Dow slipped with 22 of its 30 components ending lower. The S&P 500 and the Nasdaq advanced with Amazon and Facebook each advancing more than 4% and Netflix rising 6.7%.
In the minutes from their latest meeting, US policymakers “generally indicated support” for tying rate-setting policy to specific economic outcomes. “A number” favoured a promise to leave rates low until inflation meets or even modestly exceeds the Fed’s 2% goal.
"Most Fed officials are glass-half-empty," Amherst Pierpont chief economist Stephen Stanley said, in contrast to himself. "They see risks of permanent damage and seem worried that the virus will never fully go away."
“Members noted that they expected to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the (rate-setting) Committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals,” the Fed said in the minutes.
The US will release June jobs data tomorrow, a day earlier than usual because of the Independence Day holiday on Friday there. TD Securities expects a 4 million increase in jobs with the jobless rate at 13.3%.
"Payrolls probably rose strongly again," TD said in a note. "However, the renewed uptrend in COVID cases cautions against extrapolating; Homebase data show upward momentum stalling since the sample week. Despite the strength in payrolls, we expect the unemployment rate to remain around where it was in May, boosted by a rise in the participation rate and a fading of misclassification issues."
NSW blows whistle on tax failings : The low GST is forcing up "damaging" income taxes, warns a new report commissioned by NSW Treasurer Dominic Perrottet.
Staff grill AMP Capital boss during virtual town hall : AMP Capital employees have voiced their concerns after it was revealed the firm's new chief executive was promoted following a sexual harassment settlement.
Investment bankers back in the spotlight as cartel case resumes : The ACCC case against ANZ, Citigroup Global Markets, Deutsche Bank and six of their executives will put investment banking back on the rack when it returns to court this month.
The Institute for Supply Management (ISM) said its index of national factory activity jumped to a reading of 52.6 last month from 43.1 in May, ending three straight months of contraction, or readings below 50.
The ADP National Employment Report on Wednesday showed U.S. private payrolls increased by 2.369 million jobs, but still less than expected in June.
Pfizer’s shares rose more than 4% after the drug maker said a COVID-19 vaccine being developed with German biotech firm BioNTech showed promise and was found to be well-tolerated in early-stage human trials.
FedEx jumped after posting better-than-expected quarterly profit and revenue, helped by a surge in pandemic-fueled home deliveries.
Macy’s reported a staggering $US3.58 billion quarterly loss on Wednesday as coronavirus-related store shutdowns resulted in a $US3 billion impairment charge.
The company, which also owns Bloomingdale’s, said net sales for the fiscal first quarter ended May 2 nearly halved to $US3.02 billion.
The pan-European STOXX 600 index rose 0.2%, with blue-chip indexes in Paris, Milan and London down about 0.2%.
Morning trading in some European markets, including Germany's DAX and Austria, was hit by a "technical issue" with the Frankfurt-based cash market system Xetra, exchange operator Deutsche Boerse said.
Markets on both sides of the Atlantic got a boost as a COVID-19 vaccine developed by Pfizer and German biotech firm BioNTech showed promise and was found to be well tolerated in early-stage human trials.
A series of business surveys released earlier showed broad improvements in manufacturing across Europe and Asia as economies opened up, with IHS Markit's final euro zone Manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) moving closer to the 50-mark separating growth from contraction in June.
The STOXX 600 shed more than 1% in afternoon trading as German Chancellor Angela Merkel warned that there was a possibility that no deal would be agreed between the European Union and Britain, with "very limited" progress made in negotiations about their future relationship.
This comes as rating agency S&P Global cut its UK forecasts for the year again and warned of a possible "perfect storm" formed by a second wave of coronavirus infections and a no-deal Brexit.
Japanese shares ended lower on Wednesday as the Bank of Japan's quarterly corporate survey showed business mood dropped to the worst level in 11 years, while the continued spread of COVID-19 cases in Tokyo also sapped risk appetite.
The benchmark Nikkei average ended 0.75% lower at 22,121.73.
The Bank of Japan's Tankan survey showed the mood among big manufacturers declined to minus 34 last month from minus 8 in March.
The BOJ survey also indicated that big firms plan to raise capital expenditure by 3.2% in the current fiscal year through March 2021, higher than initially expected.
Investor sentiment was dealt another blow after Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said the coronavirus state of emergency could be re-imposed in a worst case scenario.
The Hong Kong stock market was closed on Wednesday for Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Establishment Day.
The US dollar retreated in choppy trading, as generally solid US economic data and improving European numbers diminished its appeal as a safe haven, though the currency's outlook remained upbeat given renewed risks posed by the novel coronavirus.
The greenback kicked off the third quarter with a decline against currencies that perform well in times of risk appetite such as the Australian, New Zealand, and Canadian dollars. It also fell against the euro and sterling. Analysts said the dollar could still gain, with the resurgence of COVID-19 cases and the potential for renewed lockdowns in US states deemed hot spots.
"In a service economy like the US, those that generate the highest number of jobs are in the high-contact businesses such as restaurants, movie theaters, and exhibition parks, which I think will come to a grinding halt," said Boris Schlossberg, managing director at BK Asset Management in New York. "There's a significant risk of reclosing some of the states. There's still a lot of risk-off flows, and the dollar could be the beneficiary of those flows," he added.
Copper climbed to its highest in over five months on better-than-expected factory data from top consumer China and supply disruptions in Chile, the world's largest miner of the metal.
China's factory activity last month grew at its fastest level since December, while Chile's state-owned miner Codelco shut refinery and foundry operations at its Chuquicamata division due to the spread of coronavirus.
Three-month copper on the London Metal Exchange rose to as high as $US6094 a tonne, a level unseen since January 23. By 1634 GMT, the metal was up 0.6% to $US6054 per tonne.
"The copper market is pricing in a big hit to production in Chile," said Julius Baer analyst Carsten Menke.
"Chinese demand is the other element, where we have seen high growth recently ... which is evidence of some restocking."
LME copper stocks hit their three-month low at 213,325 tonnes, while ShFE copper inventories were at their lowest since January 2019 at 99,971 tonnes.
Chinese domestic refined copper prices climbed to 48,910 yuan a tonne, their highest since January 17, but premiums of imported copper into China have been flat for a week.
Australian shares rose on the first day of the new financial year after banks found some buyers, as investors cautiously held out hopes for an economic recovery.
The S&P/ASX 200 index rose 0.6 per cent, or 36 points, to 5934.40. extending a rally on the last trading day of the 2020 financial year, when the index gained 1.4 per cent.
Global recovery hopes were given a boost on Wednesday after China's latest June Manufacturing purchasing managers' index surprised expectations. Manufacturing activity rose to 51.2 last month from 50.7 in May, surprising expectations for a 50.5 print.
