Australian shares were set to open lower, after the Federal Reserve reiterated a continuing effort to bolster what it sees as challenging days ahead for the US economy.
US stocks fluctuated; the Dow turned from negative to positive immediately after the Fed's reassurance. However, the losses returned as the bleaker outlook came into clearer focus. The Dow shed 282 points on the day. The S&P 500 ended lower. However, the Nasdaq rose yet again, bolsted by techs including Microsoft, Apple and Amazon. Tesla leapt 9%.
ASX futures were down 66 points or 1.1% to 6063 near 7am AEST.
The currency spiked more than 1% in the wake of the Fed news; it was last up 0.5%.
The Federal Reserve repeated its promise of continued extraordinary support for the economy as policymakers projected a 6.5% decline in gross domestic product this year and a 9.3% unemployment rate at year's end.
"The ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment and inflation in the near term and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term," the Fed said in its latest policy statement.
The first policymaker economic projections since December see the overnight interest rate remaining near zero through at least 2022.
The Fed will make decisions on policies including yield curve control as it gains a better understanding of the economy's trajectory, Powell added.
White House Economic Adviser Larry Kudlow said the US economy appears to have hit a turning point after rapidly plunging into a recession due to the coronavirus pandemic about three months ago.
"The stock market is presaging an upturn in the economy," he said in an interview on CNBC, citing the recent market rally and a variety of indicators he said were green shoots of the economy.
Australia leads on economic recovery: OECD : The OECD expects Australia's recession to be less severe than the rest of the world, but maintaining the performance will require further stimulus and reform.
AustralianSuper takes 25pc stake in build-to-rent platform : The super giant has put its money into the relatively unknown build-to-rent-to-buy model of affordable housing development.
NAB's back-to-school push is a turning point for bankers : National Australia Bank's decision to put all of its bankers through training courses could be the beginning of an industry-wide lift of ethical standards.
Bank stocks face biggest challenges yet in 2020 : Fund managers and analysts warn that the real test for banks could come over the second half of 2020 as the government stimulus wears off.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq hit a record high for the fourth straight session, with gains for Microsoft, Apple and Amazon driving a rally which has taken the index back into bull market territory.
Tesla rose through $US1000 a share to reset its record high. Wedbush yesterday issued a bullish view: "While the stock has been roaring higher, we believe the main fundamental catalyst continues to be the massive China market which is showing clear signs of a spike in demand for Musk & Co. heading into the rest of this year."
The US federal budget deficit in May nearly doubled to $US399 billion from a year earlier amid continued strong spending on coronavirus relief programs and a 25% drop in receipts, the Treasury Department said on Wednesday.
The May deficit brought the year-to-date fiscal deficit to $US1.88 trillion, already eclipsing the previous full-year record of $US1.4 trillion in 2009, with some analysts predicting a gap as high as $US3.8 trillion for the fiscal year to September 30.
May receipts fell 25% to $US174 billion, powered largely by a 16% drop in individual withheld taxes and a 62% drop in corporate income tax payments. Outlays were up 30% to $US573 billion.
A US Treasury official told Reuters that it was difficult to predict when the coronavirus relief outlays would peak in the federal budget data.
European stocks swung both ways before settling lower.
After gaining as much as 0.9% at the open, the pan-European STOXX 600 ended down 0.4%, falling for a second straight session. Travel and leisure stocks led declines.
Food ordering firm Just Eat Takeaway bottomed out the STOXX 600, down 13.3%, after saying it was in advanced talks to buy Grubhub Inc in an all-stock deal.
The banking index fell 1.3% despite an early boost from a Reuters report that European Central Bank officials were drawing up a scheme to cope with potentially hundreds of billions of euros in unpaid loans.
Lufthansa slid 5.7% after Germany said it planned to extend its travel warning to countries outside Europe until August 31.
Deutsche Bank's chief executive officer in Europe, the Middle East and Africa is leaving the German lender he first joined 25 years ago, people familiar with the matter said.
Ashok Aram, who also heads the firm's international private and commercial bank operations, is departing for personal reasons, according to the people. He will stay with the bank for a couple more months to help with a handover, the people said, asking not to be identified as the matter is private.
Hong Kong shares closed little changed on Wednesday as risk sentiment was hit by a deepened deflation in China's producer prices.
At the close of trade, the Hang Seng index was down 7.5 points, or 0.03%, at 25,049.73. The Hang Seng China Enterprises index rose 0.2% to 10,143.48.
The sub-index of the Hang Seng tracking energy shares dipped 1.1%, while the IT sector rose 2.6%, the financial sector ended 0.2% lower and the property sector dipped 0.1%. The top gainer on the Hang Seng was Tencent Holdings, which gained 2.9%.
At its close, the Shanghai Composite index was down 0.42% at 2943.75.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei share average ended up 0.2% at 23,124.95, while the broader Topix lost 0.2% to 1624.71.
"The market has been recovering but many people are concerned about the outlook. Given the current stretched valuations, we could see a correction in the near term," said Masato Futoi, deputy general manager of institutional sales at Tokai Tokyo Securities.
The US dollar extended losses, dropping to a fresh three-month low against a basket of major currencies after the Federal Reserve made no policy changes, as expected, and pledged to continue its asset purchases aimed at stabilising a US economy that has been ravaged by the novel coronavirus.
The Fed also did not announce any measures to cap the rise of bond yields, as some has speculated.
The greenback fell to three-month troughs against the euro, sterling and Swiss franc after the Fed statement. It slid to a three-week low versus the yen.
Copper prices rose for a fifth straight session to their highest since January, supported by firm demand and an improved technical picture.
Benchmark copper on the London Metal Exchange (LME) was up 2.1% to $US5893 per tonne by 1600 GMT, after touching its loftiest since January 24 at $US5913.50.
LME aluminium rose to its highest since March 20, up 1.4% to $US1628 a tonne.
"Copper is being carried higher by an improved fundamental outlook but also by an improved technical picture," said Saxo Bank analyst Ole Hansen.
The metal broke through the 100- and 200-day moving averages recently, prompting further buying.
The next area of resistance for LME copper lies at $US6050, Hansen said.
The investment bank raised its copper and aluminium forecasts, and lifted its 12-month commodity returns forecast to 13.1%.
"Net positioning on LME copper is on the verge of turning long, with the net short position shrinking from over 40,000 contracts in February to just 895 contracts as of early June," said BMO analyst Timothy Wood-Dow.
The Australian sharemarket edged higher on Wednesday marking a seventh consecutive session of gains with investor confidence in the recovery pushing a number of retailers sharply higher.
The S&P/ASX 200 Index closed 3.5 points above its previous close, gaining 0.1 per cent to end the day at 6148.4 points.
