Asian equities dwindle further as Trump administration alleges Chinese companies.
Trade wars, fears of virus resurgence recently hit the market sentiment.
Off in China, Hong Kong fails to confine the trades’ risk-off mood amid a light calendar.
With the latest updates from the White House adding strength to the previous pessimism, Asian shares range further towards the south. As a result, MSCI’s index of Asia Pacific shares outside Japan drops 0.40% while Japan’s Nikkei 225 flash 1.6% loss around 22,200. Further, Australia’s ASX 200 also portrays the downbeat sentiment while declining over 2.0% to 5,844 as we write during the early Thursday. Though, New Zealand’s NZX 50 might be looking at the recent trade numbers to print a lesser loss of 1.09%
Following the early-day comments by White House Adviser Peter Navarro , recent updates from Reuters suggest that the US policymakers cite Chinese military backing Huawei and Hikvision. The news propels the already tensed relations between the world’s two largest economies.
In addition to the US-China tension, the American trade updates concerning the European Union (EU), the UK and Asian tire manufacturers have recently favored odds of a major trade war.
Additionally, increasing virus numbers from the US strengthen the fears of the wave 2.0. The pandemic’s likely downbeat economic impact has recently been realized in the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) another downgrade to 2020 GDP forecast.
Other than the Asian risk barometers, the US 10-year Treasury yields and stock futures are also portraying the grim market conditions.
It’s worth mentioning that traders in Beijing and Hong Kong are enjoying holidays on Thursday. As a result, risk catalysts, mainly concerning the coronavirus (COVID-19) and global trade relations, remain as the key drivers.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
