Stocks in Asia remain pressured as the pandemic fears weigh investor sentiment.
The US-China tension over Hong Kong and Xinjing recently gained attention.
PBOC announced rate cut, ADB slashes growth forecasts for China.
Aussie employment, New Zealand’s GDP flashed downbeat figures.
Asian equities continue to bear the burden of the coronavirus (COVID-19) fears amid escalating numbers from various US states. The underlying pessimism is strong enough to rule out US President Donald Trump’s signal for a cure to the pandemic. The reason being additional worries concerning the US-China tussle after diplomat from Beijing warned US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to not interfere in Hong Kong and Xinjiang issues.
On the data front, Australia’s May month employment figures came in weaker than anticipated with the headline Unemployment Rate rising past-7.0% expected to 7.1%. Elsewhere, New Zealand’s first quarter (Q1) GDP shrank 1.6% versus -1.0% market consensuses.
Against this backdrop, MSCI’s index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan mark 0.06% gains with Japan’s Nikkei declining 0.40% to 22,373 by the press time of the pre-European session on Thursday. Australian’s ASX 200 loses 0.55% to 5,958 but New Zealand’s NZX 50 surpasses all by being down 1.3% to 340.25. Further, shares in China and Hong Kong remain mostly directionless and so does equities from South Korea, Indonesia and India. Other than the already mentioned catalysts, the India-China tussle and tension among the North and South of Korea also sour the trading sentiment in Asia.
Looking at the broader perspective, the US 10-year Treasury yields drop two basis points to revisit 0.70% while the US stock futures remain on the back foot as we write.
As a slew of updates concerning the US-China and the India-China issues, not to forget the pandemic news, are crossing wires off-late, a lack of major data/events could push traders towards qualitative catalysts.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
