Futures Drop Amid Earnings Caution; Dollar Slips: Markets Wrap
(Bloomberg) -- U.S. futures dropped after sobering comments from Amazon and Apple about the impact of the coronavirus. Asian trading will be limited Friday, with much of the region out on holidays.
After the close of U.S. trading, Amazon.com warned of a possible second-quarter loss, while Apple omitted an earnings forecast for the first time in more than a decade. Futures in Japan pointed lower after the S&P 500 Index fell from a seven-week high in wake of the U.S. reporting a larger-than-expected jump in unemployment claims. Strong results from Microsoft Corp., Facebook Inc. and Tesla Inc. had limited losses on the tech-heavy Nasdaq gauges. Treasuries and the dollar headed for the first weekly declines in three.
Crude rose for a second day on signs that fuel consumption is starting to recover in the world’s biggest economies.
Despite falling on the final trading day of April, global stocks posted their biggest monthly gains in almost a decade, with the S&P 500 up the most since 1987. Investors continue to weigh a brutal economic picture against hopes for a coronavirus treatment and an eventual end to lockdown measures across the world. Still, earnings reports from tech giants show some parts of the economy have remained resilient.
“It’s encouraging you’re seeing big tech earnings come in strong, but there’s still challenges,” said Brian Price, head of investment management for Commonwealth Financial Network.“There’s going to be a push-pull in the market for the foreseeable future.”
On the virus front, U.S. cases increased at the slowest past of the month, while U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson said Britain is past the peak of the outbreak. U.S. Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Stephen Hahn said the agency is moving at “lightning speed” to review data on Gilead Sciences’ experimental Covid-19 treatment.
Meanwhile, European stocks fell amid a barrage of bad economic readings and European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde’s projection that the euro-area economy could shrink 12% this year. The ECB intensified its response to the coronavirus crisis and the Federal Reserve said it planned to expand its Main Street Lending Program.
These are the main moves in markets:
Futures on the S&P 500 dropped 1.6% as of 7:16 a.m. in Tokyo after the index fell 0.9% Thursday.
The euro rose 0.7% to $1.0955.
The British pound rose 1% to $1.2591.
The Japanese yen fell 0.6% to 107.34 per dollar.
West Texas Intermediate crude gained 25% to $18.84 a barrel.
Gold weakened 0.2% to $1,683 an ounce.
This article was automatically imported from our old content management system. If you see any display errors, please let us know: community-feedback@swissinfo.ch
