UNDATED (AP) — Shares are mixed in muted trading in Europe after a day of gains in Asia, where Shanghai’s benchmark jumped 2%. Germany’s DAX edged 0.1% and the CAC 40 in Paris was almost unchanged. Britain’s FTSE also was steady. In Asia, Tokyo’s Nikkei 225 index picked up 0.7% while South Korea’s Kospi gained 0.8%. Wall Street is closed today for the July 4th holiday.
BERLIN (AP) — German Chancellor Angela Merkel is pushing for a quick agreement on a recovery fund aimed at pulling the European Union out of the coronavirus recession. She argued today that “every day counts.” Germany took over the rotating EU presidency for six months on Wednesday. That gives it a key role in cajoling other countries to compromise on the recovery fund and the EU budget for the next seven years — ideally when EU leaders meet July 17-18 for their first in-person summit in months. Merkel told Germany’s upper house of parliament that “a lot of good will and readiness to compromise from all sides will be required.”
PARIS (AP) — Air France is meeting with personnel representatives today to discuss thousands of job cuts after the virus pandemic grounded most flights and darkened prospects for future air travel. Union activists protested at Air France headquarters at Paris’ Charles de Gaulle Airport as the talks began. They’re especially angry that the French government didn’t require Air France to protect jobs when it won 7 billion euros, or $8 billion, in state bailout funds. French media reports have said the airline is looking to cut 7,500 jobs, primarily through voluntary departures. Airlines around the world are forecast to lose $84 billion this year and some have filed for bankruptcy.
BERLIN (AP) — Germany’s parliament is preparing to pass new legislation finalizing the country’s long-awaited phase-out of coal, over objections from environmental groups that the plan is not ambitious enough. Both houses of parliament are expected to vote today on the roadmap that envisions the phase-out of coal between now and 2038. It earmarks some 40 billion euros ($45 billion) to affected regions to support them with the transition. Germany is already phasing out nuclear power and the government envisions greater reliance on renewable energy as well as hydrogen and natural gas in the future.
SEOUL, South Korea (AP) — South Koreans have waited 16 years for a savory, crispy bite that would satisfy their taste buds and right an infamous wrong. This week, they finally could fill a bowl with the cereal they wanted all along: green onion-flavored Chex. The product’s release has taken on surprising cultural significance for an odd culinary experiment. A vote that green onion Chex suspiciously lost in 2004 became a marketing mishap. Kellogg’s Korea released the limited-edition, green onion Chex this week with a catchy ad and an apology for the wait. Was it worth it? One of the first tasters found it artificial. Others say skip the milk and eat it alongside a beer.
