This week, the Nikkei 225 index has recovered the losses incurred from the fears of the coronavirus spread.
The Japanese index in its log-scale weekly chart still shows the upward trend it has maintained intact since March 2009, when Nikkei found buyers at 7,021.3 points.
In the big picture, the string of rising highs and lows is intact, indicating that the long-term upward bias is still present.
In terms of Elliott’s wave analysis, Nikkei advances in a fifth Intermediate-grade wave identified in blue.
Likewise,loo0king at the long-term bullish sequence, we can observe the principle of alternation between corrective waves (2) and (4) of intermediate degree. According to Elliott's wave theory, if a corrective wave is simple, the next wave will be complex and vice versa.
In the case of the Nikkei, we can observe the development of a triangular formation in the wave (2) of Intermediate degree, that follows an internal sequence as 3-3-3-3-3. The triangle formation labeled in green is identified as a Minor degree.
Now, looking at the progress of wave (4) of Intermediate degree labeled in blue, the internal structure corresponds to a flat formation.
In particular, we observe the alternation between both corrective waves in terms of its length and complexity. While wave (2) is longer than wave (4), at the same time, the second wave shows more complexity than the fourth wave.
As the principle of alternation is observed in chart 01, in the next figure, which corresponds to a two-day timeframe,  we can identify the Nikkei currently moving in a triangular corrective wave.
On the chart, we observe that Nikkei continue moving sideways in a wave 4 of Minor degree labeled in green, which is developing a triangle formation.
The triangle structure in progress has completed the internal wave "d" of Minute degree labeled in black. Currently, the Japanese index  is advancing in the wave "e" corresponding to the last bearish segment, which would end the wave 4 of Minor degree.
After completing this corrective wave, a new rally should likely start. This bullish movement corresponds to a wave 5 of Minor degree, which, at the same time, would complete the wave (5) of Intermediate degree.
To conclude, as long as the Japanese index remains above 16,121.6 points, the long-term trend will continue bullish.
In conclusion, the long-term upward trend is still valid. However, in the short term, a bearish movement should develop, which would complete the corrective structure in progress.
Try Secure Leveraged Trading with EagleFX!
Risk Warning: CFD and Spot Forex trading both come with a high degree of risk. You must be prepared to sustain a total loss of any funds deposited with us, as well as any additional losses, charges, or other costs we incur in recovering any payment from you. Given the possibility of losing more than your entire investment, speculation in certain investments should only be conducted with risk capital funds that if lost will not significantly affect your personal or institution’s financial well-being. Before deciding to trade the products offered by us, you should carefully consider your objectives, financial situation, needs and level of experience. You should also be aware of all the risks associated with trading on margin.
