Economic Times | 19 Jun, 2020 | 10.56AM IST
Nifty ended above a key resistance at 10,050 on Thursday, and analysts said the 50-pack is now likely to carry forward this momentum and inch towards the 10,250 level. Deepak Jasani of HDFC Securities said technically, Nifty closed above the 10,046 mark and now seems headed for 10,149-10,178 levels. "On any fall, the 9,943-10,046 levels can provide support to the index," he said.
Trade setup: Nifty50’s next stop is 100 DMA at 10,112; tread carefully
The domestic stock market had an extremely buoyant session on Thursday and Nifty50 went on to end the day with robust gains. Defying global weakness, Indian equities opened on a firm note. After trading flat initially, the index rose while staying in a secular uptrend. It continued in an upward rising channel throughout the session. The maximum Call open interest that was concentrated at 10,000 level shifted to 10,100 and this ensured Nifty settles just below that level.
HDFC Asset Management Company's offer-for-sale (OFS) by promoter Standard Life Investments closed on Thursday, with retail investors subscribing 82 per cent of the portion reserved for them. Retail investors bid for 9,87,191 shares on Thursday as against 12 lakh scrips on offer, translating into a subscription of 82 per cent, according to data available with the National Stock Exchange.
Real estate developer Brigade Enterprises has reported 115% drop in the fourth-quarter profit from a year ago, due to the change in accounting norms to AS-115 and nationwide lockdown impacting the hospitality business and the increase in CSR spend. Net profit for the January-March quarter of FY20 stood at Rs 11 crore, Bengaluru-based Brigade EnterprisesNSE 1.07 % said on Thursday. The company’s turnover for the period was Rs 644 crore, a 17% drop over the same period of the previous fiscal.
Here’s who bought and sold what in some of the key bulk and block deals of the day. Abakkus Emerging Opportunities Fund bought 72,000 shares of HIL at Rs 1,045.14 a share on the BSE, and another 58,000 shares of the company at Rs 1,046.68 a share. Shailesh V Haribhakti sold 41.33 shares in ASM Technologies at Rs 65.02 a share.
Dow Jones opens lower on rising virus cases, elevated jobless claims
US stocks fell at the open on Thursday as an uptick in COVID-19 infections in the United States threatened to upend bets of a swift economic recovery, with data showing weekly jobless claims remained elevated amid a second wave of layoffs. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 103.16 points, or 0.39 per cent, at the open to 26,016.45.
Fears about India retail loan defaults overblown, Macquarie says
The volume of Indian loans subject to moratorium is dropping, suggesting that fears about large-scale defaults on banks’ retail lending books may be overblown, according to analysts at Macquarie Group Ltd. Based on soundings with home lending specialist Housing Development Finance Corp. and Indian banks, “the unanimous feedback has been that there has been a decline in the total loan book under moratorium from the 25–30% numbers reported as of end-May,” analysts led by Suresh Ganapathy wrote in a note.
The Bank of England intensified its response to the fallout from the coronavirus by expanding its bond-buying program, but slowed the pace of purchases and gave few clues on what it plans to do next to help lift the economy out of the worst recession in centuries.
Traders should maintain focus on stock selection: Ajit Mishra
"We expect the Nifty index to carry this momentum and inch towards 10,250 levels ahead. Meanwhile, the news related to the stand-off with China and cues from the global market will remain on participants' radar. Since all the sectors are contributing to the move, traders should maintain their focus on the stock selection." said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking
Nifty charts suggest dominance by bulls, more upside
“After forming a short-term base for itself near the crucial short term-moving averages, Nifty took a leap on the upside. It recently broke the Inside Bar pattern formed on the daily chart on the upside. Thus, Nifty looks poised to test its swing high of 10,328,” said Gaurav Ratnaparkhi, Senior Technical Analyst at Sharekhan. He expects the 10,000-9,960 range to act as a support zone in case of any minor dip in Nifty50.
Participants took note of developments in AGR payment dues: Ajit Mishra
"The benchmark indices finally regained momentum and surged over 2%, after trading sideways for the last three sessions. On the news front, participants took note of the latest developments on the AGR payment dues wherein the SC has allowed more time to the Department of Telecommunications(DOT) to review the payment proposals by the telecom companies'. The rally was well supported by banking, metal and capital goods majors and the market breadth too was inclined strongly on the advancing side." said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking
Rupee weakened to three-week low on virus resurgence jitters: Sugandha Sachdeva
"Indian rupee has weakened to a three week low amid jitters about the resurgence of new coronavirus infections around the world, which are dampening hopes of a quick recovery from the economic fallout of COVID-19. Further undermining sentiments for the currency is the uncertainty with regards to the current border stand-off between India and China. Another catalyst for the depreciation in rupee is the retreat in dollar index from three month lows. On the contrary, the local unit is still underpinned by persistent fund inflows due to developments with regards to reopening of the economy. Going forward, only a breach of 76.60 mark would steer it towards new record lows in coming days, else we expect the domestic currency to hold steady." said Sugandha Sachdeva VP-Metals, Energy & Currency Research, Religare Broking
CLOSING BELL: Sensex ends at day's high, up 700 pts; Nifty nears 10,100; Bajaj Finance, Kotak Bank rise 5% each
S&P BSE BANKEX biggest sectoral gainer, up 3.81%
S&P BSE Telecom biggest sectoral loser, up 0.12%
S&P BSE BANKEX biggest sectoral gainer, up nearly 4%. This is how the index stocks are performing
Rupee settles on a flat note, up 2 paise at 76.14 against US dollar
Forex traders said rupee was trading in a narrow range as positive domestic equities and weak US currency supported the local unit, while rising coronavirus cases, border tension with China and foreign fund outflows capped the gains.
RIL, Future Group deal as early as next month: Agencies
#Ambani said to near deal to buy stake in #Amazon&#39;s India partner: Agencies  Catch LIVE market updates here:… https://t.co/S0UGoyXKV6
