Economic Times | 17 Jun, 2020 | 06.23PM IST
Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said the US economy may be entering a period of significant improvements in employment, but one that will leave the labor market “well short” of the robust levels seen just before the coronavirus pandemic.
HDFC plans to raise funds; board meet on Jun 19
HDFC, the country's largest mortgage lender, plans to raise funds and the proposal regarding this will be discussed by its board on June 19. In a regulator filing on Tuesday, the company said a meeting of its committee of directors, duly constituted by the board of directors, will be held on June 19.
A meeting of the fund raising committee of the board is proposed to be held on June 19 to consider and issue secured, rated, listed, redeemable non convertible debentures aggregating to Rs 200 crore on private placement basis, in one or more tranches, the commercial vehicle maker said in a regulatory filing.
Deepak Jasani of HDFC Securities said the 9,720 level has been tested twice in last two sessions and has held up, suggesting a strong support. Markets could rally if these supports hold up in the near term.
Standard Life Investments, one of the promoters of HDFC Asset Management Company is looking to sell up to 60 lakhs shares of the mutual fund constituting 2.82% total equity through offer for sale on June 17 and June 18. The sale price of the OFS shares has been fixed at Rs 2,362 apiece, a 7% discount to Tuesday’s closing price of Rs 2538, which according to analysts is a bargain buy.
Here’s who bought and sold what in some of the key bulk and block deals of the day. Ruane, Cunniff & Goldfarb Inc A/C Acacia Conservation Fund sold 1,78,049 shares in 3M India at Rs 17,100 each, which were lapped up by Aurigin Master Fund, HDFC Standard Life Insurance Co, Kotak Funds – India MidCap Fund, L&T Mid Cap Fund, Max New York Life Insurance Co, and UTI Mutual Fund.
Cholamandalam Financial Holdings Ltd, formerly TI Financial Holdings Ltd, on Tuesday reported standalone profits for the January-March 2020 quarter at Rs 25.36 crore. The city-based company part of the diversified conglomerate Murugappa Group had reported standalone net profits at Rs 34.26 crore during corresponding quarter of last year.
HPCL Q4 results: Net plunges more than 99% hit by inventory losses, forex woes
State-run oil marketing company Hindustan Petroleum Corporation (HPCL) said on Tuesday its net profit for the quarter ended March plunged more than 99 per cent, primarily hit by inventory losses and exchange rate fluctuations. The company posted a net profit of Rs 27 crore for the quarter ended March, down from Rs 2,970 crore in the same quarter a year ago.
Sebi panel suggests measures to strengthen enforcement, recovery mechanism
A Sebi panel on Tuesday suggested measures to strengthen markets watchdog's enforcement mechanism and improve the system of recovery of siphoned off money. The committee headed by former Supreme Court Judge Anil Dave has proposed method of quantification of profit made by the defaulter and loss caused to investors.
BNP Paribas Wealth Management has shut down its wealth management business in India, the company confirmed on Tuesday, but denied that the decision was impacted by the current Covid-19 pandemic. “BNP Paribas Wealth Management has decided to exit its onshore wealth management business in India in order to focus on areas where its global footprint and diversified business strengths allow it to provide clients with more value-added services,” a BNP Paribas spokeswoman said in a response to a query.
US stocks jumped at the open on Tuesday after a record rise in May retail sales revived hopes of a swift post-pandemic economic rebound, with sentiment also lifted by data showing reduced COVID-19 death rates in a trial of a generic steroid drug. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 563.52 points, or 2.19 per cent, at the open to 26,326.68.
Risk appetite surged in June as investors reduced cash holdings and hedge funds jumped on equities, but most money managers think the stock market is overvalued, according to a Bank of America Corp. survey.
Gold in the national capital rose by Rs 761 to Rs 48,414 per 10 gram on Tuesday in-tandem with spike in international prices of the precious metal and rupee depreciation, according to HDFC Securities. In the previous trade, the yellow metal had closed at Rs 47,653 per 10 gram.
Options data suggests a wider range for Nifty; India VIX moving up
Nifty fell more than 300 points from its intraday high of 10,046. However, a tremendous recovery of 200 points from lower levels followed and it helped Nifty conclude the session a tad above the 9,900 mark. The index formed a small red body candle on the daily chart.
Nifty IT index snapped a three-day losing streak, as its constituent shares gained after the rupee weakened against the US dollar. The index gained 0.38 per cent lifted by 1.81 per cent gain in Infosys shares. NIIT Tech and TCS were among the other gainers.
“While Nifty is facing resistance at 10,000 level, there is evidence of sharp buying near the support at 9,700 level. The positive sequential movement of forming higher tops and bottoms remains intact, as long as the recent swing low of 9,545 is protected,” said Nagaraj Shetti of HDFC Securities.
Reiterate our view preferring hedged bets: Ajit Mishra
"Markets are witnessing wild swings and it may continue as we’re mirroring the global markets. Besides, the stand-off between India and China at LAC will also be on investors' radar and any further escalation could negatively impact the markets. On the index front, a decisive breakout above 10,050 in Nifty can only trigger a fresh up move else consolidation will continue. We reiterate our view preferring hedged bets in the present," said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking.
Tensions between India and China led to sell-off: Ajit Mishra
"In a volatile trading session, the Indian indices opened on a firm note in sync with the global markets. As the day progressed, news reports of escalating border tensions between India and China led to a sell-off in the Indian markets. However, it soon managed to recover and ended higher by 1% to close at 9,914 levels. Amongst the sectors, a mixed trend was witnessed as Banking, IT, Metal and Consumer Durables ended with decent gains while other indices like Oil & Gas, Realty and Telecom ended with losses," said Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking.
S&P BSE Finance biggest sectoral gainer, up 2.39%
S&P BSE Telecom biggest sectoral loser, down 1.46%
Drug firm Ipca Laboratories on Tuesday reported a 13.50 per cent decline in its consolidated net profit to Rs 83.05 crore for March 2020 quarter mainly on account of impairment of intangible assets of a US subsidiary. The company had posted a net profit of Rs 96.02 crore for the corresponding period of the previous fiscal, Ipca Laboratories said in a filing to the BSE.
