Economic Times | 09 Jun, 2020 | 10.17AM IST
A weak start to the European markets soured domestic market mood.
Chalet Hotels on Monday reported an over threefold jump in its consolidated net profit to Rs 42.17 crore for the quarter ended March 31. The company had posted a net profit of Rs 13.30 crore for the corresponding period of the previous financial year, Chalet Hotels said in a filing to the BSE.
Saudi Arabia will boost output in July to match its output Opec quota while ending deeper, voluntary cuts amid signs of global demand recovering, the Saudi energy minister said on Monday. Opec, Russia and other producers agreed on Saturday to extend record output cuts of 9.7 million barrels per day (bpd) into July, curbing global supply by almost 10 per cent amid a steep slump in demand due to the coronavirus pandemic.
Mauritius-based UPL Corp, the offshore arm of agrochemical major UPL, is set to be the first private sector issuer of overseas bonds after the pandemic triggered an economic crisis. While the company aims to raise about $600 million via dollar bond sales, it will simultaneously use the proceeds to buy back bonds maturing in October next year.
Markets regulator Sebi has directed Dairy Plantations (India) Ltd to refund money collected from investors for its collective investment scheme (CIS). The company has been asked to invite claims within a month by issuing notice in newspapers. Further, a period of one month from the date of the advertisement will be provided to investors for submitting any claim, the regulator said in an order.
PVR takes cost reduction steps; plans to raise Rs 300 crore via rights issue
Multiplex operator PVR on Monday said it has cut salary across various levels, laid off employees and deferred increments during the lockdown to mitigate adverse impact of COVID-19 on the business. The company said at present it is not generating any revenue from exhibition business and related activities as cinemas across the country are shut following the directions from the regulatory authorities.
The Reserve Bank on Monday proposed a comprehensive framework for sale of loan exposures, which could be standard, sub-standard or non-performing assets (NPAs), as part of the overall exercise to deepen the market for lending.
Here’s who bought and sold what in some of the key bulk deals of the day. Porinju Veliyath sold 21,012 shares of Raunaq EPC International at Rs 24.40 a share, while Mahindra Girdarilal Wadhwani bought 20,000 shares of the company at the same price. Kotak Mahindra Investments sold 12.84 lakh shares in Coffee Day at Rs 14.05 each.
Titan Q4 results: Net profit grows 21% to Rs 357 crore; beats Street estimates
Jewellery maker Titan on Monday posted a growth of 21.11 per cent in net profit to Rs 356.79 crore for the quarter ended March 31. Analysts in an ETNow poll had projected the figure at Rs 281 crore. Total income, however, declined 5.46 per cent YoY to Rs 4,468.84 crore.
Multiplex chain operator PVR Ltd on Monday reported a consolidated net loss of Rs 74.61 crore for the fourth quarter ended March 2020, as the film exhibition business was impacted because of COVID-19 pandemic. The company had posted a net profit of Rs 46.75 crore in the January-March quarter a year ago, PVR said in a BSE filing.
Wall Street's main indexes opened higher on Monday, building on last week's rally after a surprise rebound in jobs bolstered views that the US economy has weathered the worst of the economic fallout from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 121.95 points, or 0.45 per cent, at the open to 27,232.93.
Markets regulator Sebi on Monday eased the compliance norms for companies seeking to list their debt securities such as non-convertible debentures (NCDs) and commercial papers. This will come into force with immediate effect, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi) said in a circular.
Multiplex chain operator Inox Leisure Ltd on Monday reported a consolidated net loss of 82.15 crore for the fourth quarter ended March 2020, as the film exhibition business was impacted because of COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdown. The company had posted a net profit of Rs 48.08 crore in January-March quarter a year ago, Inox Leisure said in a BSE filing.
Drug firm Abbott India on Monday reported a 1.96 per cent decline in net profit to Rs 110.97 crore for the quarter ended on March 31, 2020, mainly on account of rise in expenses. The company had posted a net profit of Rs 113.19 crore for the corresponding period of previous fiscal, Abbott India said in a BSE filing.
Nifty Energy index gained for the 10th session as reopening of the economy meant consumption of all forms of energy will also see a spike. The index added 1.55 per cent thanks to gains in GAIL, BPCL, HPCL and ONGC.
Investors predicting India’s bond yield curve to steepen further are probably reading it wrong. That’s the view of Jayesh Mehta, a veteran trader at Bank of America. He thinks the record $88.5 billion of bond purchases by the central bank this fiscal year and a further cut in interest rates will tamp down the curve’s steepness from near a decade high, pushing down yields on the most-traded 2029 notes to 5.50%, the lowest since 2009.
Market trend remains positive to rangebound, go for buy-on-decline
Nifty opened with a gap up on Monday in line with strong global cues, but failed to surpass its crucial hurdle at 10,333 level. It consolidated in the initial hour of trade, but gradually drifted towards the 10,150 level in the latter part of the day. It formed a bearish candle on the daily scale as profit booking emerged at higher levels, but the overall market trend still remains positive to rangebound and investors can adapt a buy-on-decline strategy.
Most housing finance companies have a comfortable liquidity position, adequate enough to cover about two months' debt repayment, according to ratings firm Icra. Icra Ratings CRA Ratings has said that based on the consolidation of its rated Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) accounting for around 90% of the sectoral AUM, most players were comfortably placed terms of liquidity.
“For the coming session, the 11,120-11,100 range remains a crucial support zone to watch for. Any violation of this support zone will trigger profit booking and take Nifty towards the 10,050-10,000 zone. On the upside, the 10,220 level will act as an intraday resistance zone. Hence, any sustainable move above this level will signal further strength at the 10,300 level,” Rajesh Palviya of Axis Securities said.
India is considering a new category of alternate investment fund which will focus on acquiring stressed assets from banks and shadow lenders, a move aimed at resolving some of the highest bad debt in the world. The fund will be allowed to buy stressed assets directly from the banks and non-banking financial companies, people with knowledge of the matter said, asking not to be identified as the matter is not public.
IL&FS sells 50% stake in GIFT City to Gujarat govt, reduces consolidated debt by over Rs 1,200 crore
Debt-laden IL&FS on Monday said it has completed the sale of its 50 per cent stake in Gujarat International Finance Tec-City (GIFT City) to the Gujarat government, generating over Rs 32 crore for its equity value and also reducing its consolidated debt by more than Rs 1,200 crore. The stake in GIFT City was bought by Gujarat Urban Development Company Ltd (GUDCL), on behalf of the Gujarat government.
S&P BSE Basic Materials biggest sectoral loser, down 0.90%
S&P BSE OIL & GAS biggest sectoral gainer, up 2.39%
The rupee settled on a muted note, up 3 paise, at 75.55 (provisional) against the US dollarNSE 1.32 % on Monday as dollar-buying by banks as well as importers and rebounding crude prices restricted gains of the local unit. Forex traders said positive domestic equities, sustained foreign fund flows and the revival of business activity are supporting the rupee, but dollar demand and rising crude oil prices are weighing on the domestic unit.
