Kristalina Georgieva, Managing Director of the IMF, Peterson Institute for
    and invest and of consumers to spend. Yet it is a nebulous concept, because
    it reflects uncertainty in the minds of consumers, managers, and
    relied on different methods to measure uncertainty. One approach is based
    based on text-searching newspaper archives, for example, the Baker, Bloom
    and Davis (2016) Economic and Policy Uncertainty index. However, these
    approaches share an important limitation: they are typically limited to a
    set of mostly advanced economies, and for many of these countries the data
    are available only after the early 1990s.
    countries in the world with a population of at least 2 million. It goes
    back in time, providing data for the past 60 years. The index uses a single
    source for all countries, which allows us to compare the level of
    economic and political events, regarding both near-term (e.g., uncertainty
    international forces in Afghanistan, or tensions between the Democratic
    People’s Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea) concerns.
    provides country reports on a quarterly basis. These reports cover the
    economy, policies, and politics of each country. We follow three steps in
    quarterly basis from the EIU from the mid-1950s onward for 143 countries.
    variants) is mentioned in these reports. Third, we normalize the total
To address potential concerns regarding the accuracy, reliability, and
    consistency of our dataset, we evaluate the index in several ways. First,
    we examine the narrative associated with the largest global spikes. Second,
    to rise close to political elections.
This new data set allows us, for the first time, to examine the historical
    evolution of uncertainty around the globe. Several interesting stylized
First, global uncertainty has increased significantly since 2012. The latest data for the fourth quarter of 2019 show that, after dipping in
    the third quarter of 2019, the aggregate index—a GDP-weighted average of
    143 countries—is at an all-time high.
    historical context. Looking back at the past 60 years, we see few episodes
    1960s and the oil crises in the 1970s.
    historically high for all countries in the world. They reflect, to a large
    in the late 1960s, a period when China was less connected to the rest of
        than in emerging market and low-income economies. Our analysis finds that uncertainty in emerging market and low-income
    economies mostly follows the global average. This is because individual
    country shocks are not synchronized, so they get averaged away. In
    contrast, uncertainty in advanced economies spikes sharply, because these
    countries tend to move together. Within advanced economies, uncertainty
    synchronization is higher among euro area countries. In addition, we find
        economies than in emerging market and advanced economies. One potential reason for this is that developing countries appear to have
    more domestic political shocks like coups, revolutions, and wars; are more
    susceptible to natural disasters like epidemics and floods; and their
    shocks and have more limited capacity to manage these shocks.
        and democracy. As countries move from a regime of autocracy and anocracy toward democracy,
Finally, increases in the index foreshadow significant output declines,
        with the effect being larger in countries with weaker institutions.
This data set can be extremely valuable for researchers. For instance, the
    across countries on key macroeconomic outcomes, such as foreign direct
HITES AHIR is a senior research officer in the IMF’s Research Department, NICHOLAS BLOOM is professor of economics at Stanford
    the IMF’s Asia and Pacific Department.
    Uncertainty. ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4): 1593–1636.
Leahy, J., and T. Whited. 1996. “ The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment:
Cycles: Exogenous Impulse or Endogenous Response?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics , forthcoming.
Opinions expressed in articles and other materials are those of the authors; they do not necessarily reflect IMF policy.
