A global index provider is putting more weight on China stocks, raising concerns from lawmakers
MSCI later today will announce an increase in the weighting of mainland China in its MSCI Emerging Markets Index, a benchmark used by many global funds and ETFs.
Sen. Marco Rubio has raised red flags about the move, saying the pension assets of federal workers should not be invested in companies that work against U.S. interests.
Brendan Ahern, chief investment officer of Kraneshares, raises the question: "Do you want the government in your plan based on the whims of who is in charge?"
An investor watches the electronic board at a stock exchange hall on Feb. 11, 2019 in China.
One of the largest indexers in the world is set to announce a new round of increases in the weighting of mainland China stocks, and the addition is generating an unusual amount of controversy.
U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida doesn't want the pension assets of federal employees supporting companies that may work against U.S. interests.
"In the case of federal employees, imagine the leverage the Chinese have if a significant amount of the retirement of service men and women in uniform and federal employees is invested in companies listed on Chinese exchanges that are not transparent, that do not undergo the same accounting scrutiny that others do and many of these companies are active agents of the Chinese government,"  Rubio said on  air today.
The reason for the increased weighting is not controversial: Mainland China's stock market has been growing and is underrepresented in global indexes. Investors have been increasingly demanding wider access to global markets, and global index providers like MSCI have been slowly increasing China's weighting.
MSCI later today will announce an increase in the weighting of mainland China in its MSCI Emerging Markets Index, a benchmark used by many global funds and ETFs, including the iShares MSCI Emerging markets ETF (EEM). They will announce an additional inclusion of roughly 175 midcap mainland China stocks in its global indices, and also increasing the weighting of 268 large-cap mainland stocks that are already in the index.
The increased weightings will go into effect on November 26th.
The addition will raise the weighting of mainland China stocks from roughly 3% to 4% of the index value. China stocks--including those listed in Hong Kong as well as those listed in the U.S. (like Alibaba), are already about 30% of that index. And its weighting will now increase.
