DuPont Capital bought 77,402 additional class B shares of Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway.
DuPont Capital Management has a storied history and, more important, has been trouncing the market in recent years, even through the volatile first quarter .
DuPont Capital, has roots stretching back to 1942 when it managed the pension plan for its former parent company, DuPont. Now a part of Corteva (ticker: CTVA), DuPont Capital’s Value Creators - U.S. Large Cap strategy, after fees, has beaten the S&P 500 index from its Jan. 1, 2017, inception date through March 31—10.85% to 6.62%. The strategy is also beating the index for all periods within that time frame, including the stormy first three months of 2020 when it lost 17.31% compared with a 19.60% drop in the index.
DuPont Capital made some material changes in its investments in the first quarter, including nearly doubling its investment in SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (SPY), which tracks the S&P 500, and buying more class B shares of Berkshire Hathaway (BRKb) and Facebook stock (FB). The investment manager disclosed the trades, among others, in a form it filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
DuPont Capital declined to comment on its first-quarter transactions.
SPY is DuPont Capital’s largest investment by value, and the investment manager bought up 1.4 million more shares of the exchange-traded fund to end the first quarter with 3.1 million shares.
SPY shares, mirroring the index, slipped 20% in the first quarter, but have rallied 9.7% so far in the second quarter.
DuPont Capital dramatically raised its Berkshire Hathaway investment by buying 77,402 additional class B shares of Warren Buffett’s company, It ended March with 193,731 shares.
Berkshire Hathaway stock slipped 19.3% in the first quarter, but unlike the S&P 500, Buffett’s firm hasn’t seen a big rebound. Shares are flat so far in the second quarter.
We have recently noted that the average equity-fund manager has beaten Buffett over the past 10 years. Despite that, we are waiting for the storied investor to make a splashy move , considering all the cash accumulated by Berkshire Hathaway.
Facebook stock slumped 18.7% in the first quarter, and has surged 21.3% in the second quarter. The social-media giant said Wednesday night that ad revenue stabilized in April after falling in March. The coronavirus pandemic has seen Facebook tally more than 3 billion users for the first time, while messaging and voice and video calling have risen.
DuPont Capital bought 45,712 more Facebook shares in the first quarter to end the period with 263,437 shares.
Inside Scoop is a regular Barron’s feature covering stock transactions by corporate executives and board members—so-called insiders—as well as large shareholders, politicians, and other prominent figures. Due to their insider status, these investors are required to disclose stock trades with the Securities and Exchange Commission or other regulatory groups.
A Market-Beating Manager Bought Up Berkshire Hathaway and Facebook Stock. Here’s What Else It Bought.
DuPont Capital Management has a storied history and, more important, has been trouncing the market in recent years, even through the volatile first quarter.
