The COVID-19 pandemic has given added weight to the valuations of the major technology companies, with the new S&P/ASX All Tech Index recovering strongly from its woeful start to life.
Investors have flocked to stocks set to benefit from accelerating digital transformation trends triggered by the rapid global shift to remote working and online shopping.
The ASX's Max Cunningham says the sector has proven that its strength is not just another bubble.
The ASX's Max Cunningham (R) with tech leaders at the launch of the All Tech Index launch in February.
A suite of new technology companies are set to join the All Tech Index as part of its first rebalance next week, including the likes of SEEK, Tyro and Nitro, adding approximately $10 billion worth of value to the index.
Despite losing as much as 42 per cent of its value between its first day of trade on February 24 and mid March thanks to the coronavirus market turmoil, the All Tech Index has since made back its losses, ending the day at 2022.9 points on Friday.
Some of the countries biggest tech names , including Afterpay and Appen (which are part of the celebrated WAAAX stocks), as well as NEXTDC , have led the resurgence, with these companies now trading up 70 per cent, 33.5 per cent, and 37 per cent for the year to date, respectively.
As a result there has been a substantial shake-up in the top echelons of the index, with Afterpay taking the top spot from fellow WAAAX stock Xero, and REA Group edging Xero out of second spot.
Afterpay, which now has a market capitalisation of $13.9 billion, set a new all-time high of $54.85 earlier this week, despite trading as low as $8.01 only three months ago.
Rounding out the top 10 were WiseTech, Computershare, SEEK, Altium, NEXTDC, Carsales and Appen. Former top 10 member, superannuation and funds administration software company Link Group, has dropped from eighth most valuable on the index to 13th.
Speaking to The Australian Financial Review, Mr Cunningham, the ASX executive general manager of listings and issuer services, said the All Tech Index had "starkly outperformed" the S&P/ASX 200, which was still down about 18 per cent on its February high.
"You don't launch an index with timing in mind, but you are hopeful that you're not launching at a peak," Mr Cunningham said.
"There's always been these [questions] of is this just another dot com bubble, but having gone through this crisis and seen the [tech] companies come out stronger, with the vast majority not having to tap the market for emergency capital, it shows tech is becoming a mainstream investment option.
"The rebalance in our view further enhances that there's more big tech companies coming into market and onto the index. It's been particularly gratifying because it's rebalanced at the top end with some strong, quality names coming in... the best thing you can hope for is an index with a broad footprint."
The number of tech companies listed on the ASX has doubled from 100 to 200 in the last five years. To qualify for the index, a company must have a market capitalisation of at least $120 million, have a minimum of $120,000 worth of value traded every day, a minimal investable weight factor of 0.3 and a minimum relative liquidity ratio of 30 per cent.
Mr Cunningham, who expects some tech listings to still occur in the last quarter of 2020 despite the pandemic, said the ASX had first started thinking about launching a tech index three years ago, but at the time it would have been made up of only 20 companies.
"Not withstanding COVID, and maybe even because of it, we're more confident we'll see even more tech companies come in and qualify for the index in the medium term," he said.
"These businesses are very well-equipped for the digital, work from home age, and a lot of the WAAAX companies have shown they're still winning business, Afterpay being the exemplar of that.
NEXTDC CEO Craig Scroggie inside one of the company's data centres.
"Having started this journey with very few big tech companies, the biggest of which was WiseTech for years, we have a great diversified cohort that can stand on its own two feet."
Along with the rebalancing of the Tech Index, data centre business NEXTDC was admitted to the S&P/ASX 100 on Friday.
NEXTDC chief executive Craig Scroggie said the pandemic had given rise to the greatest remote working experiment in the world and had triggered a renewed support for tech stocks.
"Despite the uncertainty and volatility in markets during the COVID-19 pandemic, the performance of the Australian All Technology Index reflects a future that is driven by an underlying accelerated shift to the digital platforms that have allowed us to transition so rapidly to highly productive remote operations," he said.
"The last three months are simply an acceleration of the demand that would have come over time.
Like NEXTDC, Appen has also been one of the biggest beneficiaries of the tech sector confidence, with its crowd of one million remote workers already used to getting the job done from home, according to CEO Mark Brayan.
"The index is valuable in bringing more focus and investment to the sector and the sector is clearly standing up well in current times," he said.
"In general, I expect enterprises to accelerate digitisation plans to get ahead of struggling competitors and be better prepared for an event like the pandemic should it ever happen again. This is good for the sector and AI in particular."
Yolanda Redrup writes on technology from our Melbourne newsroom. Connect with Yolanda on Twitter . Email Yolanda at yolanda.redrup@afr.com.au
