Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an interaction, or dismiss a notification.
Personal Finance Insider writes about products, strategies, and tips to help you make smart decisions with your money. We may receive a small commission from our partners, like American Express, but our reporting and recommendations are always independent and objective.
An adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) secures your rate for the first few years of your loan, then changes the rate periodically — unlike a fixed-rate mortgage, which locks in your rate for the entire life of the loan.
Most lenders will offer a 7/1 ARM and 5/1 ARM, but many provide more term options.
Your ARM rate depends on a rate index, and on the margin determined by your lender.
Because ARM rates usually start lower than fixed-rate mortgage rates, ARMs are worthwhile options for people who plan to sell their home before their rate changes.
When you buy a home, you'll choose between to basic types of mortgages: a fixed-rate mortgage and an adjustable-rate mortgage, or ARM .
A fixed-rate mortgage locks in your rate for the entire life of your loan. For example, if you have a 30-year fixed mortgage, you'll pay the same rate for all 30 years.
An ARM keeps your rate the same for the first few years, then periodically changes over time — typically once a year.
With an ARM, your rate stays the same for a certain number of years, called the "initial rate period," then changes periodically. For example, if you have a 5/1 ARM, your introductory rate period is five years, and your rate will go up or down every year.
The most common terms are 7/1 and 5/1 ARMs, but many lenders offer shorter or longer intro periods.
Rates will depend on which lender you go with, but in general, lenders reward a shorter initial rate period with a lower intro rate. However, if you're getting a significantly low rate to begin with, you may want to lock in that rate for a longer period of time with a longer initial rate period.
Regardless of which term you choose, it's worth noting that rates are at historic lows right now , so you should land a relatively low APR.
If your initial rate period is coming to an end, how do you know whether your ARM rate will increase or decrease?
ARM rates rely on two main factors: an index and margin.
An index is a tool used to measure rates. ARM rates are usually tied to an index such as the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), the prime rate, the maturity yield of the one-year Treasury bill, or the 11th District cost of funds index.
If you check the respective index and see trends are going up or down, you'll have a good idea whether your rate will increase or decrease.
When a lender approves your loan, it assigns a margin for your rate. For instance, if you take out a 5/1 ARM with an index at 3% and a margin of 2%, your intro rate is 5%. Let's say when the intro period ends, the index has dropped to 1.5% — your rate for the following year will be 3.5% (1.5% index + 2% margin).
Should you get an adjustable-rate mortgage?
If mortgage rates decrease, you pay less. With a fixed-rate mortgage, you're tied to the same rate for the entirety of your loan, unless you refinance . An ARM gives you the opportunity to snag a lower rate for at least a year if the respective index drops.
ARM APRs start lower than fixed-rate mortgage APRs. As a general rule of thumb, the fixed rate for an ARM initial rate period starts lower than the rate for a fixed-rate mortgage. This means you'll pay less for at least the first few years than you would with a fixed-rate mortgage.
It's a worthwhile option if you expect to move soon. If you expect to move within five years , you might like a 5/1 ARM. You can lock in a lower rate than you would get with a fixed-rate mortgage and never risk the rate going up before you move.
If mortgage rates increase, you're stuck with a higher rate. Sure, you can benefit from a lower rate if the index decreases once your initial rate period ends. But if the index has increased by the end of your intro period, you have to pay a higher rate, and there's nothing you can do about it — unless you choose to refinance .
You could face a prepayment penalty. Maybe you expect to pay off your mortgage before your rate changes, or you want to refinance for a lower rate before the intro period ends. Many lenders charge prepayment penalties when you take either of these steps. If you expect to pay off your mortgage early or refinance, either plan accordingly or get your mortgage through a lender that doesn't charge prepayment penalties.
It's risky if you expect to stay in the home for a long time. Many people who buy their forever home go with a fixed-rate mortgage over an ARM, because they know exactly how much they'll pay from month to month. With an ARM, you'll face a rate change every year, and you don't know how high rates could go in the next 30 years or so.
