Aramco, known officially as Saudi Arabian Oil Co., trades on the Saudi Tadawul exchange.
It’s extremely hard for any American to buy into Saudi Aramco, the world’s most valuable corporation . But for those looking to get a little exposure, at least two widely available exchange-traded funds now hold shares of the company.
Aramco, known officially as Saudi Arabian Oil Co. (ticker: 2222.SA), trades on the Saudi Tadawul exchange. Saudi rules announced in 2015 make it difficult for foreign investors to take stakes in companies on the exchange. Foreign investment is allowed through institutions with at least $5 billion in assets, and foreigners can’t buy more than 5% of a company.
Saudi Arabia decided not to list Aramco on a foreign exchange such as the New York Stock Exchange, where the kingdom would have less control over how shares were sold and marketed to investors.
The vast majority of people and institutions that invested in the initial public offering, which started trading on Dec. 11 , were in Saudi Arabia or the surrounding countries. Only 1.5% of the shares in the company were offered to the public, with retail investors getting 0.5% and institutions buying 1%. The equity sale raised $25.6 billion for the company, making it the largest IPO ever.
MSCI has already begun adding the stock to its indexes, and FTSE Russell and other index creators have said they would soon do the same. MSCI has included the stock in the MSCI Saudi Arabia Index and the MSCI Emerging Markets Index.
Those indexes are tracked by ETFs, creating a way for investors to benefit from any gains in the stock. The iShares MSCI Saudi Arabia ETF (KSA) and the iShares MSCI Emerging Markets ETF (EEM) both hold Aramco now, with the Saudi Arabia index holding a much larger portion of its assets in Aramco, at 4.55% versus 0.16%.
More options will be coming soon. The FTSE Russell plans to add Aramco to the FTSE Global Equity Index Series (FTSE All-World Index, FTSE Global Large Cap Index, FTSE Emerging Index) on Monday.
The inclusion of Aramco in those indexes mean funds will be buying more of the stock, adding to demand, writes Arqaam Capital analyst Rita Guindy, who rates shares at Buy. The MSCI listing should channel $710 million from passive investors to the stock, and the FTSE move should add $400 million, Guindy writes. Still, that is “less support from passive trackers” than Guindy had originally expected.
Aramco’s valuation moved past $2 trillion on Monday, but Aramco stock has mostly been falling since. On Thursday, shares fell 3.3% to close at 35.5 Saudi riyal, or $9.46. At that level, the company is worth $1.89 trillion, still the largest corporation in the world by far. Apple (AAPL), the second largest, is at about $1.2 trillion.
Barron’s has been skeptical of Saudi Aramco’s valuation , given the company’s state ownership and the fact that its dividend yield is relatively low for a large oil company.
Aramco Stock Is Super Hard to Get. A Few ETFs Own Some.
It’s extremely hard for any American to buy into Saudi Aramco, the world’s most valuable corporation.
