Are these the best index tracking funds in the world?
Any new EFT purchase should balance an existing portfolio to ensure there is a diversified spread across different countries, markets and sectors. AP
An exchange traded fund is a type of investment fund that can be traded quickly and easily, just like stocks and shares. They come with no upfront costs aside from your brokerage's dealing charges and annual fees, which are far lower than on traditional mutual investment funds. Charges are as low as 0.03 per cent on one of the very cheapest (and most popular), Vanguard S&P 500 ETF, with the maximum around 0.75 per cent.
There is no fund manager deciding which stocks and other assets to invest in, instead they passively track their chosen index, country, region or commodity, regardless of whether it goes up or down.
The first ETF was launched as recently as 1993, but the sector boasted $5.78 billion in assets under management at the end of September as inflows hit record highs, according to the latest figures from ETFGI, a leading independent research and consultancy firm.
There are thousands to choose from, with the five largest providers BlackRock’s iShares, Vanguard, State Street Global Advisers, Deutsche Bank X-trackers and Invesco PowerShares.
While the best-known track major indices such as MSCI World, the S&P 500 and FTSE 100, you can also invest in specific countries or regions, large, medium or small companies, government bonds, gold, crude oil, cocoa, water, carbon, cattle, corn futures, currency shifts or even a stock market crash.
Index-tracking exchange traded funds (ETFs) are enormously popular among private investors, because they offer easy access to global stock market performance at minimum cost.
They are particularly favoured by UAE residents, because they are cheap and easy to buy on an online trading platform, and combine rock bottom charges with maximum flexibility, as you can buy and sell them at any time.
The biggest stumbling block is that there are literally thousands to choose from, and they don't always have
consumer-friendly names. Choice is a wonderful thing, but sometimes you can have too much of it, making it difficult to work out which ones are the best to buy.
You could make things really simple for yourself, by purchasing Vanguard FTSE All-World ETF (VWRD), a one-stop shop fund that is hugely popular among members of SimplyFI, a non-profit community of personal finance and investing enthusiasts in the Emirates.
This ETF gives you access to around 3,000 different companies in nearly 50 countries worldwide, in both developed and emerging markets, and has an annual charge of just 0.22 per cent.
If you want some exposure to bonds, you can pair it up with the iShares Global Govt Bond UCITS ETF (IGLO).
However, given the massive ETF multi-verse, many will be reluctant to limit themselves in this way, so we asked our investment experts to select some of their favourites.
Before rushing to buy, though, Ben Barber, a UAE financial blogger at www.buildingwealthwisely.com , advises checking what funds you already hold.
“Any new fund purchase should balance your existing portfolio," says Mr Barber, "to give you a balanced spread across different countries, markets and sectors.”
Aim: To track the performance of the top 500 US large cap US-based companies and multinationals.
Analysis: Sam Dickens, portfolio manager at trading platform IG, says this ETF gives you exposure to many of the most successful companies in the world. “You can also have currency hedged versions, for example, GSPX is hedged against the British pound, which may appeal to UK investors.”
