, a poster child for bad governance, some would argue, in the wake of its widely reported customer abuse .
But Davis has had trouble securing for her fund the “ESG” label that helps market these massive concerns.
Another well-worn criticism of ESG is that performance lags. That bears a second look, says Karen Wallace, director of investor education at Morningstar. The fund research firm says its study of over 56 ESG-screened indexes finds that performance across the survey range reveals returns uncompromised by feel-good stock picking.
Why? Companies that care about ESG metrics also tend to care about healthier balance sheets, stronger competitive advantages and lower volatility overall, historically boosting their long-run returns, Wallace said.
Over the past five years, sustainable funds have done well in both up and down markets relative to their conventional peers, according to Morningstar data. When markets were flat (2015) or down (2018), the returns of 57% and 62% of sustainable funds, respectively, placed them in the top half of their categories. When markets were up in 2016, 2017 and 2019, the returns of 55%, 54% and 67% for sustainable funds placed in the top half of their categories.
A partial explanation for the outperformance of sustainable equity funds over traditional ones lies in their being underweight energy stocks during a period of significant underperformance by that sector, such as in 2019 , even before the COVID-linked oil-price crater. Diversified sustainable U.S. equity funds have about a 1.9% average energy weighting, compared with 3.9% for the S&P 500.
Importantly, investors are also getting more opportunity for portfolios that “create” good rather than only being able to avoid the “bad.” In other words, ESG investing has evolved over the past 20 years away from a focus on excluding components deemed negative (tobacco or gun stocks) to an integrative approach of building an ESG portfolio, perhaps adding solar stocks or seeking out a company with minority representation on its board.
The “avoidance” ESG approach, still in use by managers who often pledge an alignment with religious values, “excluded prominent companies from the investment universe for nonfinancial reasons, which can lead to underperformance,” said Wallace. The newer approach, she said, “tilts the portfolio toward companies that are better at managing ESG issues and therefore less likely to face financial risks such as fines, lawsuits and reputational damage.” In general, tech stocks increasingly find their way into ESG portfolios.
With more stock-specific selection, “ESG is in many ways the new active investing,” agreed Ethan Powell, a former hedge-fund manager who founded the nonprofit Impact Shares, which was named most innovative in 2019 by ETF.com. That includes how a fund engages with the companies it owns, applies pressure by proxy and seeks to provide measurable impact beyond financial return.
Jackie Liu, co-chair of San Francisco law firm Morrison & Foerster’s global corporate department, also questioned why there’s a lingering underperformance stigma, considering that institutional investors with long-run future returns at stake for trillions in holdings — large pension funds, including CalPERS, among them — have led the conversion to sustainable portfolios. Any investors might look at what drives institutional decision making, she said, which is formulated to be better insulated against climate-change lawsuits, rising insurance costs and other future risks.
Still, caution abounds. Investors would be wise to stop thinking of “Wall Street” as a service industry and start thinking of it as just another product peddler, Ric Edelman counsels. It’s his belief that “ESG” is an au courant way of making investing products sexy enough to distinguish them from the cheapest, commoditized offerings from the likes of Vanguard and BlackRock.
Edelman is the founder of Edelman Financial Engines, the largest independent financial advisory firm in the U.S. And he’s not the only high-profile ESG skeptic. “It’s a complete fraud,” the venture capitalist Chamath Palihapitiya said on CNBC in February . “It’s great marketing, but a lot of sizzle, no steak.”
For his part, Edelman has other, more nuanced, reasons for not steering his clients to ESG strategies: “Applying a noneconomic filter to an economic decision is never a good approach,” he told MarketWatch. And: “Mixing social morals with investments can be as dangerous as mixing politics and investments.”
It’s Edelman suggestion that “morally driven” investors instead make charitable contributions with the returns they receive from traditional investment strategies.
Another increasingly popular approach is likewise an about-face from the traditional divest-from-the-violators concept, and urges investors to fight for change because they have skin in the game. Suz Mac Cormac, corporate partner at Morrison & Foerster, who chairs its energy and social enterprise and impact-investing practices, represents clients who see merit in “fighting from the inside.”
“You can cut them off or you can engage,” she said, by investing in, and thus, holding companies responsible for ESG action via shareholder or employee activism.
Fund giant State Street Global Advisors, for instance, this year put the companies it invests in on behalf of clients on notice, saying three out of four companies aren’t meeting ESG targets and will be subjected to proxy voting action against board members and other steps.
Finally, there’s another strategy that has its roots in the attempt to express social values through portfolios, but will likely soon overtake investing of all types: “direct indexing.”
Natalie Truty, an adviser at New York–based Wealthspire, is a veteran of what she calls “the values-based discussion.” Once she understands exactly what a client wants — sometimes the mandate can be as vague as “make me more sustainable” — Truty can essentially build, on the client’s behalf, a portfolio that reflects those impulses.
Truty describes direct indexing like this: “It’s as if you took an index fund and unwrapped it.” She can apply the client’s “screens” -— such as avoiding tobacco or guns — to narrow down, say, the S&P 500 SPX,
to the Smith Family 400.
Truty said she’ll be watching with interest to see if the socioeconomic issues that battered financial markets in March and April will filter into client decisions. When the global oil-price war — what many analysts believe may be the death rattle for fossil-fuel dominance — broke out, Truty fielded several calls from clients seeking reassurance that they had no exposure to oil.
ETF Database’s Dave Nadig says younger investors now ask tougher questions.
For now, that kind of high-touch service, including responding to all those increasingly plugged-in ESG investors, is only available to clients with enough assets to make it worthwhile for most advisers. But just like any revolutionary technology — ETF Database’s Dave Nadig calls direct indexing “the self-driving cars of investment management” — the software is likely to become more inexpensive and widespread.
“I’m an outlier on this, but I believe that in 10 years, wrappers like ETFs and mutual funds are going to seem archaic,” Nadig told MarketWatch. “They’re great for pooling people’s money together. But the minute you have a personal opinion, wrappers stink.”
The second quarter comes to the close, and an uncertain last half of the year is looming. Our call of the day comes from JPMorgan Chase strategists, who identify which stocks are winning now and are probably the safest bets for the rest of the year.
