Last Updated at September 26, 2019 02:19 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Bloomberg on Wednesday offered to help India gain access to global bond indexes, a move that will help Asia’s third-largest economy attract more foreign inflows. “Bloomberg will help India navigate the processfor gaining inclusion in global market benchmark indexes, so international investors can access India’s bond market,” Founder Michael Bloomberg, who owns Bloomberg Barclay indexes, said in New York at a business forum.
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi is the key note speaker at the event. The move will “help Indian businesses raise funds, invest and grow ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
