HDFC said its board of directors approved investment of Rs 1,000 crore in Yes Bank at Rs 10 per share and may hold in excess of 5 percent stake in Yes Bank post investment.
Axis Bank said its Board of Directors approved investment of Rs 600 crore in Yes Bank at Rs 10 per share.
The Indian Rupee ended at Rs 73.91 per dollar, up 31 paise from Thursday's close of 74.22 per dollar.
HDFC, Axis Bank and Kotak Mahindra Bank are likely to invest Rs 1,000 crore each in Yes Bank scheme, reports CNBC-TV18 quoting sources.
These firms are likely to acquire 5 percent stake each in Yes Bank, sources said.
HDFC Group is likely to announce an investment of about Rs 1,000 crore in Yes Bank, reports CNBC-TV18 quoting unnamed sources.
Gaurav Ratnaparkhi (Senior Technical Analyst) at Sharekhan: Nifty witnessed extreme sentiments on March 13. On account of global cues, the index opened with a significant gap on the downside and went down further to hit the lower circuit. As the market opened for trading subsequently the bulls rushed in with vengeance and not only lifted the index into the positive territory but also crossed the Thursday’s high. The recovery halted near the key hourly moving averages. On the higher side, 10200-10300 acted as a key resistance and can continue to do so going ahead. The overall structure shows that the Nifty can now get into a consolidation mode within the broad range of 10000 – 9000. Currently, the index is trading near the upper end & can take a dip towards the lower end of 9000.
ICICI Bank will acquire 100 crore equity shares in Yes Bank at Rs 10 per share as board of directors approved investment of Rs 1,000 crore in the private sector lender via equity.
Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking: The Indian market opened gap down hitting lower circuit within few minutes of trade following the huge sell-off in global markets. However, it recovered its losses soon after the trading resumed and reported biggest intra-day recovery by ending in positive.The broader markets BSE-Midcap and BSE-Smallcap ended higher by 2.1% and 1.3%, respectively. On the sector front, all the indices ended in green with Banks, Telecom, Oil & Gas and Metals being the top gainers. Downside risk for the Indian markets cannot be ruled out in the near term given uncertainty across globe. The improvement in domestic macro data (IIP and easing CPI) is a good sign, however growth recovery still remains evasive and therefore there are high expectations that RBI may cut rates in its next policy meet to offset the impact of coronavirus as well as economic slowdown. Meanwhile in the near term, we expect volatility to remain high and maintain cautious stance.
