Gallup Managing Director Larry Emond gathered the strategies and policies of 100 members of the CHRO Roundtable, an organization that includes the CHROs of more than 650 of the world's largest companies, for their responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. The companies in this sampling average $27 billion in revenue with 80,000 employees and most are global organizations. This is what Emond found.
Most organizations have created crisis management teams, task forces or committees with a response tailored to specific geographic regions. These task forces meet regularly to develop policies and provide information to leaders, managers and front-line employees regarding COVID-19 awareness, prevention, management and hygiene practices.
These teams are also focused on management protocols and business continuity plans to guide current actions and forecast possible responses to future events. In general, their protocols and plans include:
If an employee is diagnosed with COVID-19, many companies have established protocols like these:
Require employees to report confirmed cases -- either of self or family member -- of COVID-19 to HR or management. The affected are typically required to stay home for 14 days and/or until cleared by a doctor to return to work with confirmation that there is no diagnosis of COVID-19.
Isolate employees diagnosed at work; immediately disinfect objects they've touched; trace their contact with other employees, customers, and clients; and notify those who may have been exposed without releasing the diagnosed employee's name.
Ask employees to log all contact with other employees or visitors in case they become symptomatic so that others can be informed of potential exposure.
Most companies have recommended limiting personal and professional travel, and some have assured workers they could decline professional invitations without penalty. Generally called soft bans, these partial travel restrictions have been issued with requests to inform HR of travel and avoid air travel, public transportation and large gatherings, as well as 14-day self-quarantines following travel to affected areas.
However, hard bans are in effect in many companies, and travel to China, Italy, South Korea, Iran, Japan, Hong Kong and Taiwan has been prohibited. Indeed, most intercontinental travel -- and, more recently, even travel in general -- has stopped for the time being, unless it's mission-critical.
Leaders are holding additional meetings to monitor business impact in efforts to protect or sustain business functions. Many companies with facilities in affected areas have closed them and are canceling their own -- or their employees' presence at -- conferences, events and face-to-face meetings. Some have been able to move operations to unaffected locations.
Companies are also assessing risks to their employees' physical and financial wellbeing . Their mitigation efforts include:
closing on-site facilities such as gyms, cafeterias and common areas
granting paid time off for symptomatic employees, employees who must care for family members who are diagnosed with COVID-19, and/or employees with diagnosed cases of COVID-19
expanding the time of meal service to avoid congestion, and asking employees to consider alternate meal times to reduce crowds
These companies are testing technological (e.g., remote work) capabilities, emergency notification systems and updating employee contact information. They're advising employees to take their laptops or other portable equipment home each night, and they are devoting IT staff to help employees set up remote connections at home, sometimes on employees' personal computers.
Leaders are holding additional meetings to monitor business impact in efforts to protect or sustain business functions.
Many companies have required or are encouraging video or audio-conferencing meetings (e.g., Skype, Zoom, Microsoft Teams) or phone calls in lieu of face-to-face meetings. They also recommend conducting collaborative projects by video or audio-conferencing, Google Docs, emails or other online channels.
Corporate leadership is communicating frequently -- daily, weekly or as available -- to effectively address their organization's COVID-19 response , advice, policies and protocols. Many are issuing FAQ guides, and many are including links to authorities and external organizations such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), The World Health Organization (WHO), Johns Hopkins University, local governments and outbreak maps.
Along with expert advice, these messages often include a genuinely personal element, i.e., reminding workers to get information from credible organizations, assuring them that none of their fellow employees have tested positive for the virus (where applicable), urging employees not to panic or spread rumors, and ensuring the message has an inspirational and strategic narrative . They will also often encourage employees to obtain enough food, water, medicines and other essentials for their families in case of quarantine or scarcity.
Corporate leadership is communicating frequently -- daily, weekly or as available -- to address their organization's COVID-19 response, advice, policies and protocols.
Communications are usually tailored to the recipients -- whether leaders, managers, employees or clients/customers, respectively -- and methods include:
email, mail, text messages, hotlines and internal systems (i.e., intranet) to propagate pertinent information
Members of the CHRO Roundtable are conscious of the effects of their communication, particularly on customers. To that end, many have:
Proscribed responses from managers/leaders if contacted by the media. Many have designated media relations personnel who address all questions from the media.
Asked employees not to violate the privacy of diagnosed employees or clients/customers in social media messages.
Deployed social media and marketing messaging about customer policies and alternative commerce/services.
Businesses are rapidly expanding training opportunities. Much of it concerns managers, who are being tasked with assisting in coronavirus containment, responding to employee needs or concerns, and communicating disease-management policies and preventative measures, such as hygiene practices. But CHROs are also creating COVID-19-specific training programs for security professionals, cleaning crews, maintenance and groundskeeping staff.
These protocols and responses, we're told, will be operational as long as is needed -- the end of May is the current long-term projection -- and all are subject to revision. Gallup will continue to report on our findings as the situation evolves.
Discover these crucial resources to better prepare your company during this disruption:
