The POUND briefly rallied against the euro after the UK officially rejected the delay to Brexit.
Michael Gove told Brussels the UK would reject an extension to the transition period, which will expire att the end of the year. The pound had fallen against the euro earlier today while markets have ticked up. One pound now buys 1.2594 euros.
The FTSE 100 had registered gains of 1.4 percent, recovering from a heavy selloff the day before on warnings from the US central bank chief about economic recovery.
Earlier today, news came that the UK economy has seen a record slump, with GDP plunging 20.4 percent.
The figures, supplied by the Office for National Statistics, show this is the biggest fall since records began in 1997. The UK has one of the worst coronavirus death tolls in the world, and has taken a crushing economic hit.
This however, did little to dampen investors optimism.
FOLLOW OUR LIVE UPDATES HERE:
Stock: Thursday was a difficult day on the markets (Image: GETTY)
UK economy suffers record slump with GDP plunging 20.4%. (Image: Getty)
European shares closed slightly up on Friday after heavy losses in the previous session.
However, it marked their worst week since the peak of the coronavirus sell-off due to persistent concerns over the pace of an economic recovery.
The pan-European STOXX 600 index ended 0.3 percent higher, after clocking its worst single-day loss since March 23 in the previous session.
The index has lost about 5.7 percent for the week, with travel and leisure stocks the worst performers as fears of a second wave of coronavirus infections in the United States rattled sentiment.
Markets had come off three-month highs through the week, with the sell-off intensifying on Thursday after the US.
Federal Reserve pointed to a long road to economic recovery for the world's largest economy.
Neela Gollapudi, head of portfolio management and research at GenTrust: “You have run up for so long, the market is looking for an excuse to pause.
"Fed's Powell said we are not going to have a V-shaped recovery, and the markets were priced to perfection in terms of how quickly things are going to turn around."
On the day, battered shares of automakers, basic resources and real estate companies rose between 1.4 percent and 2 percent.
Royal Dutch Shell, BP and Total rose between around 0.6 percent and 1.7 percent, despite a drop in oil prices.
US consumer sentiment perked up in early June as households cheered the reopening of businesses and a surprise rebound in hiring, though they did not expect a significant improvement in the economy amid fears of a resurgence in COVID-19 infections.
The survey from the University of Michigan on Friday is broadly in line with economists' expectations that the recovery from the recession would be a long slog.
The National Bureau of Economic Research, the arbiter of US recessions, declared on Monday that the economy slipped into recession in February.
Joel Naroff, chief economist at Naroff Economics in Holland, Pennsylvania: ”While uncertainty about the future is beginning to ease, it is still higher than it was at anytime during the Great Recession.
“That raises questions about the willingness to purchase big-ticket items.
“If we don't see that happen, the recovery will be slower than hoped for."
The University of Michigan's consumer sentiment index increased to a reading of 78.9 from 72.3 in May.
Two-thirds of consumers in the survey expected "bad times financially" during the year ahead, while half anticipated a "renewed downturn.
The FTSE-100 index at the close was up 28.48 at 6105.18.
Meanwhile, The FTSE Mid-250 index closed up 103.67 at 17077.34.
4pm update: The FTSE-100 index at 3.45pm was up 57.81 at 6134.51.
Wall Street's main indexes jumped on Friday, recouping about half of the previous session's sharp losses, but were still on track for their worst week in nearly three months on fears of a rise in new coronavirus infections and economic worries.
All the major S&P sectors rose with technology and financials providing the biggest boost to the benchmark index.
Boeing Co jumped 11 percent, as it looked to end the week 8 percent lower.
United Airlines Holdings Inc, American Airlines Group Inc, Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd jumped between 14 percent and 19 percent leading gains on the S&P 500 following sharp declines in the previous session.
Ryan Giannotto, director of research at GraniteShares ETFs in New York: “People are just taking a breather after the outright selling yesterday, like we saw back in the dark days of February and early March.
"There's always going to be more headlines about coronavirus cases increasing, more tests increasing. That's just something that markets, investors and companies are going to have to learn to deal with."
3.15pm update: The FTSE-100 index at 2.45pm was up 98.04 at 6174.74.
US import prices increased by the most in more than a year in May, driven by higher costs for petroleum products and food, which could further diminish fears of deflation as the economy battles a recession.
The report from the Labor Department on Friday followed data this week showing consumer prices falling moderately in May and a solid rebound in producer prices.
Mike Englund, chief economist at Action Economics in Boulder, Colorado: “These gains should support June increases for CPI and PPI.
"Trade prices should rise further in June with oil prices, alongside a lift from a drop-back in the value of the dollar, though we have an ongoing headwind from demand destruction with global shutdowns."
Import prices rose 1.0 percent last month, the largest gain since February 2019, after falling 2.6 percent in April.
Economists polled by Reuters had forecast import prices, which exclude tariffs, increasing 0.6 percent in May. In the 12 months through May, import prices decreased 6.0 percent after dropping 6.8 percent in April.
The Federal Reserve, which tracks the core personal consumption expenditures price index for its 2 percent inflation target, sharply lowered its inflation projections on Wednesday.
The UK will introduce border controls in stages on European Union goods after the Brexit transition period ends in a bid to soften the blow for companies already battling the coronavirus pandemic.
Reversing an original plan to impose full border controls on imports coming into Britain from the EU from next year, the Government said it would introduce the changes in stages up until July 1, 2021, giving firms more time to deal with paperwork.
Cabinet Office minister Michael Gove said in a statement: “Today's announcement is an important step towards getting the country ready for the end of the transition period, but there is still more work to be done.”
The Government added that it would build new border facilities for carrying out checks and provide support to ports which need to build new infrastructure.
The Prime Minister revealed he wasn't surprised by GDP figures because of the coronavirus outbreak.
Mr Johnson said: “These figures came as no surprise to us because we’ve always recognised that this wasn’t going to be just a public health crisis but also a really serious crisis for our economy.
He said countries that depend on services would always be hit hard in this kind of crisis.
"But we’re also a very resilient and a dynamic economy and we will bounce back," he continued.
PwC's chief economist, Jonathan Gillham, comments on today's record breaking GDP data: "This contraction has been driven by a massive hit to construction (40 percent smaller than last month) and manufacturing (-24 percent), which fared even worse than services (-19 percent).”
“Breaking down the 20.4 percent reduction in GDP, the decline in retail sales accounts for around 15 percent of this figure, with accommodation and restaurants contributing around 9 percent and construction 12 percent.
“The shutdown in car plants led this industry to nearly halve in size and new engine production is below 1 percent of what it was pre-lockdown. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the pharmaceutical industry was the only non-government sector to show growth (15.4 percent).
“This data underlines that the effectiveness of the response from both the Government and the business community remains critical to limiting the longer term scarring to the economy through business failures and unemployment. If this response is effective, we would expect a quicker economic recovery than we saw after the financial crisis, even though the short-term fall in output will be much steeper due to the lockdown."
Having weighed a deluge of dire warnings on the economy this morning, European markets continued on their uptrend. Germany's DAX rose nearlt 1 percent while the FTSE 100 had rallied 1.3 percent by lunch time in London.
Gold was on track for a sizable weekly gain, as investors rushed to the certainty of haven assets.
Despite gloomy news about the economy the FTSE 100 has rebounded somewhat. It is now trading at 6,152, 1.3 percent higher than opening levels.
US stock futures were higher, too, again at odds with reems of downcast data.
Brian O’Reilly, head of market strategy for Mediolanum International Funds told the Wall Street Journal: “We can’t discount the fact that there is a lot of money sitting on the sidelines.
"It’s a trading market at the moment—more than a long-term fundamentals market—so on any setback like yesterday, you’re likely to see people come in and bid the market higher.”
Volatility bets are off as long and short exposures among non-commercial investors on the Cboe Volatility Index have sunk to near multi-year lows.
The most speculative investors are taking a new tack as counterintuitive Wall Street rallies continue.
“If this reflects a lack of conviction about the direction of volatility in the coming weeks, it is understandable,” Tallbacken’s Michael Purves wrote in a note reported by Bloomberg, referring to VIX futures bets. “Educated guesses on the future moves in volatility are arguably pretty uneducated right now.”
The FTSE initially lost ground on market open, but quickly see-sawed. It is now down around 0.4 percent.
Germany's DAX ticked up 0.5 percent. The Europe-wide Stoxx 600 index fell 0.6 percent.
US stock futures struck a more positive note, rebounding from losses yesterday. Both the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq look set to open more than 1 percent higher later on.
Jeremy Thomson Cook, Chief Economist at Equals said: “It’s not a surprise that record declines in economic activity occurred when most UK businesses had people working from home or on furlough. The 20 percent fall is a shocking figure nonetheless, but gives us a good idea of how deep the trough is that the UK economy needs to make its way out of in the coming quarters"
“With a Brexit showdown in the coming fortnight, we can but hope that today’s numbers focus a few minds in to providing an extension to the current transition period so as to relieve businesses from fighting two of their largest ever battles concurrently.”
Andrea Olivari, Co-Founder at digital lender Selina Finance said: “These figures reflect this week’s stark warning from the OECD about the contraction of the UK economy. However, with the lockdown easing and both the hospitality and retail sectors re-opening and, keeping in mind, of course, all the Government measures to support business and workers, there’s tentative hope we could see a U-shaped recovery."
Fears of a second coronavirus wave are thought to have contributed to Thursday's fall in the markets.
But US Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin told CNBC that the country could not shut down the economy again if a second wave hit:  "We can't shut down the economy again. I think we have learned that if you shut down the economy you're going to create more damage, and not just economic damage.
"There are other areas of medical problems and everything else that gets put on hold.
"I'd say the good news is plenty of hospital capacity, a lot of progress on testing. I think we're over 20 million people that have been tested and will continue to test people and that was something that was the big problem and the reason why the president needed to close down parts of the economy.
"We have the fed program, we have Main Street, which is going to be now up and running, and we're prepared to go back to Congress for more money to support the American workers. We're going to get everybody back to work. That's my number one job working with the president."
