The London Stock Exchange Group said it is on track to complete its $27billion (£21billion) takeover of data provider Refinitiv, despite questions from European regulators.
It said it expects the transaction to be completed in the second half of the year.
The megamerger was endorsed by LSE shareholders in November last year, but the European Commission is scrutinising the deal.
The LSE said in a statement:
Our proposed acquisition of Refinitiv, a leading provider of data, analytics and financial markets services, will significantly accelerate our strategy to be a leading global financial markets infrastructure provider.
Refinitiv brings highly complementary capabilities in data, analytics and capital markets as well as deep customer relationships across a global business.
Detailed integration planning is underway to ensure we are ready to deliver the benefits of the transaction to our shareholders, customers and other stakeholders.  We remain on track to close the transaction in the second half of this year.
Oil prices continued to slide today amid fears the coronavirus will cause a global slowdown, reducing demand for oil.
Brent Crude price was down almost 3 per cent, or more than $1.5 to $50.66 per barrel.
Craig Erlam at OANDA says:
There's no confusion in the oil market where crude prices have slipped to their lowest levels since December 2018 and the trend is not their friend. Oil producers are due to meet next week and will attempt to arrest the slump in crude prices but they'll have a huge task on their hands.
The previously recommended 600,000 barrels won't be enough and the group is struggling to get Russia on board as it is. The least we can expect is unilateral action by Saudi Arabia but other members joining a cut would send a stronger message to the markets. Until then, Brent is looking vulnerable at $50.
Airlines, insurers and miners are among the worst hit this morning.
This has been one of the worst weeks on the markets in a very long time, leaving investors’ portfolios battered and bruised, says Russ Mould at AJ Bell.
There is no sign of widespread bargain hunting by investors despite the cut-price shares on offer.
That might not happen until there is a clearer picture of how far and wide coronavirus has spread and how different countries are trying to contain it.
IAG, the owner of British Airways, has warned that earnings have been hit by weaker demand as a result of coronavirus.
The airline group said it has seen lower demand on Asian and European routes as well as weaker business travel across its network due to the cancellation of industry events and corporate travel restrictions.
Willie Walsh, chief executive of the firm which also owns Aer Lingus, told reporters he believed the impact of coronavirus on the airline industry would be significant enough for some failing airlines to be 'pushed over the edge'.
The update came as IAG reported that operating profits for 2019 fell by 33.6 per cent to £2.6billion.
Shares are down 8.9 per cent at 469.50p.
House prices are rising at the fastest annual pace in 18 months, but there are fears that a coronavirus outbreak could stall the property market again.
The cost of the average home edged up by £200 in February to £216,092, according to the Nationwide index, with house price inflation reaching 2.3 per cent.
The figures based on mortgage approvals provided further evidence that a pick-up in the property market that began before the election in December accelerated in the New Year.
But there are concerns that if coronavirus cases step up in the UK, house hunters will stay home.
