Stocks Drop Amid Virus Surge; Bonds Edge Up: Markets Wrap
(Bloomberg) -- U.S. stocks opened lower after a volatile week, with investors weighing a resurgence in new virus infections and data showing a drop in American incomes. Treasuries nudged higher.
The S&P 500 extended its weekly loss to about 1%, as the U.S. continued to report a surge in cases and some states halted reopening plans. Data showed consumer spending surged by a record in May as Americans spent relief payments, though incomes slumped. Big banks slid following Thursday’s rally after the Federal Reserve capped dividends and banned buybacks through September. Volumes may be elevated later today as Russell indexes conduct their annual rebalancing.
Copper was on track for a sixth weekly advance, with prices briefly topping $6,000 a ton. The yen strengthened. The 10-year Treasury yield fell to 0.6%
U.S. markets have largely shrugged off concerns that a second wave of the pandemic could force policymakers to reverse plans to re-open, though signs are mounting that states in the South and Southwest may not be able to avoid rolling back some economic activity. Investors remain convinced that the Fed is ready to amp up its assistance should the economy start to sputter anew.
Record Virus Cases in U.S. Defy States’ Efforts at Control
The Fed “is going to support this market one way or the other,” Sandy Villere, portfolio manager at Villere & Co., said on Bloomberg TV. Still, “I think there are going to be a few more dips to come. It’s amazing, the market doesn’t care about fundamentals or earnings at this point, they care about the pandemic and the pandemic only.”
In remarks on Friday, European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde said the recovery from the coronavirus pandemic will be “restrained” and will change parts of the economy permanently. While the worst of the crisis might be over, it’ll take time for the “phenomenal” jump in savings to trickle into higher investment and spending, she said.
Oil traded near $39 a barrel in New York as Russia slashed exports of its flagship crude Urals to the lowest in at least 10 years. Gold was near $1,760 an ounce, heading for a third weekly advance, the longest winning run since January.
Here are some key events coming up:
A rebalance of Russell indexes is due on Friday.
These are some of the main moves in markets:
The S&P 500 Index fell 0.4% as of 9:31 a.m. New York time.The Stoxx Europe 600 Index advanced 1%.The MSCI Asia Pacific Index gained 0.6%.The MSCI Emerging Market Index was little changed.
The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index increased 0.2%.The euro was unchanged at $1.1218.The British pound fell 0.3% to $1.2386.The onshore yuan weakened 0.3% to 7.078 per dollar.The Japanese yen strengthened 0.2% to 106.97 per dollar.
West Texas Intermediate crude declined 1% to $38.33 a barrel.Brent crude dipped 0.5% to $40.86 a barrel.Gold weakened 0.1% to $1,762.19 an ounce.
For more articles like this, please visit us at bloomberg.com
Subscribe now to stay ahead with the most trusted business news source.
