Glencore, the mining company, said it has informed by the Office of the Attorney General of Switzerland (OAG) that it has opened a criminal investigation into the company.
Glencore, the mining company, said it has informed by the Office of the Attorney General of Switzerland (OAG) that it has opened a criminal investigation into the company for failure to have the organizational measures in place to prevent alleged corruption in the Democratic Republic of Congo currently under investigation by the OAG.
From a technical perspective, the short term price rebound is likely to fade as the Relative Strength Index (RSI, 14) struck against its resistance threshold at 70% and broke down its short term rising trend line.  Prices are nearing the 20-day simple moving average which is still ascending.  A final rebound towards 180p is possible before the stock price reverses down towards 153p and 130p. Alternatively, a push above 190p would call for a further rise towards the key horizontal resistance at 216p (overlap).
Join our live webinars for the latest analysis and trading ideas. Register now
GAIN Capital UK Limited (trading as “City Index”) is an execution-only service provider. This material, whether or not it states any opinions, is for general information purposes only and it does not take into account your personal circumstances or objectives. This material has been prepared using the thoughts and opinions of the author and these may change. However, City Index does not plan to provide further updates to any material once published and it is not under any obligation to keep this material up to date. This material is short term in nature and may only relate to facts and circumstances existing at a specific time or day. Nothing in this material is (or should be considered to be) financial, investment, legal, tax or other advice and no reliance should be placed on it.
No opinion given in this material constitutes a recommendation by City Index or the author that any particular investment, security, transaction or investment strategy is suitable for any specific person. The material has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research. Although City Index is not specifically prevented from dealing before providing this material, City Index does not seek to take advantage of the material prior to its dissemination. This material is not intended for distribution to, or use by, any person in any country or jurisdiction where such distribution or use would be contrary to local law or regulation.
CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money rapidly due to leverage. 74% of retail investor accounts lose money when trading CFDs with this provider. You should consider whether you understand how CFDs work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.
* Spread Betting and CFD Trading are exempt from UK stamp duty. Spread betting is also exempt from UK Capital Gains Tax. However, tax laws are subject to change and depend on individual circumstances. Please seek independent advice if necessary.
† 1 point spreads available on the UK 100, Germany 30, France 40 and Australia 200 during market hours on daily funded trades & daily future spread bets and CFDs (excluding futures).
‡ Voted “Best Trading Platform”, “Best Mobile Application” and “Best Spread Betting Provider” at the OPWA Awards 2019. Voted “Best Professional Trading Platform” and “Best Spread Betting Provider” at the 2019 Shares Awards. Voted “Best CFD Provider” at the ADVFN International Financial Awards 2020.
City Index is a trading name of GAIN Capital UK Limited. Head and Registered Office: Devon House, 58 St Katharine’s Way, London, E1W 1JP. GAIN Capital UK Ltd is a company registered in England and Wales, number: 1761813. Authorised and Regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority. FCA Register Number: 113942. VAT number: 524837435.
City Index and City Trading are trademarks of GAIN Capital UK Ltd.
The information on this website is not targeted at the general public of any particular country. It is not intended for distribution to residents in any country where such distribution or use would contravene any local law or regulatory requirement.
We use cookies, and by continuing to use this site or clicking "Agree" you agree to their use. Full details are in our Cookie Policy .
