Global markets hit hard as indices catch Wuhan flu; Sensex falls 285 pts
Foreign brokerages are bracing for a larger impact on the global markets than what was during the SARS outbreak, which also originated in China, back in 2003
Last Updated at January 31, 2020 01:11 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
The outbreak of coronavirus is quickly unraveling gains made by global markets from the US-China trade deal euphoria, with major indices trading 2-9 per cent lower than their mid-January peaks. The global market capitalisation has seen an erosion of $2.2 trillion in the last week of January.
Foreign brokerages are bracing for a larger impact on the global markets than what was during the SARS outbreak, which also originated in China, back in 2003. “We expect a bigger and possibly longer macro impact on Asia than what was seen during SARS. Our base case is that 12 months from now, the ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
