Investors always look at three factors to balance their investment decisions — returns, volatility and price-earnings ratio; all these factors have favoured Indian indices.
India's most vibrant index Nifty produced 12.18 per cent in a year (as on May 31, 2019) | File photo from REUTERS
Investors found that when world stock markets were volatile, India's two indices showed calm with a good return.
Historical return, volatility earnings ratio data of last year showed that Indian Stock Market was doing well with respect to various international counterparts including Europe's FTSE and USA's Nasdaq indices.
India's most vibrant index Nifty produced 12.18 per cent in a year (as on May 31, 2019). At the same time, global stock markets had been struck with various factors, including slowing world economy, less support from central banks and trade tensions.
In this period, Hang Seng index of Hong Kong recorded negative 13.07 per cent followed by Singapore Strait Times index (-10.17 per cent), Japan's Nikkei (-9.21 per cent), Europe' FTSE (-7.49 per cent) and Nasdaq (-2.02 per cent). However, USA's DOW index registered only 0.01 per cent return for the period of June 2018 to May 2019.
Investors always look at three factors to balance their investment decisions - returns, volatility and price-earnings ratio; all these factors have favoured Indian indices.
Annualised volatility data shows that India's stock indices are less volatile than the world's top stock markets, including the USA'S Nasdaq and China's Shanghai Composite Index.
China Shanghai Composite Index is the highest volatile market. Annualised volatility for June, 2018 to May, 2019, the Shanghai Composite index witnessed 21.5 per cent volatility followed by US Nasdaq (19.4 per cent).
"Chinese equity markets are no strangers to large swings. Long-term measures of volatility indicate annual levels near 33 per cent and 54 per cent for offshore and onshore markets respectively" (based on quarterly data), Standard Chartered Bank said in its global market outlook.
The Indian indices -- Sensex and Nifty -- recorded the lowest annualised volatility to 12.6 per cent and 12.8 per cent, respectively, for the period of June, 2018 to May, 2019.
"The performance of Indian capital market compares favourably with the other major global economies on various parameters such as indices returns, volatility and currency movements," Ajay Tyagi, Chairman, SEBI, India's capital market regulator said.
India also ranked top in the criteria of the price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio, which gives an idea to investors that index is over or undervalued. Higher P/E means that higher earnings expectations in the future compared to lower P/E. Indian market recorded top rank in terms of P/E. Nifty P/E ratio at 29.5, which was the highest across the world indices during June, 2018 to May, 2019, Sebi data shows.
The growing financial integration with fast cross-border mobility of private capital inflows leads the rally in Indian market experts said that shift in the leverage preference of companies from debt to equity finance.
Rajiv Singh, CEO, Karvy stock broking Ltd explains to India Today that "post demonetisation, domestic inflows have become more robust and domestic institutions have stepped in whenever FII's have sold. The trade war has helped as India is thought of as a safe haven among peers. Lastly, subdued oil prices have helped Indian markets perform better than other EM's".
India has outperformed peers on account of multiple reasons, firstly, the election of a stable reform-oriented government, coupled with the long term growth story for Indian equities has made India an attractive destination for global investors.
India has outperformed emerging markets by 5.5 per cent in the last one year, of which 4.5 per cent rally occurred on the day after exit polls were announced. FII inflows are the reason why index heavyweights like HDFC, HDFC Bank, Bajaj Fin, Bajaj Finserve, Reliance, TCS have done well, whereas the broader market has been weak, Rajiv said.
