Our methodology is straightforward. Gifts per full-time enrollment comes from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) of the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and are a median of the most recent seven years. The alumni participation rate, compiled by the Council for the Advancement and Support of Education ( CASE ), is averaged over three years. (This year CASE made it a point to remind us that its alumni participation measure, which only looks at donations, fails to capture other ways graduates show their love, like via volunteer work.)
There have been some impressive moves among the colleges in our rankings over the past several years. Small liberal arts schools like Hamilton College, founded in 1812, and Smith, whose notable alums include Gone With The Wind author Margaret Mitchell and the iconic chef Julia Child, moved up into the top 25, from below 40 five years ago. Tiny Wabash College in Indiana, originally known as The Wabash Teacher's Seminary and Manual Labor College when it was founded in 1832 by graduates of Dartmouth College, wasn't in the top 100 when we began our ranking in 2013. Today it is ranked 10th. The University of Notre Dame, whose alumni include actor Regis Philbin, moved up by ten positions to fourth place, following the immovable trio of Dartmouth, Williams and Princeton—ranked as the top three for every year since 2014.
At the same time, larger research universities including Harvard, Stanford and MIT, known for producing computer science, math and economics majors who are routinely snapped up with impressive compensation packages by the leading tech companies, start ups and financiers, have fallen in the rankings. Harvard, for example, has dropped from 20th place in 2018 to 37th, despite an impressive median alumni gift of more than $35,000. On average, only 17% of its alums choose to give back to Crimson.
Below you will find our 2019 ranking of the top 200 Grateful Graduate colleges.
I’m a summer intern on Forbes’ Money & Markets team, and a student at Brown University. I just completed my junior year, and am double majoring in Economics and
I’m a summer intern on Forbes’ Money & Markets team, and a student at Brown University. I just completed my junior year, and am double majoring in Economics and International Relations. I am also a Section Manager for the student-run magazine, the Brown Political Review, and have some experience in the non-profit and consulting sector.
I'm Matt Schifrin vice president and assistant managing editor of Money & Markets for Forbes Media. I have worked for Forbes for more than 25 years and learned business
I'm Matt Schifrin vice president and assistant managing editor of Money & Markets for Forbes Media. I have worked for Forbes for more than 25 years and learned business journalism under Forbes’ late great editor Jim Michaels. For the first 15 years of my career, I wrote mostly investigative features but now I am responsible for investing and finance content in Forbes Magazine and on Forbes.com. I'm also editor in charge of Forbes Newsletter Group and Forbes iConferences and I used to run Forbes Best Of The Web. I won a SABEW award in 2012 and a MIN Best of The Web award in 2009. My book, The Warren Buffetts Next Door, The World's Greatest Investor You've Never Heard Of was published in 2011. I am a graduate of Cornell University.
