As with any unknown situation, the slightest bit of clarity can make the biggest difference, which was proven on 24 March - the morning after Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced the strict new measures for people in the UK to stay at home.
This coincided with the closing of Donald Trump's deal with Congress to shore up the US economy in the face of the outbreak.
The FTSE 100 jumped 9 per cent, or 452.12 points, to 5446.01, its second-biggest daily rise since its inception, despite warnings that Britain was heading for 'a recession of the scale we have not seen in modern history'.
At the end of trading on 6 April, the FTSE All Share was down 27.5 per cent on its mid-January peak.
Over the past decade, investors in the UK's stock market indices are still up, but the past three months have wiped out a sizeable chunk of their gains
This is the first global stock market decline of its kind in that it has been prompted by a health pandemic, but experts urge investors to remain calm and not make any knee-jerk reactions.
'Longstanding investors who recall the Russian debt crisis, the Dot Com bubble and the Global Financial Crisis, will know that market will eventually recover, that it doesn’t make sense to panic sell in the eye of the storm and that times of turmoil do in fact present buying opportunities,' warned Jason Hollands, of Tilney.
'While markets are likely to remain volatile in the near term, I’m in no doubt that the impact of the coronavirus on financial markets will be transitory. We’ve seen such big day to day swings, up as well as down, trying to trade around short term moves is a mugs game.
Despite being the original epicentre of the outbreak of the virus, China was one of the best performers between January and April, with the MSCI China down by 6.2 per cent since 1 January in total return terms.
The biggest drop the index saw was 8.1 per cent on 16 March - when almost all markets across the globe were hit.
Jason Hollands of Tilney said: 'This might surprise those unfamiliar with the shape of markets and who have read about the massive economic disruption in China.
'It was the first country to be hit by the virus but current indications are that the outbreak may have peaked, with no new growth in infections in recent days. South Korea, which was also impacted early on, has seen infection rates decline.
'Market sentiment is clearly highly sensitive to data developments and news flow at the moment and it is the escalation of cases in the developed nations and response of authorities that is driving bearish sentiment.
'But don’t forget, this can work both ways round and any perceived turning point over the coming weeks in stemming the spread of the virus or it peaking, will likely help reset market sentiment.'
Japan, which has so far recorded only 85 deaths, has been hit worse in stock market terms with the TOPIX down by almost 15 per cent.
With the world's highest death tolls from the coronavirus recorded in Italy and Spain, Europe is now considered the new epicentre of the pandemic.
The MSCI Europe excluding UK index fell 20.2 per cent between the start of the year and end of April.
Drilling down further, both Germany and France were down 22 per cent, while Spain and Italy were down 25 per cent, according to FE Analytics.
