ATLANTA & NEW YORK--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Intercontinental Exchange, Inc. (NYSE: ICE), a leading operator of global exchanges and clearing houses and provider of data and listings services, today announced the launch of a new index designed to track and benchmark the global price of carbon. This is an important part of efforts to measure and reduce the emission of carbon dioxide CO2 and other pollutants in economies around the world.
The new ICE Global Carbon Futures Index is made up of pricing from the three most actively traded carbon markets in the world: the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS), which started in 2005, the California Cap and Trade Program, which started in 2013 and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), which was established in 2009. Together these markets represent some of the largest regional economies in the world, and the secondary futures market for those programs, which trade on ICE’s futures markets, make up the majority of volume in all carbon-based futures contracts.
“While the world is focused on quantifying the impact of COVID-19, this Earth Day, we’re also reminded of the importance that metrics and benchmarks will play in reducing carbon emissions and mitigating against global warming,” said Lynn Martin, President of ICE Data Services. “This is a first step in producing an accurate, transparent global price for carbon, and one that utilizes a market-based mechanism for the evaluation of that price, as we move toward the longer-term shift to a net-zero carbon economy.”
The ICE Global Carbon Futures Index provides a volume weighted average price and measures the performance of a long-only basket of ICE EUA Futures Contracts , ICE California Carbon Allowance Futures Contracts and ICE Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative Futures Contracts . It is calculated in U.S. Dollars and calculated throughout the day. ICE has also launched carbon price indices for each of the constituent markets: the ICE EUA Carbon Futures Index, ICE CCA Carbon Futures Index and ICE RGGI Carbon Futures Index. The ICE EUA Carbon Futures Index will be calculated and published in Euros and the other indices will be calculated and published in U.S. Dollars.
For more information about the ICE Carbon Futures Index Family, please visit: www.theice.com/carbonindex .
Intercontinental Exchange (NYSE: ICE) is a Fortune 500 company formed in the year 2000 to modernize markets. ICE serves customers by operating the exchanges , clearing houses and information services they rely upon to invest, trade and manage risk across global financial and commodity markets. A leader in market data, ICE Data Services serves the information and connectivity needs across virtually all asset classes. As the parent company of the New York Stock Exchange , the company is the premier venue for raising capital in the world, driving economic growth and transforming markets.
Trademarks of ICE and/or its affiliates include Intercontinental Exchange, ICE, ICE block design, NYSE and New York Stock Exchange. Information regarding additional trademarks and intellectual property rights of Intercontinental Exchange, Inc. and/or its affiliates is located at http://www.intercontinentalexchange.com/terms-of-use . Key Information Documents for certain products covered by the EU Packaged Retail and Insurance-based Investment Products Regulation can be accessed on the relevant exchange website under the heading “Key Information Documents (KIDS).”
Safe Harbor Statement under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 -- Statements in this press release regarding ICE's business that are not historical facts are "forward-looking statements" that involve risks and uncertainties. For a discussion of additional risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to differ from those contained in the forward-looking statements, see ICE's Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filings, including, but not limited to, the risk factors in ICE's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC on February 6, 2020.
