      complete index universe and according to its latest analysis, there are 
      3.727 million indexes globally. This represents an increase of 
      conducted in June 2017, a 12 percent rise in the past year.
The current survey, which was conducted as of June 30, 2018, sought 
      98 percent of all indexes globally available.
      approximately 16 percent of the overall index universe. The significant 
      and some consolidation of index families to independent providers. The 
      survey shows the greatest growth in a number of fixed income categories, 
      including composite and municipal bonds.
When looking at fixed income growth by geography, the Americas represent 
      approximately 36 percent of total fixed income indexes available, rising 
      and Frontier/Emerging markets experienced the largest increase, growing 
      percent and 8 percent year-over-year, respectively.
Rick Redding, the CEO of IIA commented: “Last year we were able to 
      quantify the index landscape for the first time ever. Now that we have a 
      fixed income where investors are looking for more fine-tuned benchmarks. 
      As the quality of the underlying data improves, it allows index 
      benchmarks and in new geographies. In addition, we are seeing a strong 
To hear more about the opportunities and growth in fixed income, 
      click here to view an IIA Educational Video.
      percent globally to 3,068,871. Sector-focused indexes was the only 
      category to experience a decline, as the number of sector indexes 
      indexes. The most dramatic increase came from Environmental, Social & 
      consistent across most categories. However, the growth and innovation in 
      targeted exposure,” Redding continued.
      geography at approximately 30 percent, but the largest growth came from 
      percent of total equity indexes. EMEA and frontier/emerging indexes now 
      represent 22 percent and 13 percent of indexes globally, while the 
      Americas have the fewest number of equity indexes at 10 percent.
      community of index providers, the IIA membership is open to independent 
      made available to the public. The amount of assets under management 
For more information about the IIA or to speak with Rick Redding, 
      that represents the global index industry. Founded in March 2012, the 
      strengthen markets and serve the needs of investors. Our members have 
Many of the leading index providers in the world are members of IIA, 
      for Research in Security Prices, China Central Depository and Clearing, 
