ATLANTA & NEW YORK--( BUSINESS WIRE )--Intercontinental Exchange, Inc. (NYSE:ICE), a leading operator of global exchanges and clearing houses and provider of data and listings services, today announced a record trading day for the NYSE FANG+ Index futures contract. On Monday, February 3, a record 8,067 contracts were traded, compared to the last record of 7,884 contracts on February 2, 2018.
“With strong volatility recently in the underlying shares of companies like Tesla, which is one of the stocks that make up the NYSE FANG+ index, we continue to see customers access ICE’s transparent and liquid markets to take positions and manage risk,” said Trabue Bland, President of ICE Futures U.S.
NYSE FANG+ Index futures are based on the NYSE FANG+ Index, and are designed to offer hedging, exposure and the capital efficiency of futures to a select group of highly-traded growth stocks of tech-enabled companies.
The NYSE FANG+ Index is equally weighted and includes the five core FANG stocks - Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Netflix and Google (Alphabet) - plus another five actively-trade technology growth stocks - Alibaba, Baidu, NVIDIA, Tesla and Twitter. It is calculated and disseminated through the ICE Data Global Index Feed under the symbol “NYFANG.”
Intercontinental Exchange (NYSE: ICE) is a Fortune 500 company formed in the year 2000 to modernize markets. ICE serves customers by operating the exchanges , clearing houses and information services they rely upon to invest, trade and manage risk across global financial and commodity markets. A leader in market data, ICE Data Services serves the information and connectivity needs across virtually all asset classes. As the parent company of the New York Stock Exchange , the company is the premier venue for raising capital in the world, driving economic growth and transforming markets.
Trademarks of ICE and/or its affiliates include Intercontinental Exchange, ICE, ICE block design, NYSE and New York Stock Exchange. Information regarding additional trademarks and intellectual property rights of Intercontinental Exchange, Inc. and/or its affiliates is located at http://www.intercontinentalexchange.com/terms-of-use . Key Information Documents for certain products covered by the EU Packaged Retail and Insurance-based Investment Products Regulation can be accessed on the relevant exchange website under the heading “Key Information Documents (KIDS).”
Safe Harbor Statement under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 -- Statements in this press release regarding ICE's business that are not historical facts are "forward-looking statements" that involve risks and uncertainties. For a discussion of additional risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to differ from those contained in the forward-looking statements, see ICE's Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filings, including, but not limited to, the risk factors in ICE's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018, as filed with the SEC on February 7, 2019.
