Saudi Arabia's state oil monopoly makes more money than any other company on Earth. But low oil prices, the climate crisis and geopolitical risk could deter investors from buying into the partial privatization of Saudi Aramco.
The concerns may cause fund managers in London, New York and Tokyo to balk at what could be the largest IPO in history , forcing Aramco to rely heavily on rich local families, sympathetic sovereign wealth funds or major customers such as China signing up for shares.
The biggest risks are tied to Aramco's core business: oil. Demand growth for crude is slowing — an inconvenient truth for bankers pitching the company at a valuation of up to $2 trillion. Add growing pressure on institutional investors to ditch oil assets they already own, as well as a tough political environment in the Middle East, and the investment case for Aramco weakens.
"It's hard to see how the company grows over time," said Anish Kapadia, director of energy at Palissy Advisors, an investment advisory firm based in London.
$1 trillion or $2 trillion?
Aramco announced its intention to float shares on the Riyadh stock exchange this week. It made clear it wants this to be a global affair.
"We want to get financial investors from all over the world," chairman Yasir Al-Rumayyan told reporters at a press conference on Sunday.
Global investors are sure to give the company a good look. Aramco, which could reportedly list a stake as large as 5%, sits on massive crude reserves. It posted a $68 billion profit for the first nine months of 2019, a slowdown from the previous year, when annual earnings totaled $111 billion.
"Aramco is the largest and lowest cost producer of oil, and the scale of spare capacity still makes it uniquely strategic in the global oil market," Hasnain Malik, the Dubai-based head of equity strategy at Tellimer, an investment bank focused on developing markets, wrote in a recent note to clients.
The company has also committed to a $75 billion annual dividend through 2024. Analysts say what investors earn from the payouts could compete with ExxonMobil ( XOM ) and Royal Dutch Shell ( RDSA ), depending on Aramco's valuation. Some potential investors may hold out for even more.
The next few weeks could be tumultuous. Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman has reportedly sought a valuation for Aramco near $2 trillion. But the model run by Palissy Advisors puts Aramco's value at just $1 trillion. That's a massive range — and some investors will worry about overpaying. Some may decide to just stick with existing oil and gas holdings, many of which have been traded publicly for years and offer more transparency.
"There [are] plenty of existing stocks which give exposure to oil," Malik told CNN Business. "Occupying a minority position in a state-owned oil company may not be that appealing."
Brent crude, the global benchmark, is currently worth about $62 per barrel. If oil prices were between $70 and $80 per barrel, it would be easy to tack on a few $100 billion more in value to Aramco, Kapadia said.
But prices aren't headed in that direction. Global economic growth is weakening, reducing demand, and climate crisis fears are escalating. OPEC said in a report published this week that annual demand growth for oil will slump to just 500,000 barrels per day at the end of the next decade, as developed countries shift to renewable sources of energy. Aramco could tighten its grip on supply to boost prices — but not without stoking division among the cartel and allied producers.
"It's essentially a one product company, and the price of that product is very volatile," said Tarek Fadlallah, chief executive of the Middle East unit of Nomura Asset Management.
Additionally, many big institutional investors are under enormous pressure to dump oil assets because of the greenhouse gas emissions they generate and declining performance. Norway's giant wealth fund said it would phase out oil and gas stocks earlier this year. According to Carbon Tracker, a think tank, every major oil and gas company, including Aramco, has committed to recent projects that don't align with the Paris Climate Agreement, which aims to limit the increase in global average temperatures to 1.5 degrees Celsius.
"There are an increasing number of funds that have it as a stated policy that they will not invest in hydrocarbon-related companies," Fadlallah said. "That necessarily decreases the universe of funds that can invest in the Aramco IPO."
