by Murali Sarma of Trade Guidance, LLC
Last night's index futures action was interesting especially in the move off the news related to US-China trade.Futures briefly sank after White House trade advisor Peter Navarro suggested the U.S.-China trade deal was over, but recovered after he, and President Donald Trump, said the deal was still in place. Regardless of this snafoo, we present to you how we called the futures and WTI for our subscribers for last evening. Without exception, we present playbooks like this twice daily - one which goes out well ahead of the morning open and then one in the afternoon well ahead of the futures 6 pm EST open.
Here is what we put out for yesterday:
Take a look at tell us if a limit order could've helped you trade these setups? Here is what we have measured for you for the intraday. Request the download of this content from our website using this link https://tradeguidance.com/newsletters/d-pb1-62320/ for our core playbook. Once you click on the link, in the resulting box, place your email address and we email you this mornings playbook. Enjoy this complimentary content and tell us if you actually traded any of the setups of merely followed along. The only setup we are a bit unsure of today and aren't trading ourselves is Nat Gas. It appears to be showing a move off the bottom which could hold to the upside but the price action in recent days have not been holding up on long setups.
Risk Disclosure: Futures, forex, currencies and stock/options trading contains substantial risk and is not for every investor. An investor could potentially lose all or more than the initial investment. Risk capital is money that can be lost without jeopardizing ones financial security or lifestyle. Only risk capital should be used for trading and only those with sufficient risk capital should consider trading. Past performance is not necessarily indicative of future results. Past Performance Disclosure: Past performance results have many inherent limitations. No representation is being made that any account will or is likely to achieve profits or losses similar to those shown; in fact, there are frequently sharp differences between actively monitored performance results and the actual results subsequently achieved by anyone using any traders newsletter service . There are numerous other factors related to the markets in general or to the implementation of any specific trading program which cannot be fully accounted for in the preparation of actual or simulated performance results and all which can adversely affect trading results. Although,TradeGuidance never presents hypothetical or simulated trade results, all trades presented can be in a simulated using back-testing to demonstrate similar results.
Is there an instrument you wish for us to analyze? Drop us a note. Come visit us at https://www.tradeguidance.com and fill out a contact form and tell us about your experience with trading financial instruments and commodities. We present weekly trade ideas on Twitter @tradeguidance and point you in the direction of the articles we like to publish on barchart and insidefutures. Tweeting only with the intent of helping traders learn!
