Most investors and analysts are used to looking at the stock market, particularly the S&P 500. This leading indicator, comprised of the largest publicly traded American companies, measured by market capitalization, is helpful in that it presents us dynamic, real-time data of what investors anticipate will be company’s future earnings.  This quarter, the S&P 500 declined about 18%, which is its worst performance since the fourth quarter of 2008, the year of the global financial crisis.
S&P 500 had its worse decline in the first quarter of 2020 since the fourth quarter of 2008.
Another much watched index is the Dow Jones Industrial Index, comprised of 30 companies that are selected to represent their respective industries. Today, this index had its worst first quarter performance ever.
Key stock indices are showing record declines due to COVID-19 crisis.
Dow Jones Market Data, as of March 31 morning.
A caveat with stock market indices is that it is more and more difficult to tell how much of the stock market is being driven by fundamental analysis of the current and forecast direction of the economy and how much is driven by algorithmic traders who program buying and selling based on pricing and liquidity patterns. Moreover, stock market indices tell us about financial conditions, not necessarily about the condition of the real economy.
Much better tailored to tell us about the real economy is the Federal Reserve’s Weekly Economic Index (WEI). This comprehensive index is designed to give us a much broader picture of what is happening in the real economy. Unfortunately, right now that picture looks worse than in 2008.
Weekly Economic Index shows real economy conditions worse than in 2008.
In a paper by Daniel Lewis and Karel Mertens of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Dallas, respectively, and Jim Stock of Harvard University, it is clear that “ When the economy hits sudden headwinds, like the COVID-19 pandemic, conditions can evolve rapidly.” To address this important challenge, Lewis, Mertens, and Stock, compute the WEI  to measure real economic activity at a weekly frequency.
The WEI is comprised of ” same-store retail sales, an index of consumer sentiment, initial unemployment insurance (UI) claims, an index of temporary and contract employment, a measure of steel production, a measure of fuel sales, and a measure of electricity consumption.” Lewis, Mertens, and Stock “transform all series to represent 52-week percentage changes, which also eliminates most seasonality in the data.” As the COVID-19 crisis unfolds, they may incorporate additional series to refine the index.
Data series used for the WEI.
In my view, it is also important that investors, analysts, and regulators look more at the fixed income market, which includes sovereign debt (Treasurys), municipal debt, corporate debt, and asset backed securities, which are pools of a wide range of debt including leveraged loans, residential and commercial mortgages, student loans, auto loans, and credit cards. The fixed income market is about 1/3 larger than the stock market and it tells one how investors feel about the rising probability of default among all these different types of issuers. Investors in corporate debt are certainly signaling that they fear that defaults are imminent, especially in those corporations which rating is speculative, also known as high yield or junk.
Additionally, consumer delinquency levels are also important data to look at because they tell us of a coming recession and of how lenders will be hit when consumers default. Already, before the COVID-19 crisis, consumer delinquencies had started to rise. In its consumer loan, DeutscheBank economists include eight different type of personal and mortgage loans that are pretty representative of the debt that Americans hold.
Consumer delinquencies were rising even before COVID-19 crisis.
With all of the above data, I am more and more convinced that the COVID-19 crisis will be far worse than the 2008 financial crisis. With any luck, it will be shorter lived.  Given that COVID-19 positive test results and deaths have not hit their apex yet and not all cities are on lockdown yet, more bad news about GDP and unemployment are unfortunately headed our way.
I have been dedicated to providing clients high quality financial consulting, research, and training services on Basel III, risk management, risk-based supervision,
I have been dedicated to providing clients high quality financial consulting, research, and training services on Basel III, risk management, risk-based supervision, capital markets, financial derivatives and Dodd-Frank for over 25 years. I have extensive global expertise and have led projects in the financial and energy sectors in over 30 countries in English, Russian, and Spanish.
