Metal shares decline as coronavirus fears intensify; JSW Steel falls 5%
Tata Steel and Jindal Steel and Power (JSPL) dipped more than 3 per cent on the . Vedanta, Hindalco Industries, Steel Authority of India (SAIL), Moil and NMDC were down in the range of 2%-3%
Last Updated at January 27, 2020 10:41 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of metal companies were under pressure on Monday with the Nifty Metal index falling more than 2 per cent as investors grew increasingly anxious about the economic impact of China's spreading virus outbreak. At 09:59 am, Nifty Metal index, the top loser among sectoral indices, was down 2.2 per cent at 2,734 points, as compared to 0.5 per cent decline in the benchmark Nifty 50 index.
Among individual stocks, JSW Steel slipped 5 per cent, and Tata Steel and Jindal Steel and Power (JSPL) dipped more than 3 per cent on the National Stock Exchange (NSE). Vedanta, Hindalco ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
