Mexico is looking at a difficult year ahead, with COVID-19 infection rates continuing to climb and an economy expected to contract as much as 10 percent in the coming months.
Yet it all depends on how you look at it, argues Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador, announcing last month that his administration is looking into a broader way to measure the welfare of his fellow citizens.
Mexico's President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, left, applauds prior to delivering a speech during his visit to a public hospital in Cuernavaca, Mexico, Friday, June 19, 2020. Lopez Obrador is desperate to restart Mexico's struggling economy after being cooped up under social distancing measures due to the new coronavirus pandemic. (AP Photo/Fernando Llano)
“I’m working on an index to measure well-being, an alternative measurement to gross domestic product,” López Obrador said in mid-May. “It will measure growth, of course, but also well-being, of the level of inequality in society — and it will include another parameter, happiness.”
The new measurement is still in planning stages, according to the president’s office, which says that a broad net of experts — think sociologists, economists, psychologists, anthropologists and mathematicians — will contribute their expertise to the new measurement system, which will be developed in consultation with the United Nations’ Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean.
One of López Obrador’s goals will be to find an alternative to what he calls “progress without justice,” in reference to the most common shorthand for a country’s economic performance, the gross domestic product, or GDP. He also seeks to quantify Mexican happiness, which he has described in his September 2019 Report to the Nation, saying “the people are happy, happy, happy — there’s an atmosphere of happiness.
The idea of measuring well-being, using data beyond GDP statistics is not new: Mexico already participates in the “Better Life” index developed by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development that measures both current and future well-being for all member countries, as a way of measuring progress.
It looks at areas such as income and wealth, housing, health, education, work-life balance, environment, social connections, civic engagement, safety and subjective well-being.
In these measurements, which are collected by Mexico’s National Institute of Statistics and Geography for the OECD’s 32-country comparative study, Mexican perceptions of personal well-being matches those of their wealthier neighbors. The country has also received high marks for civic participation, but much lower ones for safety, housing issues and income disparity.
A leading Mexican good government organization, Como Vamos, has participated for the last five years in a worldwide measurement of well-being that is conducted by the Social Progress Index, or SDI, which was established by two prestigious U.S. business professors. This measurement system bypasses a country’s economic performance, focusing instead on variables that contribute to well-being, such as nutrition and literacy rates, as well as broader societal benefits such as liberty and freedom of speech.
In 2019, Mexico came in at 55 of 149 countries in the SDI, performing roughly the same as Ecuador, Peru, Albania and Armenia. It got relatively high points for internet communication access and access to water but low marks for personal safety and personal liberty.
The SDI has, however, been criticized for not including the subjective measurement of life satisfaction, as well as the extent to which wealth is concentrated in a country.
The World Happiness Report, which is developed by the Sustainable Development Solutions Network, has included this subjective well-being in its measurement, and gave Mexico a much higher position: it ranked as the 24th happiest country on earth, nestled in between France and Taiwan in its 2020 report.
Mexico’s strong family culture is at the heart of this happiness, according to Mariano Rojas, a professor at the Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences, who contributed to the 2018 report.
“We are used to talking about economic needs, but there are other needs that are very important — this need of feeling that you belong to a group, that someone cares about you,” Rojas said. “That is something that is very particular in countries like Mexico, and it contributes a lot to happiness. In a recent survey we ran, the percentage of people who said they had experienced some kind of loving interaction the day before was twice as high in Mexico as in the U.S.”
Yet while the described aims of a new measurement for López Obrador sound reasonable to many, a lack of information on the details leaves many suspect about how the index will be developed and used.
“He wants to make something he can tinker with and can use politically,” said Valeria Moy, the director of Como Vamos, noting that López Obrador is looking for a boost in the face of the upcoming 2021 mid-term elections. “If we know what we are going to measure and the information is public and available, then I am fine with the idea. But if we are going to create an index that is a magic wand, I don’t like it.”
And then there is the timing: the proposed index is coming amid reports from economists that Mexico’s economy could contract as much as 10 percent by the end of the year, driven by the COVID-19 pandemic but exacerbated by the government’s inaction to intervene to help save jobs and companies.
Mexico has reported about 203,000 COVID-19 infections, with 6,104 new cases on Thursday, and almost 26,000 deaths. The Health Ministry has said that there are likely about eight times as many cases as recorded.
Johns Hopkins University has ranked Mexico as 11th in the world for the number of cases.
“Our recovery is going to be different from our peers because we did not inject into the economy,” said Luis Gonzali, a portfolio manager with Franklin Templeton in Mexico City. “We are going to see a sharp decline in GDP and then the recovery will be slow, with a sharp increase in poverty.”
On a human level, it is likely to mean 10 million more Mexicans living in extreme poverty, according to CONEVAL, an autonomous public agency that measures poverty in Mexico. About 60 million of Mexico’s population of 126 million people live in poverty.
And regardless of the emotional and support that their families and loved ones provide, they should not be expected to be happy about it, according to Tony Payan, the director of the Mexico Center at the Baker Institute at Rice University.
“I think it is disingenuous of López Obrador and a fallacy to delink happiness from material prosperity,” Payan said. “When you are poor, you are miserable.”
