LONDON--( BUSINESS WIRE )--MSCI Inc. (NYSE:MSCI), a leading provider of research-based indexes and analytics , announced today the results of the May 2020 Semi-Annual Index Review for the MSCI Equity Indexes - including the MSCI Global Standard, MSCI Global Small Cap and MSCI Micro Cap Indexes, the MSCI Global Value and Growth Indexes, the MSCI Frontier Markets and MSCI Frontier Markets Small Cap Indexes, the MSCI Global Islamic and MSCI Global Islamic Small Cap Indexes, the MSCI Pan-Euro and MSCI Euro Indexes, the MSCI US Equity Indexes, the MSCI US REIT Index, the MSCI China A Onshore Indexes and the MSCI China All Shares Indexes. All changes will be implemented as of the close of May 29, 2020. These changes have been posted on the Index Review page on MSCI's website at https://www.msci.com/index-review .
MSCI Global Standard Indexes: One hundred thirty-seven securities will be added to and 181 securities will be deleted from the MSCI ACWI Index. There will be 62 additions to and 93 deletions from the MSCI World Index. The three largest additions to the MSCI World Index by full company market capitalization will be Zoom Video Comm A (USA), Keurig Dr Pepper (USA) and Liberty Broadband A (USA). The three largest additions to the MSCI Emerging Markets Index measured by full company market capitalization will be Offcn Education A (Hk-C) (China), China Feihe (China) and Emirates Nbd Bank (AE).
MSCI Global Small Cap Indexes: There will be 442 additions to and 544 deletions from the MSCI ACWI Small Cap Index.
MSCI Global Investable Market Indexes: There will be 390 additions to and 536 deletions from the MSCI ACWI Investable Market Index (IMI).
MSCI Global All Cap Indexes: There will be 346 additions to and 211 deletions from the MSCI World All Cap Index.
MSCI Frontier Markets Indexes: There will be one addition to and five deletions from the MSCI Frontier Markets Index. The only addition to the MSCI Frontier Markets Index will be Blom Bank GDR (Lebanon). There will be 9 additions to and 12 deletions from the MSCI Frontier Markets Small Cap Index.
MSCI will not implement any changes resulting from the May 2020 SAIR for the securities classified in Bangladesh, Jordan and Sri Lanka due to prolonged stock exchange closures as well as in Nigeria due to the deterioration of liquidity in its FX market.
MSCI Global Islamic Indexes: Twenty-three securities will be added to and 106 securities will be deleted from the MSCI ACWI Islamic Index. The three largest additions to the MSCI ACWI Islamic Index measured by full company market capitalization will be Workday A (USA), Fuji Film Holdings Co (Japan) and Liberty Broadband C (USA). There will be three additions to and three deletions from the MSCI Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Countries IMI Islamic Index.
MSCI US Equity Indexes: There will be seventeen securities added to and 12 securities deleted from the MSCI US Large Cap 300 Index. The three largest additions to the MSCI US Large Cap 300 Index measured by full company market capitalization will be Zoom Video Comm A, Uber Technologies and Dexcom.
Thirty-seven securities will be added to and 38 securities will be deleted from the MSCI US Mid Cap 450 Index. The three largest additions to the MSCI US Mid Cap 450 Index measured by full company market capitalization will be Datadog A, Moderna and Cardinal Health.
Ninety-seven securities will be added to and 45 securities will be deleted from the MSCI US Small Cap 1750 Index. The three largest additions to the MSCI US Small Cap 1750 Index measured by full company market capitalization will be Manpowergroup, Adaptive Biotechnologies and Livongo Health.
There will be 15 additions to and 21 deletions from the MSCI US Micro Cap Index.
For the MSCI US Investable Market Value Index, there will be 235 additions or upward changes in Value Inclusion Factor (VIFs), and 85 deletions or downward changes in VIFs. For the MSCI US Investable Market Growth Index, there will be 139 additions or upward changes in Growth Inclusion Factors (GIFs), and 213 deletions or downward changes in GIFs.
MSCI US REIT Index: There will be one addition to and nine deletions from the MSCI US REIT Index. The addition to the MSCI US REIT Index will be Safehold Inc.
MSCI China A Onshore Indexes: There will be 61 additions to and 18 deletions from the MSCI China A Onshore Index. The three largest additions to the MSCI China A Onshore Index will be Offcn Education Technology A, Zhejiang Century A and China Galaxy Securities A. There will be 208 additions to and 53 deletions from the MSCI China A Onshore Small Cap Index.
MSCI China All Shares Indexes: There will be 56 additions to and 54 deletions from the MSCI China All Shares Index. The three largest additions to the MSCI China All Shares Index will be Offcn Education Tech A, China Feihe and Zhejiang Century A. There will be 256 additions to and 88 deletions from the MSCI China All Shares Small Cap Index.
MSCI is a leading provider of critical decision support tools and services for the global investment community. With over 45 years of expertise in research, data and technology, we power better investment decisions by enabling clients to understand and analyze key drivers of risk and return and confidently build more effective portfolios. We create industry-leading research-enhanced solutions that clients use to gain insight into and improve transparency across the investment process. To learn more, please visit www.msci.com .
This document and all of the information contained in it, including without limitation all text, data, graphs, charts (collectively, the “Information”) is the property of MSCI Inc. or its subsidiaries (collectively, “MSCI”), or MSCI’s licensors, direct or indirect suppliers or any third party involved in making or compiling any Information (collectively, with MSCI, the “Information Providers”) and is provided for informational purposes only. The Information may not be modified, reverse-engineered, reproduced or redisseminated in whole or in part without prior written permission from MSCI.
The Information may not be used to create derivative works or to verify or correct other data or information. For example (but without limitation), the Information may not be used to create indexes, databases, risk models, analytics, software, or in connection with the issuing, offering, sponsoring, managing or marketing of any securities, portfolios, financial products or other investment vehicles utilizing or based on, linked to, tracking or otherwise derived from the Information or any other MSCI data, information, products or services.
The user of the Information assumes the entire risk of any use it may make or permit to be made of the Information. NONE OF THE INFORMATION PROVIDERS MAKES ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES OR REPRESENTATIONS WITH RESPECT TO THE INFORMATION (OR THE RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED BY THE USE THEREOF), AND TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, EACH INFORMATION PROVIDER EXPRESSLY DISCLAIMS ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF ORIGINALITY, ACCURACY, TIMELINESS, NON-INFRINGEMENT, COMPLETENESS, MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE) WITH RESPECT TO ANY OF THE INFORMATION.
Without limiting any of the foregoing and to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, in no event shall any Information Provider have any liability regarding any of the Information for any direct, indirect, special, punitive, consequential (including lost profits) or any other damages even if notified of the possibility of such damages. The foregoing shall not exclude or limit any liability that may not by applicable law be excluded or limited, including without limitation (as applicable), any liability for death or personal injury to the extent that such injury results from the negligence or willful default of itself, its servants, agents or sub-contractors.
Information containing any historical information, data or analysis should not be taken as an indication or guarantee of any future performance, analysis, forecast or prediction. Past performance does not guarantee future results.
The Information should not be relied on and is not a substitute for the skill, judgment and experience of the user, its management, employees, advisors and/or clients when making investment and other business decisions. All Information is impersonal and not tailored to the needs of any person, entity or group of persons.
None of the Information constitutes an offer to sell (or a solicitation of an offer to buy), any security, financial product or other investment vehicle or any trading strategy.
It is not possible to invest directly in an index. Exposure to an asset class or trading strategy or other category represented by an index is only available through third party investable instruments (if any) based on that index. MSCI does not issue, sponsor, endorse, market, offer, review or otherwise express any opinion regarding any fund, ETF, derivative or other security, investment, financial product or trading strategy that is based on, linked to or seeks to provide an investment return related to the performance of any MSCI index (collectively, “Index Linked Investments”). MSCI makes no assurance that any Index Linked Investments will accurately track index performance or provide positive investment returns. MSCI Inc. is not an investment adviser or fiduciary and MSCI makes no representation regarding the advisability of investing in any Index Linked Investments.
Index returns do not represent the results of actual trading of investible assets/securities. MSCI maintains and calculates indexes, but does not manage actual assets. Index returns do not reflect payment of any sales charges or fees an investor may pay to purchase the securities underlying the index or Index Linked Investments. The imposition of these fees and charges would cause the performance of an Index Linked Investment to be different than the MSCI index performance.
The Information may contain back tested data. Back-tested performance is not actual performance, but is hypothetical. There are frequently material differences between back tested performance results and actual results subsequently achieved by any investment strategy.
Constituents of MSCI equity indexes are listed companies, which are included in or excluded from the indexes according to the application of the relevant index methodologies. Accordingly, constituents in MSCI equity indexes may include MSCI Inc., clients of MSCI or suppliers to MSCI. Inclusion of a security within an MSCI index is not a recommendation by MSCI to buy, sell, or hold such security, nor is it considered to be investment advice.
Data and information produced by various affiliates of MSCI Inc., including MSCI ESG Research LLC and Barra LLC, may be used in calculating certain MSCI indexes. More information can be found in the relevant index methodologies on www.msci.com .
MSCI receives compensation in connection with licensing its indexes to third parties. MSCI Inc.’s revenue includes fees based on assets in Index Linked Investments. Information can be found in MSCI Inc.’s company filings on the Investor Relations section of www.msci.com .
MSCI ESG Research LLC is a Registered Investment Adviser under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 and a subsidiary of MSCI Inc. Except with respect to any applicable products or services from MSCI ESG Research, neither MSCI nor any of its products or services recommends, endorses, approves or otherwise expresses any opinion regarding any issuer, securities, financial products or instruments or trading strategies and MSCI’s products or services are not intended to constitute investment advice or a recommendation to make (or refrain from making) any kind of investment decision and may not be relied on as such. Issuers mentioned or included in any MSCI ESG Research materials may include MSCI Inc., clients of MSCI or suppliers to MSCI, and may also purchase research or other products or services from MSCI ESG Research. MSCI ESG Research materials, including materials utilized in any MSCI ESG Indexes or other products, have not been submitted to, nor received approval from, the United States Securities and Exchange Commission or any other regulatory body.
Any use of or access to products, services or information of MSCI requires a license from MSCI. MSCI, Barra, RiskMetrics, IPD and other MSCI brands and product names are the trademarks, service marks, or registered trademarks of MSCI or its subsidiaries in the United States and other jurisdictions. The Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) was developed by and is the exclusive property of MSCI and Standard & Poor’s. “Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS)” is a service mark of MSCI and Standard & Poor’s.
MIFID2/MIFIR notice: MSCI ESG Research LLC does not distribute or act as an intermediary for financial instruments or structured deposits, nor does it deal on its own account, provide execution services for others or manage client accounts. No MSCI ESG Research product or service supports, promotes or is intended to support or promote any such activity. MSCI ESG Research is an independent provider of ESG data, reports and ratings based on published methodologies and available to clients on a subscription basis. We do not provide custom or one-off ratings or recommendations of securities or other financial instruments upon request.
Privacy notice: For information about how MSCI ESG Research LLC collects and uses personal data concerning officers and directors, please refer to our Privacy Notice at https://www.msci.com/privacy-pledge .
