Motilal Oswal: Kotak Mahindra Bank could be the top beneficiary if included in the index, according to Motilal Oswal. The brokerage and research firm expects as much as $1.5 billion in terms of foreign flows towards Kotak Mahindra Bank. Torrent Pharma, Biocon, Indraprastha Gas are the other stocks that Motilal Oswal has predicted to be included in the index. Tata Power, Mahindra and Mahindra Financial Services Limited, and Ashok Leyland could be excluded in the rejig.
ICICI Direct: Although ICICI Direct research has not speculated on the change in India’s weightage in the upcoming rebalancing but it expects certain stocks to be included in the index. ICICI Direct has four predictions for inclusion and is expecting the exclusion of two other stocks. Tata Consumer Products, Biocon, Indraprastha Gas Ltd and Torrent Pharma are expected to be a part of MSCI India while Tata Power and Mahindra & Mahindra Finance Services Limited could be excluded, according to ICICI Direct. “Currently, with 84 constituents, the index covers ~85% of the Indian equity universe. Sectorally, financial services has the highest weightage in the index followed by the technology space,” the research firm said.
Emkay Global: The brokerage firm is expecting a net $246 million of foreign fund inflows post the May rebalancing. With the change in India’s weightage on various MSCI indexes, the stocks that could be included in the MSCI India index include — Tata Consumer, Torrent Pharma, Jubilant Food, Biocon, Alkem Lab, and Ipca Labs, said a research report. Benchmark funds could see net inflows to the tune of $246 million if the change is made in the May rebalancing, brokerage and research firm Emkay Global said. Bharti Infratel , Shriram Transport, Mahindra & Mahindra Finance Services Limited and Tata Power could exit owing to the low foreign investment headroom.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
