Rajat Jain, chief investment officer, Principal Mutual Fund, says that from a volatility perspective, index funds would also be impacted by the current volatility in equity markets similar to actively managed equity funds. “The decision to invest in an index fund should be based on the investors’ risk appetite and comfort with the near term volatility. Investors looking to take exposure to the equity market and who don’t want to take risk of near term underperformance from an actively managed strategy may certainly look at these,” he says.
Similarly, Omkeshwar Singh, head- RankMF, Samco Securities, says that in the current Covid-19 pandemic situation the selection of quality businesses has become very important for the future growth and wealth creation. “If investors are not able to select quality equity mutual funds schemes, then index funds are a better option,” he underlines.
As the current market scenario is complex and the dynamics change very fast, investors must carefully select the index. Ideally, an investor should invest in diversified funds like Nifty or Sensex funds. If an index fund is benchmarked to the Nifty, the portfolio will constitute the same 50 stocks as the benchmark. Individual investors who are not market savvy should stick to index funds for convenience, liquidity and ease of investing.
“An average investor should look at an index fund that tracks a broad market index rather than funds that track a sector, a theme or a narrow market cap,” says Jain. On a similar note, Singh advises investors to invest in index funds of leading indexes of Nifty 50 and Sensex 30 considering the volatility in equity markets.
An index fund investor can be assured of returns in sync with the indices. The only difference in returns would be on account of tracking error. Lower the tracking error, the closer the returns are to the benchmark. So, an investor must select funds with minimum tracking error before investing in an index fund. These funds set aside a certain percentage in cash to ensure that, in the event of redemption request from investors, there is sufficient liquidity.
An index fund helps an investor balance risks in the portfolio as the fund matches its performance to that of its index. If an investor does not want to take risk of near-term underperformance and is expecting predictable returns, he should look at index funds. As such funds can see short-term fluctuation, investors must stay invested for the long term for the fund to generate higher returns.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
