The First Trust ETF took a hit recently, as its strategy is split with two-thirds of the investments going long and only a third short. The fund is sitting at a smaller net loss after the carnage last week — and more importantly, it has the ability to go fully 50% short if managers see signs of trouble, and even put some assets in cash. This hedge fund-like approach makes the ETF much more agile than a typical blue-chip stock fund.
Introduced in 2014, First Trust Long/Short Equity ETF has a robust investor base with $260 million under management. The sophisticated management demands a pretty steep fee structure, at 1.59% annually, so this fund may be best used as a short-term hedge or tactical bet instead of a core holding.
Offered by New York Life's investment arm, the IQ Hedge Multi-Strategy Tracker ETF QAI,
is far off the beaten trail. No matter. This is one of the oldest tactical funds, launched in March 2009, with more than $810 million in assets.
The IQ Hedge ETF is designed to pursue risk-adjusted returns through a variety of means — including long/short U.S. equity exposure like FTLS, but also developed- and emerging market stocks, fixed income plays and a "fund of funds" model. The portfolio currently includes a staggering 450 or so holdings that include iShares, SPDR and Vanguard ETFs.
Fees are steep, at 0.80 annually, but QAI offers waivers that take gross operating expenses down a bit to soften the blow. It would be incredibly difficult to replicate this comprehensive strategy on your own, even if you theoretically can access these funds individually, and clearly many investors find this hands-off approach appealing given the ETF’s large asset base.
Gold is a popular and accessible investment for non-correlated returns. To be sure, gold is not a guaranteed "store of value," as some say. This hard asset has underperformed stocks in the long-term and has plenty of periods of steep declines in value. Yet it's undeniable that gold is one of the asset classes tethered the least to U.S. stocks. Gold can move independently, acting as a hedge against market declines or even rising in a tough market for other mainstream investments.
SPDR Gold Shares ETF GLD,
