John Buckingham has seen just about every type of stock-market environment in his three decades as a money manager. As a rule, he urges long-term investors to be patient.
But he’s also quick to enter pockets of the market that have been hit especially hard during the spread of the Covid-19 strain of coronavirus.
Buckingham, 54, says the cruise industry is one such opportunity, despite its obvious difficulties as the virus spreads. That is because of the increasing popularity of cruises among an aging population.
“Redeployment of Asian ships can work for a while, then you cut pricing and people are unlikely to go. So you may have one or two quarters where you have much lower revenue,” Buckingham said during an interview Feb. 28. “The question is three to five years from now. In the fullness of time, my belief is people will get back to cruising.”
Buckingham is the editor of the Prudent Speculator — a newsletter with a 13.9% average annual return through Jan 31, compared with an average return of 10.2% for the S&P 500 SPX,
, according to the Hulbert Financial Digest . He is also a portfolio manager with Kovitz Investment Group, which has about $5 billion in assets under management. Buckingham’s style is to select value stocks, with most paying dividends, and to hold them for at least three years, or as long as their prices appear to be attractive relative to intrinsic value.
“We have been reminding people that volatility is normal,” Buckingham said, adding that some investors had difficulty adjusting after enjoying such a good 2019, when the S&P 500 returned 31.5.% (with dividends reinvested).
On Feb. 26, Jason Zweig wrote in The Wall Street Journal that professional investors have to sell stocks during sharp downturns , while individual investors don’t. If you are an index-fund investor, you might be tempted to try to time the market by jumping out during a time of turmoil and then buying back in after the market hits bottom. The problem with this strategy for a nonprofessional investor is that you might come back in too late to enjoy a significant gain. You might even think it is too late, that stocks are too expensive and then miss out on subsequent gains after the market returns to its previous record level.
“People are trained with the flight gene. That’s what kept early man alive and it is human nature. So we try to stay on an even keel and be unemotional. That is why we have jobs,” Buckingham said.
Here is data compiled by Buckingham and his staff, showing 34 corrections of 10% or more for the S&P 500 since the Prudent Speculator was launched in March 1977, along with subsequent rallies:
You can see that the average increase is far larger than the average correction. It’s never easy to go through a correction, but they are common events that all long-term investors need to live with. Keep in mind that before those outsized gains in 2019, the S&P 500 was down 13.5% in the fourth quarter of 2019 (with dividends reinvested).
Here’s how the 11 sectors of the S&P 500 performed from the close Feb. 19 — the most recent closing high for the index — and Feb. 28:
