Passive fund ISA investing for your portfolio could begin with five top recommendations.  Stephanie Spicer taps the experts for views on this approach.
You want the best returns from your ISA investments, indeed from any investments; but to what extent are you prepared to run some risks to get the best? It is the perennial investor decision – or should be. Broadly, the options are passive investing or aggressive investing.
Whether the terms are helpful is debateable: passive suggests lying over and letting your investments happen without your input; aggressive could suggest a gung-ho flayling over any investments touting the highest returns.
The actuality is – or should be – in-between both scenarios. Lawrence Gosling, editor-in-chief of What Investment wrote recently: “The decision is often framed as passive equals cheap equals better; while active means expensive means lower returns. As many readers will know the decision is never quite as clear and easy as this. It is true that, on the whole, passive investment funds – namely those that follow an index – are cheaper than the average active fund.”
The price you will pay of course will vary, in terms of fees, depending on when and where you invest and in terms of returns, again depending on when and where you invest!
Lawrence makes the point that to find the ‘right’ passive investment solution for your needs you need to be active – “in other words do not just pick the cheapest or largest index, be active in deciding what you are trying to achieve,” he wrote.
One could argue all the same reasonings around aggressive investing, that is, the ‘taking some more risk for some higher returns’ approach.
To help focus investors on some options Patrick Connolly, financial planner at IFAs Chase de Vere continues our ISA season top fund picks series by making five fund recommendations for you if you are seeking passive investments for your ISA.
Fund managers will take different means to a passive investment end within the obvious parameters of following an index or indices and to reflect the proportional balance of companies within those indices.
“This low cost, broad investment approach can help mitigate the risk of price swings in individual stocks in the portfolio,” said Robert Dowling, Senior Fund Manager at Legal & General Investment Management (LGIM).
The approach for the L&G Global Infrastructure Fund suits the passive investor, the manager suggests, in that it targets diversified exposures but focuses solely on listed infrastructure, including transportation, energy and telecommunications companies.
“Listed infrastructure historically has provided equitylike returns with lower volatility than the broader market,” Dowling claimed.
Balance and global diversification is key, agreed James Norton, senior investment planner at Vanguard.
“We believe investors have the best chance of meeting their investment objectives by holding a balanced, globally diversified portfolio, at a low-cost, and for the long term,” he said.
“We use index trackers as they provide broad exposure to markets at a very low cost. This cost point is particularly important given the likelihood of lower global returns over the next decade. Every pound out of an investor’s pocket is a pound out of their future returns.”
But Norton conceded: “Timing the market is extremely difficult, even for professional investors, as demonstrated by the difficulties active managers have experienced in beating the market over the past decade.”
Patrick Connolly, head of communications at Chase de Vere selects his top five passive funds for your ISA portfolio.
This is a passive fund which tracks the performance of the FTSE World (ex UK) Index and so provides investors with a broad exposure to global stock markets.
As it invests more in the largest companies in the world its biggest weighting is in the US and its largest holdings are in companies such as Microsoft, Apple and Amazon.
It has annual charges of 0.13%. L&G also engages in ‘active ownership’ where they aim to encourage good ethical behaviours in the companies they invest in.
This fund invests in a range of Vanguard’s tracker funds, which aim to replicate the performance of stock markets and of fixed interest indices around the world.
This provides good diversification by getting exposure to global shares and fixed interest at a low cost, with an annual charge of 0.22%.
The high weighting in US equities has helped the fund to perform strongly as US markets have outperformed and investors also have the option of choosing similar funds with 20%, 40%, 80% or 100% equity weighting options, so investors can select the fund which is most suitable for their objectives and attitude to risk.
This fund aims to replicate the performance of the FTSE All Share Index and so can be a good core holding fund in many investment portfolios. It simply buys the shares that are in the index rather than trying to predict which ones will perform well or badly. So, the largest holdings in the fund will be the largest shares in the index and include the likes of Royal Dutch Shell, HSBC and BP.
It is a low-cost way to get broad exposure to the UK stock market as it charges only 0.07% pa.
This fund tracks the performance of the FTSE 250 Index, which is the index of the largest 250 UK companies by market capitalisation after the largest 100 companies, which are reflected in the FTSE 100 Index.
It provides investors with a way to access mid cap companies, which can often be more dynamic and have more growth potential than their larger brethren.
The largest companies in this index currently include Bellway, Direct Line and Marks & Spencer and the fund has an annual charge just of 0.18%.
Infrastructure is deemed very ‘bond-like’ in that its assets tend to be long-duration and provide a stable income, usually inflation linked.
This fund has an attractive yield, currently 3.1%, and has shown defensive characteristics as we saw when stock markets fell in the fourth quarter of 2018. This means it can have a role to play to provide some protection in a portfolio alongside mainstream equity holdings.
The fund tracks the FTSE Global Core Infrastructure Index, investing in the shares in that index, and it has an annual charge of 0.31%.
