Protests over the death of George Floyd raged from coast to coast -- with crowds breaking curfew in major cities on another night of fury and frustrations.
Fires burned and and tear gas canisters flew in Minneapolis as people threw objects at officers. In Seattle, smoke filled the air as police in riot gear lined up outside stores. And in Philadelphia, firefighters doused blazes and officers chased a group of protesters down the streets for violating curfew. The words "I can't breathe" were scrawled on a building not far from where smoke billowed.
Looters ransacked stores on the famous Melrose Avenue in Los Angeles, leaving shelves bare and setting some buildings ablaze.
The National Guard dispatched to Washington, DC, to assist police handling protests around the White House, authorities said.
At least 25 cities have imposed curfews and numerous states activated National Guard forces in anticipation of another night of protests , sparked in part by the death of Floyd -- who was unarmed and handcuffed -- while in Minneapolis police custody.
The former officer seen in a video kneeling on Floyd's neck was arrested and charged. Protesters are demanding the arrest of three other officers at the scene.
• City curfews: A curfew is underway in cities like Atlanta, Philadelphia and Milwaukee until Sunday morning. Mayors in cities like Denver, Cincinnati, Louisville and Salt Lake City imposed evening curfews that will expire Monday morning.
• Officer injured: A Philadelphia bike officer trying to stop people involved in looting was run over by the suspects while escaping. The officer is in the hospital with a broken arm and other injuries. At least 12 other officers were injured.
• National Guard: Several states and the District of Columbia have either activated or requested assistance from the National Guard, including Minnesota, Georgia, Ohio, Colorado and Kentucky.
• 21-year-old shot: A young man was killed Friday night in downtown Detroit where protests were taking place. Police had previously said the victim was 19 and that they could not confirm whether the victim was part of the protests.
A man kneels and raises his fist in the air at the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial in Washington, DC, on Friday, June 19.
Protesters near the White House try to pull down a statue of former President Andrew Jackson on Monday, June 22. The statue stands in the middle of Lafayette Square, which has been the site of largely peaceful protests.
NASCAR drivers, pit crew members and others show their support for Bubba Wallace as they walk alongside his No. 43 car before a Cup Series race in Talladega, Alabama, on June 22. Wallace, the only Black driver in NASCAR's top circuit, has been an outspoken advocate of the Black Lives Matter movement and the corresponding protests against racism and police brutality. A noose was found in his garage stall on Sunday. The FBI investigated and concluded that the noose was a garage-door pull rope that had been in place as early as October 2019 -- well before it had been assigned to Wallace's team.
Protesters try to enter a gate leading to the BOK Center, where President Donald Trump was holding a rally in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on Saturday, June 20. It was the President's first rally since the coronavirus pandemic began.
Fireworks explode over the statue of Confederate General Robert E. Lee during a Juneteenth celebration in Richmond, Virginia, on Friday, June 19. The Juneteenth holiday commemorates the end of slavery in the United States.
Activist Angela Davis raises her fist during a Juneteenth shutdown and protest at the Port of Oakland in California.
People march through the streets of Atlanta during a Juneteenth rally on June 19.
People pray together during a Juneteenth event at Atlanta's Centennial Olympic Park.
People attend a Juneteenth rally in Fort Myers, Florida.
A man marches with a child on his shoulders during a Juneteenth celebration in New York.
A statue of Confederate Maj. Richard W. Dowling is removed in Houston on June 17. Confederate statues are being taken down and tampered with across the United States.
Members of Spark-Y, a nonprofit youth empowerment group, build a garden at the George Floyd memorial site in Minneapolis on June 17.
A woman shouts slogans as she protests outside a burned Wendy's restaurant in Atlanta on June 15. Demonstrators set fire to the restaurant on June 13 after Rayshard Brooks was fatally shot near the restaurant's drive-thru on June 12. Brooks, 27, was shot after police moved to handcuff him for suspected driving under the influence, according to videos from the scene. The videos show that Brooks took an officer's Taser during the attempted arrest and then fired the Taser at the officers as he ran away. One officer then fatally shot Brooks three times with his service weapon, authorities said. Brooks was shot twice in the back, according to a release by the Fulton County Medical Examiner's Office.
Police in Albuquerque, New Mexico, detain members of the New Mexico Civil Guard, an armed civilian group, after a man was shot during a protest on June 15. The shooting happened as protesters were trying to pull down a statue of Spanish conquistador Juan de Oñate. A 31-year-old man was arrested in connection with the shooting, police said. The New Mexico Civil Guard told CNN by email that the man is not part of their group.
Protesters surround the police headquarters in Richmond, Virginia, on June 14.
This aerial photo shows a Black Lives Matter mural in Seattle on June 14. Barricades and street graffiti mark the entrance to what's known as Seattle's Capitol Hill Autonomous Zone, which protesters have occupied since June 7.
Demonstrators set fire to a Wendy's restaurant in Atlanta on June 13. Rayshard Brooks was fatally shot by police on Friday night.
A police officer talks to protesters on an Atlanta highway, near where Brooks was killed. A major interstate was shut down after protesters marched onto a connector and were met by lined-up police vehicles.
Protesters rally in Atlanta after Brooks' death.
Demonstrators in New York make their way through Brooklyn on June 13.
Paperboy Prince, a congressional candidate for New York's 7th District, leads a march in Brooklyn on June 12.
Members of the 1199SEIU union, the nation's largest union of health-care workers, kneel for eight minutes and 46 seconds during a vigil at the Brookdale Hospital Medical Center in New York. Eight minutes and 46 seconds is how long the police officer in Minneapolis held his knee on George Floyd's neck.
Minnesota state troopers surround a statue of Christopher Columbus after activists pulled it down in front of the Capitol in St. Paul on June 10. Columbus has long been a contentious figure in history for his treatment of the Indigenous communities he encountered and for his role in the violent colonization at their expense.
Josiah Brown fist-bumps a member of the US Secret Service after he and his mother, Alexis Brown, prayed over the officers near the White House on June 9.
Buffalo Bills cornerback Josh Norman prays over Malcolm Rutledge during protests near the White House on June 9. "Both White and Black people haven't seen a Black man in chains in years," Rutledge said. "They don't understand the psychological chains we still carry."
New York City Public Advocate Jumaane Williams, center, leads a march over the Brooklyn Bridge during a protest for police reform on June 8.
Black Lives Matter supporters gather in Los Angeles for a memorial service honoring George Floyd on June 8.
Seattle Police and Washington National Guard personnel retake control of an intersection as demonstrators clash with law enforcement near the Seattle Police Department's East Precinct shortly after midnight on June 8.
A person watches protesters march in St. Louis on June 7.
A young boy rides with the Compton Cowboys during a "peace ride" for George Floyd in Compton, California, on June 7.
Protesters lie in a street near the White House on June 7.
NASCAR driver Bubba Wallace wears a shirt that reads "I Can't Breathe - Black Lives Matter" as the National Anthem is played before a Cup Series race at Atlanta Motor Speedway.
A man dances near Floyd's memorial in Minneapolis on June 6.
Demonstrators paint the words "defund the police" as they protest near the White House on June 6.
People protest near the Seattle Police Department's East Precinct on June 6.
People in New York City attend a rally June 6 at Washington Square Park.
Protesters stretch more than five blocks during a demonstration near the White House on June 6.
Xavier Brown shows his support as demonstrators march past his home in St. Paul, Minnesota, on June 6.
Protesters walk across the Brooklyn Bridge on June 6.
Protesters pack the lawn at the Indiana Capitol on June 6.
Tamika Palmer, the mother of Breonna Taylor, closes her eyes during a vigil for her daughter in Louisville, Kentucky, on June 6.
Demonstrators take to the streets in Clayton, Missouri, on June 6.
Protesters are arrested after violating curfew in New York on June 5.
People attend a rally outside Jackson Square in New Orleans on June 5.
The new Black Lives Matter Plaza is seen near St. John's Episcopal Church in Washington, DC, on June 5. The words "Black Lives Matter" were painted on two blocks of 16th Street. The painters were contacted by Mayor Muriel Bowser.
Demonstrators brave the rain to protest near the White House on June 4.
Protesters take a knee in front of a line of police officers in Brooklyn, New York, on June 4.
A protester who was arrested for breaking a curfew in New York looks out from a police van on June 4.
Protesters march in San Diego on June 4.
Police in New York arrest a protester on Fifth Avenue on June 4.
The White House is seen behind temporary metal fencing that was installed to keep protesters further back.
Jessica Moore attempts to hold dialogue with a counter-protester while rallying in Anna, Illinois, on June 4.
People dance in the street during a protest in Pasadena, California, on June 4.
Protesters in Washington, DC, gather at the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial on June 4.
A man in Minneapolis holds a candle June 3 near the scene of George Floyd's death.
Protesters use umbrellas during a protest in Seattle on June 3.
Protesters in New Orleans gather in front of a pedestal that once displayed a statue of Confederate soldier Robert E. Lee. The Civil War-era landmark was removed in 2017 after a nationwide debate over Confederate symbols, which some say represent slavery and injustice and others say represent history and heritage.
Protesters hold up their phones during a demonstration outside the White House on June 3.
A protester is arrested for violating curfew near the Plaza Hotel in New York on June 3.
Hundreds of surfers in Encinitas, California, gather in support of Black Lives Matter on June 3.
A protester faces a law enforcement officer in Washington, DC, on June 3.
Protesters pack into Dolores Park during a demonstration in San Francisco on June 3.
Protesters kneel in front of New York City police officers before being arrested for violating curfew on June 3.
Hundreds of demonstrators in Boston lie face down, symbolizing the last moments of George Floyd's life, on June 3. Related photos: Lie-in protests around the world
People protest near the US Capitol in Washington, DC, on June 3.
Atlanta Police Officer J. Coleman shares a fist bump with protester Elijah Raffington on June 3. The police bicycle unit was taking a knee with protesters outside the CNN Center.
People in Minneapolis raise their hands and shout slogans on June 2 as they protest at the makeshift memorial for George Floyd.
Protesters walk off the Manhattan Bridge in New York after being blocked by police on June 2. Police were on both sides of the bridge as peaceful protesters were in the middle. Eventually the protesters were allowed to walk away and leave the area.
Protesters lie down in an intersection, blocking traffic in Coralville, Iowa, on June 2.
Police officers hold a perimeter June 2 behind a metal fence that was recently erected in front of the White House.
Protesters ride a bus through a street in Atlanta on June 2. The windshield reads "use your voice."
Demonstrators raise their hands in the air while protesting in front of City Hall in Los Angeles on June 2.
Protesters gather in Houston on June 2. Tens of thousands of people marched to City Hall to shout George Floyd's name. Houston is Floyd's hometown.
Protesters raise their fists in New York City on June 2.
Members of the National Guard watch as demonstrators march along Hollywood Boulevard in Los Angeles on June 2.
Protesters on horseback rally in downtown Houston on June 2.
A group of clergy members stops and prays during a march to a George Floyd memorial in Minneapolis on June 2.
Ericka Ward-Audena stands with her 7-year-old daughter, Elle, during a protest in Washington, DC, on June 2. "I wanted my daughter to see the protests," she said. "It's really important. I've gotten a million questions from her because of it."
Protesters gather near Manhattan's Foley Square in New York on June 2.
A resident of Clarksville, Tennessee, holds up a sign that says "I can't breathe" across the street from protesters on June 2.
Protesters rally outside the Ohio Statehouse in Columbus on June 2.
Passengers hold up their fists in solidarity with protesters as they drive by the Wood County Courthouse in Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, on June 2.
A person holds a "Black Lives Matter" sign as a heavy cloud of tear gas and smoke rises in Seattle on June 1.
People attend a candlelight vigil at Queens Park in New York on June 1.
Two men kneel in front of a line of Kentucky state troopers during a protest in Louisville on June 1.
A firework thrown by a protester explodes at the feet of police in Riverside, California, on June 1.
A woman cries out after being exposed to tear gas near the White House on June 1. Thousands of people were peacefully protesting near Lafayette Park when police started to shoot rubber bullets, tear gas and flash bangs into the crowd. They were clearing the block to allow President Donald Trump to walk to St. John's Episcopal Church for a photo op.
Security forces push protesters away from the White House in order to allow President Trump to make a visit to a nearby church on June 1.
Law enforcement officers kneel with protesters in Atlanta on June 1.
A protester is doused with water and milk after being hit with pepper spray from law enforcement in Washington, DC, on June 1.
Protesters gather at the J.E.B. Stuart statue in Richmond, Virginia, on June 1.
A demonstrator holds her hands up while she kneels in front of police officers at City Hall in Anaheim, California, on June 1.
Terrence Floyd, George Floyd's brother, visits a makeshift memorial in Minneapolis on June 1. "He was barely able to walk," CNN's Sara Sidner reported. "He had to have two people on either side of him holding him up as he tried to make his way to the spot." He later spoke to the crowd and called for peace.
Protesters gather in New York's Times Square on June 1.
Protesters burn materials during a protest in Washington, DC, early on June 1.
Police stand guard outside the White House as people gather to protest on May 31.
A woman is carried by police in Charlotte, North Carolina, on May 31.
Jeffrey Maddrey, an assistant chief of the New York Police Department, takes a knee during a rally in Brooklyn on May 31.
A protester kneels in front of a police line in Memphis, Tennessee, on May 31.
A person is seen inside a damaged 7-Eleven store in New York on May 31.
Protester Kendrick Cutkelvin uses a SWAT vehicle loudspeaker to disperse a crowd of protesters after a rally in Savannah, Georgia, on May 31.
A tractor-trailer drives into a crowd of protesters in Minneapolis on May 31. As the driver tried to speed up, protesters overtook the vehicle and the driver stopped, video shows.
Motorists are ordered to the ground by police during a protest in Minneapolis on May 31.
People stage a "die-in" protest in Portland, Oregon, on May 31.
Police react to demonstrators near the White House on May 31.
A demonstrator jumps on a police car in Washington, DC.
A woman is helped after being hit with pepper spray in Minneapolis.
Police confront protesters at the Barclays Center in New York on May 31.
A young boy raises his fist during a demonstration in Atlanta on May 31.
Demonstrators pray during a march in Atlanta.
A police officer aims a nonlethal weapon as protesters raise their hands in Santa Monica, California, on May 31.
A man screams as he sees a police officer take a knee near the White House on May 31.
Protesters march during a rally in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, on May 31.
Demonstrators gather to protest near the White House on May 31.
People demonstrate outside the Minnesota Capitol, which was ringed with state troopers and the National Guard on May 31.
Armored vehicles from the Minnesota Army National Guard surround the Capitol in St. Paul on May 31.
Shaynna Ford stands in front of police in Washington, DC, on May 30.
A protester runs past burning cars and buildings in St. Paul on May 30.
Protesters link arms in Charlotte on May 30.
A firework explodes by a police line near the White House on May 30.
Looters ransack an Urban Outfitters store in Seattle on May 30.
Police push people back as they detain a protester in Las Vegas on May 30.
A Los Angeles Police Department kiosk burns in The Grove shopping center during a protest on May 30.
Protesters hold up metal gates as they build a barrier on a Las Vegas roadway on May 30.
Bridges over the Chicago River are lifted to limit transportation to and from the Loop, where protesters clashed with police on May 30.
Visual journalist Ed Ou is seen bleeding after police fired tear gas and rubber bullets in Minneapolis on May 30.
Police advance through smoke and tear gas in Minneapolis on May 30.
A protester confronts a police officer in Tampa, Florida, on May 30.
Protesters begin to kneel during a protest in New York's Queens borough on May 30.
A demonstrator is injured during a protest near the White House on May 30.
Police officers kneel during a rally in Coral Gables, Florida on May 30,.
Protesters jump on an overturned car near the Municipal Services Building in Philadelphia on May 30.
A police officer shoots rubber bullets at protesters who were throwing rocks and water bottles during a demonstration in Miami on May 30.
Police stand guard near the CNN Center and Centennial Olympic Park as protests continued in Atlanta on May 30.
A protester receives first aid after being hit with pepper spray outside the Statehouse in Columbus, Ohio, on May 30.
Demonstrators clash near the White House on May 30.
People with signs and masks that read "I can't breathe" attend a protest in Chicago on May 30.
A protester holds a sign while a vehicle burns in a Philadelphia street on May 30.
People gather on top of a baseball backstop during a protest in Los Angeles on May 30.
Thousands of people stage a "die-in" protest at the Colorado State Capitol in Denver on May 30.
Genesee County Sheriff Chris Swanson high-fives a woman who called his name as he marches with protesters in Flint, Michigan, on May 30.
Protesters march near the Salt Lake City Police Department on May 30.
Protesters chant outside Dallas City Hall on May 30.
People vandalize a Walgreens store during protests in Oakland, California, on May 29.
Police officers move forward to clear a street during a protest in downtown Los Angeles on May 29.
Police officers fire tear gas at protesters in Denver on May 29.
Police officers and protesters clash near the CNN Center in Atlanta on May 29.
A man walks away as a car burns in a Minneapolis parking garage on May 29.
Protesters block a street in Los Angeles on May 29.
Police form a line near the Centennial Olympic Park and CNN Center in Atlanta on May 29.
Men raise their fists after making their way onto Interstate 75 and stopping traffic in Cincinnati on May 29.
People in Minneapolis attempt to extinguish burning cars on May 29.
A protester is detained by police in Houston on May 29.
Protesters confront police officers while blocking the 110 Freeway in Los Angeles on May 29.
Protesters walk through downtown Lexington, Kentucky, on May 29.
Demonstrators in Oakland climb atop a truck while blocking all lanes of traffic on Interstate 880 on May 29.
Protesters burn a flag outside the CNN Center in Atlanta on May 29.
A protester in Minneapolis douses himself with milk on May 29.
A man stands on top of a burning police car during a protest outside the CNN Center in Atlanta on May 29.
Demonstrators walk along Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, DC, on May 29.
A police officer in Boston holds down a protester while another officer uses pepper spray on May 29.
Protesters chant in Civic Center Park during a rally in Denver on May 29.
Protesters gather in Kansas City, Missouri, on May 29.
Demonstrators protest outside CNN headquarters in Atlanta on May 29.
Protesters ride in cars during a demonstration in Louisville, Kentucky, on May 29.
Protesters gather in front of a New York City courthouse and jail on May 29.
A protester holds up an American flag in New Orleans on May 29.
Jamela J. Pettiford sings during a protest outside the Hennepin County Government Center in Minneapolis on May 29.
CNN journalist Omar Jimenez is taken into custody during a live broadcast May 29 at the site of protests in Minneapolis. Jimenez's crew, including a producer and a camera operator, were also placed in handcuffs. They have since been released from custody. Police told the crew they were being detained because they were told to move and didn't, one member of the CNN crew relayed to the network. Jimenez could be seen holding his CNN badge while reporting, identifying himself as a reporter and telling the officers the crew would move wherever officers needed them to. Gov. Tim Walz apologized for the arrests and said he took full responsibility.
Police gather along Minneapolis' Lake Street early on May 29 as fires burned after a night of unrest.
Protesters gather in front of a burning fast-food restaurant in Minneapolis on May 29.
Protesters link arms and surround a police officer to protect him from the crowd in Louisville on May 28.
A protester carries an American flag upside down next to a burning building in Minneapolis on May 28.
A protester in Memphis winces in pain after being hit with pepper spray by police on May 28.
A protester dumps fuel on a fire at a Minneapolis police precinct on May 28.
People demonstrate outside of a burning Minneapolis police precinct on May 28.
A protester moves around the smoke-filled police precinct in Minneapolis on May 28.
A woman yells at a sheriff's deputy during a protest in Minneapolis on May 28.
Crews work to put out fires after an apartment building under construction was burned to the ground during protests in Minneapolis on May 28.
A protester is detained by police during a rally in New York City's Union Square on May 28.
Tony L. Clark holds up a poster of George Floyd during a protest in Minneapolis on May 28.
Protesters speak to police officers during a demonstration in New York City on May 28.
A protester reacts amid a cloud of tear gas in St. Paul on May 28.
Hundreds of people listen to speakers May 28 outside of Cup Foods in Minneapolis. The neighborhood grocery store is where police first encountered Floyd.
People protest in Minneapolis on May 28.
Gwen Dumas is consoled near a convenience store in Minneapolis on May 28.
People look on as a construction site burns in Minneapolis on May 27.
Demonstrators gather in Memphis on May 27.
A firework explodes as a fire burns inside an Auto Zone store in Minneapolis on May 27.
People use garden hoses and buckets to save homes in Minneapolis after rioters set fire to a housing complex under construction on May 27.
Protesters raise their hands up as they react to tear gas during a demonstration in Minneapolis on May 27.
People join hands across a freeway in Los Angeles during a protest on May 27.
Protesters use shopping carts as a barricade as they confront police near a Minneapolis police precinct on May 27.
Demonstrators in Minneapolis raise their hands during a standoff with police on May 27.
Two police officers stand on the roof of a Minneapolis police precinct during demonstrations on May 27.
A protester holds up his hands in Minneapolis on May 27.
Minneapolis protesters react as a projectile launched by police explodes near them on May 27.
Minneapolis police stand by an illustration of Floyd as demonstrators rally on May 27.
Protesters gather in Los Angeles on May 27.
Kika Villareal, left, and her daughter Aubrie march with fellow protesters in Los Angeles on May 27.
A man facing a row of police officers holds a burnt US flag as protesters gather in downtown Los Angeles on May 27.
Protesters gather near the Minneapolis Police Third Precinct on May 26.
Demonstrators march on Minneapolis' Hiawatha Avenue on May 26.
Demonstrators react in Minneapolis on May 26.
A police officer throws a tear-gas canister toward protesters during a rally in Minneapolis on May 27.
Three women join hands in Minneapolis as they pray around a makeshift memorial for Floyd on May 26.
Protesters and police face off during a rally in Minneapolis on May 26.
Crowds gather in the street at a protest in Minneapolis on May 26.
People gather outside a police precinct during demonstrations in Minneapolis on May 26.
Tear gas is fired as protesters clash with police in Minneapolis on May 26.
A protester is doused with milk after exposure to tear gas in Minneapolis on May 26.
People gather and pray around a makeshift memorial in Minneapolis on May 26. It was near the site where Floyd was taken into police custody the previous day.
People stand outside the Minneapolis Police Third Precinct and chant "Hands up, don't shoot" on May 26.
A Minneapolis demonstrator holds a sign reading "Justice for George" on May 26.
Police try to disperse crowds in Minneapolis on May 26.
Protesters rally around a damaged police vehicle in Minneapolis on May 26.
Milk is poured on the face of a protester who had been exposed to tear gas in Minneapolis on May 26.
A car in Minneapolis is hit with tear gas on May 26.
Crowds rally in Minneapolis on May 26.
Minneapolis protesters gather in the rain on May 26.
Floyd's girlfriend, Shawanda Hill, is in the center of this photo taken on May 26, near the spot where he died.
State and local authorities said the violence in Minneapolis was being fueled by outsiders.
"Nothing we do to provide justice" for Floyd "matter(s) to any of these people who are out here firing upon the National Guard, burning" businesses and "disrupting civil life," Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz told reporters on Saturday.
The governor said he understands that "Minnesotans' ... inability to deal with inequality" and racism was the catalyst for the protests -- but he said rough estimates indicate only 20% of protesters there are Minnesotans.
Analysis: Yes, there is misinformation in Minneapolis. No, it's not all Russia's fault.
St. Paul Mayor Melvin Carter said everyone arrested in his city on Friday night was from out of state.
A CNN analysis of data from the Hennepin County Sheriff's office showed that more than 80% of those booked into jail on riot and other potentially riot-related charges over the last two days were from Minnesota.
Of the 51 people booked into jail between noon Thursday and noon Saturday on riot, unlawful assembly, burglary or damage to property charges, a total of 43 had an address listed in Minnesota, the data showed.
The data only covers people booked into jail, not necessarily all arrests. Hennepin County includes Minneapolis, but not St. Paul.
John Harrington, the state public safety commissioner , said that assertions about outside agitators come partly from arrest data as well as information from fliers and online postings.
Officials did not provide further details about who exactly was fueling the unrest and where they were from. Harrington said he hoped to release more information later Saturday.
Without citing evidence, the attorney general said that in many places "it appears the violence is planned, organized, and driven by anarchic and left extremist groups, far-left extremist groups using Antifa-like tactics, many of whom traveled from outside the state to promote the violence."
A Justice Department spokeswoman later said the information underpinning Barr's assertion came from state and local law enforcement.
Protests were underway Saturday in cities like Chicago, Baltimore, Los Angeles and Washington, DC, where several Secret Service vehicles were vandalized with graffiti outside the White House.
A demonstration in Los Angeles led to clashes between police and protesters. Police vehicles were vandalized in Los Angeles by some protesters who kicked in the windows or sprayed the cars with graffiti. Police fired rubber bullets at demonstrators, who chanted "Black Lives Matter" and "George Floyd."
Aerial footage from CNN affiliate WLS showed protesters in Chicago vandalizing police vehicles. Some threw water bottles at police officers in riot gear, while others were seen lifting police barricades and throwing them at police cars.
A man holds a sign as fires sent large smoke plumes in Philadelphia on Saturday.
In Philadelphia, police said protests at City Hall and the Art Museum began peacefully before a group of others began "committing criminal acts, including vandalism."
In Atlanta, police braced for more potential protests and arrests Saturday night. Members of the National Guard gathered at Lenox Square Mall after the police department said it would be assisted by about 20 other agencies to monitor activity and "protect vulnerable business districts and retail centers"
A nation cooped up for weeks over coronavirus restrictions and suffering from resulting job losses saw throngs of people demonstrating in the streets of more than 30 cities on Friday.
People initially gathered peacefully in some places but anger boiled over as the hours passed.
At a protest in Detroit, one person was shot dead.
In Oakland, California, one Federal Protective Service officer was killed and one other injured Friday in a shooting at the downtown federal building during protests in the city, police said. Details about what led to the shooting weren't immediately available.
"It's about time this police brutality has to stop. I don't agree with breaking into all of the businesses, but I can understand the outrage after REPEATED incidents," Mackenzie Slagle said of protests in Oakland. "Because I'm a white woman, and I needed to show up for all my brothers and sisters."
In Atlanta, protests turned violent when a crowd set fire to a police car and smashed windows at CNN Center.
"What I see happening on the streets of Atlanta is not Atlanta. This is not a protest. This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. This is chaos," Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms said.
"Killer" was scrawled across a damaged police car in Los Angeles where protesters lined up along a freeway to block traffic. At least two officers were injured during the night, said the LAPD.
But other cities saw a contrast of demonstrators.
In Minneapolis, the epicenter of the demonstrations, some protesters knelt under a bridge and prayed while others tossed rocks at officers who fired rubber bullets in return.
Minneapolis and St. Paul were under a curfew after looting and arson broke out during days of protests. But hundreds took to the streets as police fired tear gas and protesters hid behind cars.
"If you can tell me something better for me to do -- if you can tell me a way that we could change the world without trying to make noise like that, then I'll get out of the streets," Max Bailey, 22, said at the protests in Denver .
Derek Chauvin, the former officer charged in Floyd's death, is being detained at the Ramsey County Jail in Saint Paul, a spokeswoman with the state's bureau of criminal apprehension told CNN.
He is facing third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter charges. His bail has been set at $500,000.
Chauvin, who is white, and three other officers detained Floyd, who was black, in handcuffs Monday after he allegedly used a counterfeit bill at a convenience store . Outrage grew after a video surfaced showing Chauvin kneeling on Floyd's neck .
Chauvin had his knee on Floyd's neck for a total of 8 minutes, 46 seconds, according to a criminal complaint filed Friday.
All four officers were fired this week after Floyd's death.
New video posted on social media appears to show three Minneapolis police officers -- not just Chauvin -- kneeling on Floyd during his arrest. CNN has not been able to locate the person who shot the footage. The new video shows the other side of the Minneapolis police vehicle -- the side opposite shown in the first video.
