Boeing was already reeling following the yearlong grounding of the 737 Max, its most popular plane, after two deadly crashes that killed 346 people. Earlier this month, Mr. Calhoun said the company was in worse shape than he imagined when he took over in January.
As the economic crisis mounts, hedge funds look to still make money.
Kenneth C. Griffin is the founder and chief executive officer of the hedge fund Citadel.Credit...Heidi Gutman/CNBC, via NBCU Photo Bank, via Getty Images
Hedge fund managers have mostly managed to stem their losses from the market sell-off. Now they’re trying to figure out how to make money again.
Some hedge funds are looking to invest in beaten-down companies poised for a rebound. King Street Capital Management, a $20 billion firm, told investors in a note reviewed by The New York Times that it had begun looking to invest in “high quality companies that have seen their bonds or loans caught up in the sell-off.”
The hedge fund billionaire Kenneth C. Griffin is starting up a new fund at Citadel to take advantage of the volatility and price discrepancies caused by the selling pressure in the bond market.
But with the usual relationships between stocks, bonds and other securities breaking down, there are few safe bets. Already there have been winners and losers.
The hedge fund manager Boaz Weinstein said in a note to investors in his $2.7 billion firm, Saba Capital Management, that he had positioned his portfolios to profit from bets on defaults and bankruptcy filings by companies with lots of high-yield, or junk, bonds. According to the note, which was reviewed by The Times, his main fund was up 33 percent this month.
One of the hardest hit is Bridgewater Associates, the $160 billion colossus led by Ray Dalio, which manages money for dozens of pensions and sovereign wealth funds. The firm’s eight main portfolios reported losses for the year ranging from 9 percent to 21 percent.
Cruise ships as hospitals? A Trump collaboration with Carnival draws scrutiny.
A Carnival cruise ship off Miami Beach, Fla. The cruise line had offered to make its ships available as floating hospitals.Credit...Lynne Sladky/Associated Press
President Trump has told reporters that Micky Arison, a former business associate and the chairman of Carnival Corporation, had offered to make the cruise operator’s ships available as floating hospitals during the coronavirus pandemic. They could be used for patients battling illnesses unrelated to the coronavirus, to relieve strain on the health care system.
The idea, which the White House declined to explain, was the latest in a string of seeming improvisations by Mr. Trump as he has come under pressure from states facing the prospect of swarms of new patients.
A spokesman for Carnival said the company would only charge for “essential costs” like food and drink, but that a city or hospital would have to cover costs to transform ships, if needed. And an abrupt transfer of hospital patients would likely mean that outside medical staff would need to contribute to the efforts.
The potential public-private partnership with Carnival has also prompted concerns about how Mr. Trump might be leveraging past business relationships in a public health crisis.
Companies are handing out cash to their workers as the crisis deepens.
With huge chunks of the economy grinding to a halt , many businesses are bracing for a steep drop-off in demand for their services. For many, that has already meant layoffs. But for companies that are keeping employees at home — or keeping their doors open — it means coming up with ways to make their lives easier.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
Walmart, the country’s largest retailer, has announced plans to give a cash bonus to all of its hourly workers in the United States. The bonus — $300 for full-time workers and $150 for part-timers — was announced Thursday, along with plans to hire 150,000 workers to serve largely shut-in shoppers who need a steady supply of food and household goods.
On Friday, PepsiCo vowed to increase certain employees’ pay by at least $100 a week for the next month, a change it said would affect around 90,000 people. The drink and snack maker said it would also hire 6,000 workers over the coming months, provide sick leave for quarantined employees and pay employees who are forced to stay home to take care of their children two-thirds of their normal wages for up to 12 weeks.
Amgen, which makes medications for heart disease and migraines, sent some employees home with $250 stipends for equipment they need, a $50-a-month allowance for internet and phone services, and a promise to pay them whatever they normally earn each week — even if their work demands dwindle.
When stocking grocery shelves turns dangerous.
They are a new class of emergency medical workers: the more than two million Americans reporting to work each day to sell food and other household staples amid the coronavirus pandemic.
As shoppers swarm stores, snapping up everything from milk to toilet paper, cashiers are there to ring them up. Stockroom employees replenish shelves as soon as shipments arrive. Their presence is a source of calm, signifying that, even as demand has surged, supply chains remain intact and the essentials that people need remain available.
But these same employees are growing tired and, because they constantly interact with customers, fearful of getting sick themselves.
U.S. stocks tumble after a tumultuous week.
Wall Street had its worst week since 2008 as the threat of a severe recession appeared ever more likely in the face of the spreading coronavirus.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell more than 4.5 percent on Friday, ending below where it stood on the day before President Trump was inaugurated, erasing the so-called Trump bump that the president has trumpeted throughout his presidency as evidence of his success. The S&P 500 is not far from that mark as well.
Stocks have collapsed more than 30 percent in a month, wiping out trillions in value and ending an 11-year long bull market. For both the S&P 500 and the Dow, the drop this week was the worst since the financial crisis more than a decade ago.
The S&P 500 fell about 4 percent on Friday, after rising earlier in the day, as the mood grew increasingly dour. Oil prices, which have cratered along with expectations for economic growth this year, fell 10 percent on Friday, dragging shares of energy companies lower.
Catch up: Here’s what else is happening:
The top two executives at United Airlines asked employees in a letter on Friday to contact members of Congress and urge them to bail out the aviation industry, noting that deep cuts would have to be made if government assistance does not materialize by month’s end. Later Friday, the airline said it would slash 95 percent of its flights abroad next month, eliminating service everywhere but Mexico. Delta disclosed that the company expected second-quarter revenue to fall 80 percent compared with the same period last year.
WhatsApp, the global messaging service owned by Facebook, said on Friday it had partnered with the World Health Organization to distribute verified information about COVID-19. Users sign up for the program through a link on the W.H.O. website , and a chatbot then doles out up-to-date information about death statistics, the latest news and articles, and how to protect oneself from contracting the virus.
Bank employees are considered essential workers under the federal government’s emergency declaration, which means banks can require workers to keep coming into work.
Reporting and research were contributed by David Gelles, Matthew Goldstein, Kate Kelly, Alexandra Stevenson, Ben Dooley, Jason Karaian, Adam Satariano, Amie Tsang, Jeanna Smialek, Matina Stevis-Gridneff, Conor Dougherty, Emily Flitter, C.J. Hughes, Ben Casselman, Niraj Chokshi, Michael de la Merced, Mike Isaac, Daniel Victor and Kevin Granville.
