Stocks close higher in choppy trade as governments, central banks try to calm investor nerves
Central banks can still make a difference with forward guidance, one analyst says
U.S. stocks closed modestly higher Thursday afternoon, in another volatile session, as central banks and governments pledged support for the economic shocks from the coronavirus pandemic that’s claimed more than 8,000 lives around the globe.
Investors were watching moves from the Federal Reserve, which announced a facility to backstop money-market mutual funds, and the European Central Bank after it rolled out an expanded asset-purchase program, while looking forward to the potential of aggressive fiscal stimulus reported to be under discussion in Congress.
What did the major indexes do?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
advanced 160.73 points, or 2.3% to end the session at 7,150.58.
On Wednesday, the Dow fell 1,338.46 points, or 6.3%, to end at 19,898.92, for its lowest close since Feb. 2, 2017. The S&P 500 dropped 131.09 points, or 5.2%, to end at 2,398.10, while the Nasdaq Composite lost 344.94 points to end at 6,989.84, down 4.7%.
Financial markets remained volatile, with gyrations this week tied to investors liquidating stocks as well as other assets, including gold and government bonds, while pushing up the U.S. dollar in a dash for cash.
The Fed early Thursday announced the opening of additional, temporary dollar swap lines with central banks in an effort to address a global scramble for dollars, following an announcement late Wednesday of a new Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility , or MMLF, to assist money-market funds in meeting demands for redemptions by households and other investors.
Investors were eyeing these developments, along with ongoing briefings from federal officials as the number of cases of COVID-19 infections rose above 10,000 in the U.S. for the first time Thursday, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Reports that Congress is discussing a fiscal stimulus package of more than $1 trillion also garnering attention.
“We’ve been hearing pretty regularly about new monetary and fiscal stimulus — each day they’re presenting programs to quiet the markets,” said Randy Frederick, vice president of trading and derivatives with the Schwab Center for Financial Research told MarketWatch. “There’s a lot of things the Fed and Congress can do and they’re going to keep pulling them out.”
That said, “we still have not had two consecutive up days in a long time,” he warned. “The problem are the down days are bigger and more frequent,” and the markets will remain subject to the success or failure of efforts to contain the virus, while a great deal of uncertainty remains.
The European Central Bank, in an emergency meeting, said it was launching a new program that would allow it to buy 750 billion euros ($820 billion) in government and private sector bonds as well as commercial paper.
Also late Wednesday, President Donald Trump signed a coronavirus bill approved by the House and Senate that targets paid leave and testing, as lawmakers and the Trump administration already are looking ahead to huge stimulus measures and other programs aimed at cushioning the economy from the blow created by the pandemic.
U.S. economic data showed the start of the coronavirus impact.  Some 281,000 Americans filed for unemployment insurance for the first time in the March 14 week, the highest since 2017, but still a subdued reading compared to the massive crush expected in coming weeks as businesses lay off workers in response to the pandemic.
A manufacturing index from the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank plunged to -12.7 in March, the lowest since June 2012.
How did other markets trade?
The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note TMUBMUSD10Y,
West Texas Intermediate crude, the U.S. gauge of oil prices, US:CLK20 rose $4.85, or 23.8%, to settle at $25.22 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, its largest one-day increase on record , one session after finishing at its lowest level since 2002.
In precious metals , gold futures for April US:GCJ20 rose $1.40, or 0.1%, to settle at $1,479.30 an ounce on Comex.
which tracks the greenback’s performance against a basket of currency trading peers, rose 1.4%, adding to a string of gains.
