Suffering Through Your First Financial Crisis? Read This to Relax
We’ve been here before, and everything will be fine.
You already know the rational steps to take during a financial crisis: Don’t look at your 401(k) or investment accounts. Don’t stay glued to CNBC or the financial press. And, above all else, do not panic-sell your investments.
And yet: As Mike Tyson put it, everyone has a plan until they get punched in the mouth.
A generation of investors is experiencing its first genuine financial crisis. For many millennials — including yours truly — no amount of rational thinking can ease the pain of the first time you watch a fifth of your life savings evaporate in a few weeks.
To guide us through that pain, I called some seasoned investors who have been around this block before, having seen crises reaching back to Black Monday of 1987 . They’re here to offer calm, perspective and a few tips on dealing with the crisis, mentally and emotionally. (Answers have been edited for length and clarity.)
Mel Lindauer, co-author of “ The Bogleheads’ Guide to Investing ”: “The only two days that really matter in investing are the day you buy and the day you sell. All the ups and downs in between are simply noise. If you can learn to ignore the noise and stick with your investment plan, you’ll do just fine.”
Brian Preston, C.P.A., C.F.P., P.F.S., and host of the YouTube channel and podcast “ The Money Guy Show ”: “Creating wealth is simple — buy the market while you are young, and let compounding growth do its magic. However, wealth creation is not easy. You have to fight all of your human instincts and build a worldview that is separate from the herd. That is hard the first time you experience irrational behavior and whipsaw markets.”
Deena Katz Evensky, professor emeritus in the department of personal financial planning at Texas Tech University: “Panicking will only create more sleepless nights for you. Maintain a ‘buy and hold’ mind-set. The best thing you have going for you right now is time. Don’t try to time the market. You must stay in the market to get market returns. Remember, you are buying companies, not just stock. Businesses are still running and the world is still operating.”
Ms. Katz: “Stop listening to or reading financial pornography. If these guys were so smart, they wouldn’t be working for a living. Watching extreme volatility on a daily basis will give you ulcers and sleepless nights. A calmer long-term perspective will take you far. And don’t get angry or beat yourself up with ‘would have, should have’ — but remember that all investments have risk.”
Mr. Preston: “You can reach a certain point where staying up-to-date on the latest news and information is doing more harm than it is good. You’ve got to separate the actionable information from unactionable information; news about school closings or advice from health officials is good, actionable information. News about market drops or volatility can be valuable information, but not necessarily actionable. Much of the news about the market and coronavirus is great for staying informed and up-to-date, but may not be great for your sanity and financial health.”
Farnoosh Torabi, financial writer and host of the podcast “ So Money ”: “Unsubscribe from the push notifications. Why do this to yourself? There’s no value in getting daily market updates if your intention is to invest for the very long run. The market will have good days and bad days and terrible days. There’s absolutely no benefit in putting yourself on high alert with every move that it makes.”
Alison Green, author of the book and blog “Ask a Manager”: “If you got laid off tomorrow, what things would you wish you had done in the last few months? Those are the things you should be doing now. For most people, that’s saving as much money as you can, shoring up your professional network and getting yourself in shape for a job search. That might mean polishing your résumé, renewing connections with your contacts, even testing the waters with a few recruiters. Short of launching a full-fledged job search, these are the things that will put you in the strongest position if you do get laid off.”
Ms. Green’s advice for freelancers: “The fear of losing work often drives freelancers to take on more work than they can comfortably handle in case some of it does disappear at some point, which means that freelancers can end up working too many hours and having horrible work/life balance. But if you have real concerns about work drying up during a time like this, it does makes sense to pad your schedule with additional work if you can do it, at least for a while. If nothing else, the extra income will give you a cushion of savings if you do end up in a dry patch later on.”
Ms. Green’s advice for college students: “The best advice I can give is to do everything you can while you’re still in school to position yourself for a job search when you’re out. Try to get part-time work in your field or as close to it as you can: do internships, do relevant projects, and make connections in the field you want to work in. Too many people still come out of school without having done those things, and it puts them at a real disadvantage. The more experience and contacts you can build up before you’re officially on the job market, the easier your search will be.”
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
Ms. Green on whether you should risk taking a new job: “It’s a risk to leave for a new company, but it can also be a risk to stay where you are since your current company could have layoffs too. Learn as much as you can about the stability of both companies. Talk to people in your field and try to get as much insider knowledge as you can. You don’t always need to hunker down and stay where you are during a bad job market; sometimes it does make sense to change companies, whether it’s for more money, a step up, or more stability. You’ve just got to make the decision with as much information as you can.”
Ms. Torabi: “If we recall, the 20th century had its own host of problems and tragedies. It’s not that I encourage everyone to have all this blind faith in the stock market. Instead, have faith in the human race and its proven ability to adapt, invent, transform and make the world a better place. And that, in the end, is what fuels a strong economy and financial market.”
Mr. Preston: “This downturn does not feel any different to me than any other periods of panic and wild swings. Whenever I hear ‘new paradigm’ or ‘this time it’s different,’ I internally smile and know that we are humming the same song, and that I have been here before.”
Ms. Katz: “Worldwide chaos and terrible news have been around forever, and somehow we live though it. Imagine what your grandparents felt during World War II or what your parents thought when President Kennedy was killed or the Vietnam War raged for years.
“There are two ultimate outcomes: We all get through this, or everything falls apart. If everything falls apart, it won’t matter. If we get through this, you have a pretty good chance of seeing things go back to normal, even if it’s new normal.”
