To print this article, all you need is to be registered or login on Mondaq.com.
dealing with are nonreputable jurisdictions. A non-reputable
subject persons are to take into account any accreditation,
of Article 9 of the 4th AML Directive.
The focus of today's newsletter is the Basel AML Index,
corruption, financial sector standards and public transparency. By
the country's resilience against ML/TF.
methodology used by the Basel Institute. Five domains, each of them
bearing a different weight on the overall scale, were taken into
provides a simplified comparison of countries' risks of ML/TF;
specific policy recommendation for countries or institutions.
indicators may be read in the Basel AML Index report 1.
Without this background in mind, the below results may easily be
The best 20 performers are Estonia (125th, with a 2.68 score),
by the Basel Institute on Governance:
- Some progress from 2018, but very slow: More countries showed
slight improvements in their risk scores, including Switzerland
(+0.37%) and Malta (+0.02%). However, there have been no
to improve their resilience against ML/TF risks. Only one country
(Tajikistan) managed to improve its score by more than 1 point.
- Some countries are still going backwards: The risk scores of
13% of countries deteriorated by more than 0.1 point. Colombia,
- Most countries are at significant risk: 60% of countries have
having a significant risk of ML/TF.
By analysing the FATF data, it appears that, despite
improved, the AML/CFT systems remain largely ineffective. Moreover,
risks of money laundering and terrorist financing.
of beneficial ownership remains a sticking point. Information on
but not followed by conviction.
During development of this Index, it became clear to the Basel
financial crimes is still a critical issue to be addressed. The
to have updated reports at all times. It must also be noted that
they need to stay on the radar for analysis for ML/TF risks. In
corruption need to be laundered. In this respect, Switzerland has
and political parties in return for advantages. Low performance in
with poor transparency levels of political finances, mainly related
in the country. The data are taken from Freedom House, the WEF and
is seen as an important tool to expose money laundering.
critical measure to deter crime, including financial crimes and
money laundering, through the threat of punishment. Switzerland has
been the third best player in 2019.
Malta has ranked 113th in the Basel AML Index 2019.
"criminal activity", such as conversion, acquisition,
possession or use of proceeds from such criminal activity.
legislative framework? As per article 2 of the Act, criminal
activity means any activity, whenever or wherever carried out,
which, under the law of Malta or any other law, amounts to either a
and drug trafficking) or to any criminal offence. The reference to
force, in the Registry of Companies and in the Maltese authorities.
implementing the recommendations identified therein.
Low risk as per the Basel Index vs High risk as per MONEYVAL:
Where does the truth lie?
It is at least curious to note that whilst the NRA, drawn up by
with possible political influences lie behind the final score.
Nevertheless, all of us have surely asked the same question: is
for ML/TF? Does the truth perhaps lie somewhere in the middle?
In view of all these international implications, the whole
developments involving ML/TF matters at all times. In the event
and any consequent impact and damage.
evaluations, peer review and regular follow-up of its reports,
guide to the subject matter. Specialist advice should be sought
