E-mini S&P 500 Futures (June): Settled at 3034.50, up 24.50 on Friday and down 152 on the week
E-mini Nasdaq-100 Futures (June): Settled at 9645, up 24.25 on Friday and down 163.50 on the week
U.S. equity benchmarks opened sharply lower Sunday night and the weakness continued into Europe’s open after a slew of weaker-than-expected economic data from China. Price action bottomed at 1:00 a.m. C.T. with Europe once again bringing a wave of buying, losses were trimmed in half. Last week, the Federal Reserve Chair Powell emphasized a “long road ahead” while dialing back the certainty of additional policy measures. Despite an overall dovish narrative, his comments spooked investors right as reports began to show a reemergence of Covid-19.
Late last week, new Covid-19 cases were reported in China for the first time in nearly 2 months. The fresh outbreak was traced back to a massive fruit and vegetable market. The government quickly moved to lockdown more than a dozen districts in what has been characterized as a wartime lockdown. Tokyo confirmed a rise in new cases and nearly half of U.S. states have also. This takes wind out of the market’s Fed-driven sails. Although the latest leg of the rally has been attributed to irrational retail buying, institutions who purchase that order flow are riding retail’s coattails with sophisticated systems. Coattails that the institutions created. As the market peels back sharply, it forces an unwind and creates pockets of illiquidity.
This brings us to quadruple witching Friday. The S&P 500 Index has lost nearly as much as 10% from its peak. Without a fresh virus narrative or the Fed exuding fears, such record call option open interest typically doesn’t allow the market to change direction ahead of expiration. However, when it does, for whatever fundamental tape-bomb reason, there becomes an adverse unwind; repositioning/downside-
hedging. What were worthless put options now bloat in value.
A trio of economic data from China last night didn’t do the tape any favors. Each read was below expectations; Industrial Production, Fixed Asset Investment, and Retail Sales. Fresh June NY Fed Manufacturing data was out at 7:30 a.m. CT. Dallas Fed President Kaplan speaks at 10:00 a.m. CT and San Francisco Fed President Daly speaks a 10:30 a.m. Tomorrow, we look to April Retail Sales, May Industrial Production, and Fed Chair Powell gives his semiannual Congressional testimony.
Blue Line Futures, is a leading futures and commodities brokerage firm offering discounted personalized service and futures and commodity research.
