Global stocks dived Friday as investors braced for the novel coronavirus to become a pandemic.
Several stock indexes are set to end the week in correction territory after falling more than 10% since Monday.
"Blood is running in the streets," Neil Wilson, the chief market analyst for Markets.com, said in a morning note.
The coronavirus has infected more than 80,000 people, killed at least 2,800, and spread to upward of 46 countries.
Global stock markets plunged Friday, leaving them on track for their steepest weekly loss since the financial crisis, as investors braced for the novel coronavirus to escalate into a pandemic.
The virus — which causes a flu-like illness called COVID-19 — has infected more than 80,000 people and killed at least 2,800, mostly in China, while spreading to upward of 46 countries.
The latest spate of bad news includes California's governor revealing that 8,400 people who traveled to China were being monitored for symptoms, a Financial Times report that a German town has quarantined 1,000 people, and countries including Nigeria, New Zealand, and Lithuania confirming their first cases .
Here's the market roundup as of 12:25 p.m. ET:
Oil prices dropped, with West Texas Intermediate down 4.7% at $44.90 a barrel and Brent crude down 3.4% at about $50.
The declines mean several stock indexes are set to end the week in correction territory, after shedding more than 10% of their value — the correction threshold — in a matter of days. The MSCI World Index has dropped more than 9% this week, marking its worst performance since November 2008.
Notably, the S&P 500 dropped 4.4% on Thursday — its steepest one-day percentage fall since August 2011 — and has slumped more than 12% in six trading days.
Market commentators sounded the alarm Friday.
"The worst week for equities since 2008 surely beckons," Michael Every, the senior Asia-Pacific strategist at RaboResearch, said in a research note.
"The panic mode is full on," Ipek Ozkardeskaya, a senior analyst at Swissquote Bank, wrote in a morning note.
The market may be "entering the period of peak fear," Neil Wilson, the chief market analyst for Markets.com, said in a morning note. "Blood is running in the streets."
Other analysts accepted that the coronavirus could weaken consumer demand and disrupt global supply chains, choking global economic growth and resulting in a bear market. Yet they argued the sell-off was overblown.
"It appears that the market has gotten ahead of itself and a rebound should be around the corner," Jasper Lawler, the head of research at London Capital Group, said in a morning note.
"The world isn't going to be pushed in a major recession just because of coronavirus," Naeem Aslam, the chief market analyst at AvaTrade, concurred in a morning note.
Here's a year-to-date chart for the S&P 500:
