The corona crash is a rare investment phenomenon. Across the markets, almost every class of asset has fallen: shares, bonds, property and commodities, including oil and gold.
But a few – very few – professional investors are thriving.
Their success, in some cases after years of working in obscurity, illustrates how money managers prepared to employ unconventional investment strategies can prosper during the toughest of markets.
On Thursday, Levitas Capital's fund was up 15 per cent this month. The S&P/ASX 200 was down 26 per cent.
The Sydney-based Levitas is a quantitative fund, which means it uses computer algorithms to trade. Levitas specialises in volatility: it makes bets on when US sharemarkets are going to move wildly by buying and selling options in the volatility index on the Chicago Board Options Exchange.
In the markets, the index is known by its ticker, VIX. In common use, it is called the "fear index".
Levitas doesn't care if shares go up or down. Right now, volatility is at an extreme. A 10-day measure of volatility is at about 121. Normally it is 10.
In an Australian context, that means that a widely-held stock like Commonwealth Bank of Australia has gone from rising or falling 0.5 per cent most days to 5 per cent.
With only $60 million the fund is tiny, reflecting a lack of interest among Australian institutional investors for sophisticated trading to reduce sudden moves up or down.
For several years its main investor has been the Australian Catholic Superannuation & Retirement Fund, and the mathematicians running the fund hope their success during this crisis will attract more investors.
“The team have poured all our collective experience into making this work," says chairman Mike Fagan. "It's been a long process and now we're finally starting to see some traction with investors.”
Michael Fagan of Levitas Capital trades volatility in shares on the Chicago Board Options Exchange from Sydney.
Because the VIX is traded in Chicago, Fagan often starts work at 2.30am Sydney time, settling into a chair in front of 16 computer monitors, and finishes at 7.30am. The team will often walk to nearby Oxford St for a cup of coffee.
In Melbourne, another quantitative investor has delivered even bigger returns.
Andrew Harrex, the head of the Australian arm of Boston-based P/E Investments, has delivered a 25 per cent return for a foreign exchange fund operated for Macquarie Group called the PE Global FX Alpha Fund.
Another of his funds, the PE Diversified Global Macro Fund, is up 65 per cent over the past 10 weeks.
Despite managing about $1.5 billion for Australian investors, P/E Investments is little known in Australia, mainly because its American founders keep a low profile. Their funds bet on global economic trends: inflation, growth, and interest rates.
For the past three years P/E has been trading the difference between fast growth in the US and sluggish growth in Europe.
Then, in late January, the computer model detected a shift in the global economy. A coronavirus-driven period of deflation was coming, according to commodity prices, which seemed to sense the coming crisis before sharemarkets.
Mr Harrex's funds began making trades that would profit from a fall in currencies of countries that are influenced by the price of oil, gas and other commodities, including Australia.
As the dollar fell through US60¢ this week , P/E's strategy was proved spectacularly correct.
A former head of debt investing at AMP, Mr Harrex said he wasn't allowed to comment.
John Hempton, chief investment officer of Bronte Capital.
With US shares at three-year lows , few share funds around the world would be up this year. But Sydney-based Bronte Capital says its investments rose in January, February and March, a remarkable performance.
When COVID-19 began spreading in China in February, founder John Hempton began reading academic papers on coronaviruses.
Bronte bought "a lot" of put options in a European stock index, and fewer in a US stock index, which allowed it to profit when shares fell, Mr Hempton said.
He also said Bronte had bought "option protection on some specific financials in Europe", which presumably means he bet that European banks would fall in price, which they did. "They turned out to be by far the best trades," he said.
"It turned out to work better than it should because not only was Europe more vulnerable, but much to my surprise Europe was affected first," he said.
Mr Hempton declined to speak to AFR Weekend.
How the coronavirus is changing markets, business and politics.
Aaron Patrick is the senior correspondent. He writes about politics and business. Connect with Aaron on Twitter . Email Aaron at apatrick@afr.com
