The collapsing oil prices seemed to have reminded investors of the dire straits the global economy is in, after weeks of optimism-fueled gains for stocks. All major indexes closed in the red on Tuesday: The Dow Jones Industrial Average finished down 632 points, or 2.7%, the Nasdaq Composite lost 3.5%, and the S&P 500 fell 3.1%.
The declines were broad, with all 11 sectors in the index closing down at least 1.5%. Technology stocks were the biggest losers, with the sector off 4.2%. Energy stocks, ironically, fared much better, down less than 2%. It’s a reversal from the sectors’ relative performance since the start of this year.
Combined with the across-the-board selling, the fact that investors are ditching their winners is a sign of derisking. It suggests that investors could be preparing for a rockier market ahead. The Cboe Volatility Index, or VIX—a measure of market volatility calculated from pricing of S&P 500 options for the next month—jumped almost 4% on Tuesday, to about 45.50.
Stocks fell overseas as well. Japan’s Nikkei 225 dropped 2% and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng lost 2.2%. After three straight advances, the Stoxx Europe 600 closed down 3.4%. The German DAX fell 4%, the French CAC 40 slid 3.8%, and the U.K.’s FTSE 100 index declined 3%.
Investors sought the safety of U.S. government debt. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note dropped almost 6 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, as its price rose. The yield fell to 0.571%, approaching a record low set in early March.
Economically sensitive commodities besides oil fell as well. The price of copper, for instance, closed 2.9% lower at $2.27 per pound.
“This recession is rapid and has ripple effects that have yet to be measured. No wonder cyclical commodities are still struggling in spite of production cuts, with the epicenter of the storm focusing on WTI crude oil,” said Florian Ielpo, head of macroeconomic research at Unigestion.
The plunge in commodities prices caused shares of many energy and materials companies to fall as well. Shares of diversified oil major Exxon Mobil (ticker: XOM) held up relatively well, down 0.5%, while smaller producers like Occidental Petroleum (OXY)—down 2.1%—lost more. Stock of Freeport-McMoRan (FCX), a mining company that produces both copper and gold, fell 7.7%.
The volatility comes as earnings season continues to pick up pace. A trio of Dow components, along with over a dozen other major companies, were moving as investors reacted to their quarterly results.
Coca-Cola (KO) shares slipped 2.6% after the beverage maker beat analysts’ expectations for both sales and earnings, but warned that the second quarter would be weak. Stay-at-home orders have meant that the company isn’t selling as much to restaurants and other venues. Coca-Cola said it saw a 25% decline in its sales volume since the beginning of April .
International Business Machines (IBM) shares lost 2.9% after the company reported sales that fell just short of analysts’ targets late Monday . The tech giant withdrew its financial forecasts for the year and said it expected a slowdown in sales as stay-at-home orders forced clients to rethink some of their enterprise-software needs.
Travelers (TRV) stock rose 0.1% despite the insurance company missing estimates on both its top and bottom lines . Catastrophe losses and charges due to Covid-19 caused its first-quarter profits to fall significantly from a year ago, even as revenues rose slightly.
Shares of Lockheed Martin (LMT) dropped 2.6%. The aerospace and defense company reported earnings per share slightly above Wall Street consensus estimates , and is sticking with its full-year guidance, unlike many companies struggling with the pandemic.
Finally, Beyond Meat (BYND) stock jumped 7.4% after Starbucks (SBUX) said it would start using its alternative-meat products in its thousands of locations in China.
It was another turbulent day on Wall Street as rapidly falling oil prices weighed on the stock market.
