Simply Wall St December 21, 2019
Investors can approximate the average market return by buying an index fund. While individual stocks can be big winners, plenty more fail to generate satisfactory returns. For example, the InDex Pharmaceuticals Holding AB (publ) ( STO:INDEX ) share price is down 13% in the last year. That’s disappointing when you consider the market returned 36%. Longer term shareholders haven’t suffered as badly, since the stock is down a comparatively less painful 2.4% in three years. It’s down 21% in about a quarter. This could be related to the recent financial results – you can catch up on the most recent data by reading our company report .
We don’t think InDex Pharmaceuticals Holding’s revenue of kr108,000 is enough to establish significant demand. You have to wonder why venture capitalists aren’t funding it. So it seems shareholders are too busy dreaming about the progress to come than dwelling on the current (lack of) revenue. Investors will be hoping that InDex Pharmaceuticals Holding can make progress and gain better traction for the business, before it runs low on cash.
We think companies that have neither significant revenues nor profits are pretty high risk. There is usually a significant chance that they will need more money for business development, putting them at the mercy of capital markets. So the share price itself impacts the value of the shares (as it determines the cost of capital). While some such companies do very well over the long term, others become hyped up by promoters before eventually falling back down to earth, and going bankrupt (or being recapitalized).
InDex Pharmaceuticals Holding had cash in excess of all liabilities of kr83m when it last reported (September 2019). That’s not too bad but management may have to think about raising capital or taking on debt, unless the company is close to breaking even. With the share price down 13% in the last year , it seems likely that the need for cash is weighing on investors’ minds. You can click on the image below to see (in greater detail) how InDex Pharmaceuticals Holding’s cash levels have changed over time. The image below shows how InDex Pharmaceuticals Holding’s balance sheet has changed over time; if you want to see the precise values, simply click on the image.
It can be extremely risky to invest in a company that doesn’t even have revenue. There’s no way to know its value easily. Given that situation, would you be concerned if it turned out insiders were relentlessly selling stock? I’d like that just about as much as I like to drink milk and fruit juice mixed together. It costs nothing but a moment of your time to see if we are picking up on any insider selling.
The last twelve months weren’t great for InDex Pharmaceuticals Holding shares, which cost holders 13%, while the market was up about 36%. Of course the long term matters more than the short term, and even great stocks will sometimes have a poor year. The three-year loss of 0.8% per year isn’t as bad as the last twelve months, suggesting that the company has not been able to convince the market it has solved its problems. Although Warren Buffett famously said he likes to ‘buy when there is blood on the streets’, he also focusses on high quality stocks with solid prospects. It is all well and good that insiders have been buying shares, but we suggest you check here to see what price insiders were buying at.
There are plenty of other companies that have insiders buying up shares. You probably do not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on SE exchanges.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
