4:14 p.m.: U.S. stocks plunged more than 7.5 per cent in the worst day on Wall Street since the financial crisis, as a full-blown oil price war rattled financial markets already on edge over the spreading coronavirus. Treasury yields plummeted, crude sank 20 per cent and credit markets buckled.
The S&P 500 sank the most since December 2008 and is now at a nine-month low.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 2,013.45 points, or 7.78 per cent, to 23,851.33, the S&P 500 lost 225.81 points, or 7.60 per cent, to 2,746.56 and the Nasdaq Composite dropped 624.94 points, or 7.29 per cent, to 7,950.68.
Canada’s main stock index closed down more than 10.3 per cent to its lowest level in 14 months as a collapse in oil prices triggers a plunge in the energy sector.
The S&P/TSX composite index lost 1,660.78 points to close at 14,514.24 and the capped energy index was down more than 27 per cent as Cenovus Energy Inc. was down 51.6 per cent.
2:14 p.m. North American stock indices have drifted lower again after managing to claw back some of their losses from early Monday trading.
As of 1:50 p.m. ET, the S&P/TSX Composite Index was down 8.4 per cent, having fallen below 15,000 points once more. In the U.S., the Dow Jones Industrial Average had declined by 7.3 per cent and the S&P 500 Index was off by 7.2 per cent from Friday’s close.
Monday’s stock-market meltdown comes as the new coronavirus continues to spread, raising concerns of upended corporate supply chains and prompting calls for governments to inject some fiscal stimulus into the economy. Another side-effect of the virus has been reducing the anticipated demand for oil, global prices for which are also being walloped by Saudi Arabia’s sudden decision to slash its crude prices.
Although equity markets are still down for the day, their movements looked to have become less herky-jerky. The Chicago Board Options Exchange’s CBOE Volatility Index, after shooting up past 60 Monday morning, settled in to the low-to-mid 50s range in the afternoon.
The sudden drop in the markets to start the trading day triggered circuit breakers in both Canada and the United States, halting trading for a short while. Such was the extent of the turmoil that it was even enough to put some politicians on alert.
“What we saw this morning was the systems that support our capital markets working,” Ontario Finance Minister Rod Phillips said during the daily question period at the provincial legislature. “We continue to monitor this situation closely. COVID-19 is having an impact on the economy and be assured that we are working diligently to be aware of its impacts and to respond to them as required.”
12:06 p.m. Major North American stock indices pared losses somewhat Monday morning trading before stalling in the red amid an equity wipeout that was prompted by the disintegration of oil prices.
In Canada, the S&P/TSX Composite Index plunged from its 16,175.02 close on Friday to as low as 14,563.70 as of around 9:51 a.m. ET Monday morning, a drop of approximately 10 per cent and 1,600 points. The sudden loss among Canadian stocks at the opening bell triggered circuit breakers, briefly halting trading on the TSX.
However, the TSX benchmark climbed back over the 15,000 mark during the remainder of Monday morning, settling at approximately 15,167 as of 11:45 a.m. ET, which was still a 6.2 per cent decline for the day thus far.
Similar paths were traced by indices in the United States, tripping circuit breakers south of the border as well.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average shed almost 2,000 points before 10 a.m. ET, briefly driving the index below the 24,000 mark. The blue-chip stock benchmark was down more than 7.5 per cent before it began rising to around 24,560 as of around noon, a five per cent drop for the day.
Meanwhile, the S&P 500 Index sank from a 2,972.37 close on Friday to as low as approximately 2,757.95 at around 9:50 a.m. ET, triggering its circuit breakers soon after the market opened. As of around noon, the benchmark was back above 2,800 points, but still down almost five per cent for the day.
There had been signs Monday would be a rough day for stocks, namely, Saudi Arabia’s decision to slash oil prices after it and other oil-producing nations failed to secure a deal with Russia for more production cuts. Crude prices collapsed, putting pressure on the share prices of oil and gas producing companies.
“Furthermore, there will be supply disruptions as a result of COVID-19,” wrote Ian de Verteuil, the head of portfolio strategy at CIBC World Markets, in a Sunday report. “These all add up to a very murky outlook for business profitability. Until this clears somewhat, equities will continue to be volatile.”
11:27 a.m. Travel stocks were pummelled again Monday as coronavirus fears gripped North American markets again.
The federal government is now warning Canadians to avoid all cruise travel, after announcing plans to airlift 237 Canadians on board the Grand Princess cruise ship hit by coronavirus off the coast of California.
Cruise company Carnival Corp. fell 15 per cent when markets opened Monday morning, bringing its losses over the past month to almost 50 per cent. Two Princess cruises, a line owned by Carnival, were hit with coronavirus in February, affecting hundreds on board and leaving passengers stranded at sea for days.
Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd., meanwhile, dropped more than 20 per cent, extending its losses to almost 60 per cent since the end of February.
Air Canada shares fell by almost eight per cent to about $30 per share, a far cry from the $47 mark at which they were trading barely a month ago. Both United Airlines and American Airlines also saw their shares drop by roughly five per cent, despite the White House hinting over the weekend that tax relief might be offered to companies in the travel business particularly hard hit by COVID-19.
Expedia Group Inc., one of the biggest online travel booking sites, continued to lose value on the Nasdaq, falling another eight per cent on Monday. The company has lost 30 per cent in market value since mid-February.
11:20 a.m. Shares of Canada’s big banks fell Monday morning as the lenders were caught in the market downturn triggered by the tumble in crude prices.
The S&P/TSX Banks Index opened about nine per cent below where it finished last week, and was 5.9 per cent lower as of around 11 a.m. ET.
Royal Bank of Canada shares were down by almost five per cent, while those of the Toronto-Dominion Bank were down 5.4 per cent. The stock price of the Bank of Nova Scotia was lower by almost 5.7 per cent, the Bank of Montreal’s by almost 7.9 per cent and the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce’s by 7.1 per cent.
The banks were not getting hammered quite to the extent as what befell Canadian oil and gas companies in morning trading, but where the oil crash would affect the lenders is the loans they’ve made to energy firms. Some of those companies now face the prospect of trying to pay off their debts with the price for their key product, oil, now about half of what it was three months ago. Banks may have to set aside more money for the possibility of bad loans.
Eight Capital analyst Steve Theriault noted Monday that Canada’s big banks have cut their direct exposure to the oil and gas sector since peaking in 2015, around the time of another shock to oil prices. That exposure among the Big Five as of the end of January ranged from as low as 1.2 per cent of RBC’s loan book to as high as 2.8 per cent of BMO’s, according to Eight Capital’s figures.
“There is clearly going to be downside at the open as the market prices in the fallout from lower oil and a deteriorating overall credit backdrop,” Theriault wrote.
Saudi Arabia and Russia are arguing over the price and flow of oil. That, and the Fake News, is the reason for the market drop!
11:11 a.m. The VIX index, used by investors as a de-facto fear gauge, increased by more than 40 per cent on Monday to reach a high that had not been seen since the global financial crisis.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange’s CBOE Volatility Index closed at 41.94 points on Friday after Russia halted an OPEC curtailment proposal to address the lesser demand that has been brought on by the coronavirus outbreak. But after a global oil price war broke out over the weekend and markets plunged on Monday morning, the intense injection of volatility saw the index hit as high as 62.12 on Monday.
The last time the VIX index was trading above 62 was on Dec 5, 2008 as U.S. markets were in the midst of the global financial crisis. Only a week later, the U.S. Federal Reserve would lower interest rates to zero.
K.J. Harrison Investors CEO Joel Clark told the Financial Post on Friday that he uses the VIX index, like many investors, as a market guide.
“The VIX is at 45 and any time the VIX is over 31, the market is uninvestible,” Clark said on Friday.
10:38 a.m. Canadian energy stocks got crushed this morning after Saudi Arabia launched a price war Sunday night, following a failure by it and other oil-producing countries to agree on new production cuts.
The S&P/TSX Capped Energy Index, a collection of Canadian energy companies, was down more than 25 per cent as of 10 a.m. ET.
Some individual producers fared much worse. Shares of Calgary-based Cenovus Energy Inc., Vermilion Energy Inc. and Crescent Point Energy Corp. were down by more than 47 per cent, 35 per cent and 33 per cent, respectively, at around the same time. Ovintiv, formely EnCana, was also trading down more than 45 per cent in New York.
The rout looks to have been brought on by the brinksmanship shown last week and over the weekend by Saudi Arabia and Russia, as well as by drop in consumption caused by the coronavirus.
Following a failure by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and Russia to come to terms last week on new cuts to oil production, Saudi Arabia slashed prices for its crude. Benchmarks cratered following the move, with WTI and Brent crude falling into the low-to-mid US$30 range.
“As if the demand shock from the coronavirus was not enough, oil markets are now being battered on the supply side as well,” analysts from TD Securities noted.
Raymond James analysts said in a note Sunday that they were making the “tactical decision” to lower their ratings for “all but a very small handful” of the Canadian oil and gas producers they cover until the situation clears up.
“At this juncture, there remains a considerable amount of uncertainty, not the least of which being the Kingdom’s (Saudi Arabia’s) intended strategy,” the Raymond James analysts wrote. “While share prices of oil & gas producers were already facing generational lows, the potential for a sustained period of sub-US$40/bbl oil is almost certainly to result in a flight to (relative) safety within the sector.”
10:36 a.m. The Canadian dollar fell sharply against the U.S. dollar Monday morning as the markets reacted to the shock in oil prices.
Bipen Rai, North American head of FX for CIBC Capital Markets, said that the currency move was directly tied to crude prices.
“You could pretty much lay it all at the feet of the launch of the price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia on Saturday,” Rai said. “So the shock move lower in crude prices has basically filtered into global markets, and really moved directionality of markets towards a bit of a risk off-tone.”
The Canadian dollar was at 73.72 US cents by mid-morning Monday, down from 74.51 when markets closed Friday. In early January the loonie was at 77.13 U.S. cents.
Rai said that the oil markets are the most direct impact on the Canadian currency, but the moves are also about broader economic concerns tied to the COVID-19 virus and the trade war with China.
“The way to think about it is that both of these are shocks that really highlight the long-term shock, which is the reduction in trade between countries,” Rai said.
10 a.m. U.S. markets were halted almost immediately after trading began on Monday after the S&P 500 and the Dow Jones Industrial Average each swiftly plunged more than seven per cent on the collapse of global oil prices.
Both indices opened a bit more than three per cent down before their losses more than doubled, plateauing beyond the seven per cent level, which is also known as a level one breach, that forces a circuit breaker to halt trading for 15 minutes.
Trading could be halted again if the S&P dips below 13 per cent — or a level two breach — which would result in another 15-minute freeze.
After trading re-opened at 9:49 a.m. EST, the S&P was down more than 200 points while the Dow’s losses eclipsed 1,600 points. As for the S&P/TSX Composite Index, its losses hit nine per cent in early trading and outpaced the U.S. to the downside.
Monday’s sell-off is the latest blow to North American markets in a painful two-week rout that has seen them rapidly descend from all-time highs to well-beyond correction territory. The downward pressure has been led by investors’ fears over the coronavirus outbreak, of which there are now more than 110,000 cases worldwide.
Over the weekend, the outbreak led to global oil prices going into freefall, shedding more than 30 per cent of their value. With demand down in China, the world’s main oil importer, OPEC looked to curtail production on Friday but Russia halted it from doing so. In response, Saudi Arabia announced that it would increasing production while offering massive discounts that immediately drove the price of Brent Crude, Western Canadian Select and the U.S.’ West Texas Intermediate.
