MINNETONKA, Minn.--( BUSINESS WIRE )--UnitedHealth Group (NYSE: UNH) has been named to the Dow Jones Sustainability North America Index (DJSI NA) and the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index (DJSI W) for 2019 in the Health Care Equipment & Services Sector. This marks 21 consecutive years the company has been named to the indices, beginning in 1999 when the rankings were established.
Dow Jones Sustainability Indices track the stock performance of the world's leading companies in terms of economic, environmental and social criteria. They provide stakeholders, including investors, insight into corporate-sustainability practices considered critical for generating long-term societal and shareholder value. Within the Health Care Equipment & Services Sector, UnitedHealth Group ranked in the 100th percentile for such key attributes as human capital development, corporate citizenship and philanthropy, partnerships toward sustainable health care, environmental policy and management systems, and operational eco-efficiency. It is the industry leader overall in the environmental category.
“The 320,000 people of UnitedHealth Group are dedicated to modernizing health care to drive distinctive returns for society — building healthier communities and improving the quality of life for the people we are privileged to serve,” said Cory Alexander, UnitedHealth Group executive vice president of Corporate Affairs. “Our continued inclusion in the Dow Jones Sustainability Indices validates our efforts to build sustainable business practices, as well as a health care system that improves outcomes, lowers costs and creates a better health care experience for everyone.”
To learn more about UnitedHealth Group’s sustainability initiatives, visit https://www.unitedhealthgroup.com/social-responsibility.html .
The Dow Jones Sustainability Indices are maintained by S&P Dow Jones Indices and RobecoSAM, an international investment firm focused exclusively on sustainability investing. RobecoSAM invites more than 3,500 listed companies around the world to report annually on their sustainability practices.
UnitedHealth Group (NYSE: UNH) is a diversified health care company dedicated to helping people live healthier lives and helping to make the health system work better for everyone. UnitedHealth Group offers a broad spectrum of products and services through two distinct platforms: UnitedHealthcare, which provides health care coverage and benefits services; and Optum, which provides information and technology-enabled health services. For more information, visit UnitedHealth Group at https://www.unitedhealthgroup.com/ or follow @UnitedHealthGrp on Twitter.
