WeWork has announced it will list its shares on the Nasdaq index.
The coworking startup, which is battling concerns over its path to profitability and governance, has also revealed new constraints on its cofounder and CEO, Adam Neumann.
The new measures concern issues such as Neumann's control of the company, stock sales, property deals, and family members.
WeWork revealed the changes Friday in an amended regulatory filing.
WeWork has announced it will list its shares on the Nasdaq index, unveiled new measures meant to improve its corporate governance, and revealed fresh limits on its cofounder and CEO, Adam Neumann, "in response to market feedback."
The changes come after concerns about the coworking startup's business model, path to profitability, and governance reportedly led it to slash its targeted public valuation to below $20 billion , less than half the private valuation of $47 billion it secured earlier this year.
WeWork revealed the changes Friday in an amended S-1 filing with the US Securities and Exchange Commission.
The company has committed to appointing a lead independent director by the end of this year and adding another director within the next year. WeWork's board — made up of a majority of independent directors — will choose Neumann's successor as CEO, instead of a succession committee as previously planned.
The filing also addresses concerns about Neumann's control of WeWork, recent stock sales, and his family's involvement in the company:
Neumann controls the lion's share of WeWork voting rights, raised $700 million by selling and borrowing against his company's stock, and even charged the company nearly $6 million for the "We" trademark.
He partly or fully owns property companies that lease four properties to WeWork, raising a potential conflict of interest as he's both the landlord and the tenant. He makes millions through this arrangement, according to The Wall Street Journal .
WeWork paid one of Neumann's immediate family members to host eight company-related events last year, and it employs another as its head of wellness.
His cofounder and wife, Rebekah, serves as chief brand and impact officer, and she was previously a member of the succession committee.
In the amended filing, WeWork slashes the voting rights attached to Neumann's "high-vote stock," making it worth 10 votes a share instead of 20 and falling to one vote a share if he becomes permanently incapacitated or dies.
Neumann has agreed to limit the amount of stock he can sell in the second and third year after the IPO to no more than 10% of his shareholdings. He will also pay back any profits he makes from his real-estate transactions with the company.
WeWork has also pledged that none of Neumann's family members will sit on its board.
