What Is a Stock Market Index?
Learn how you can track the overall performance of a group of stocks over time.
Dan Caplinger has been a contract writer for the Motley Fool since 2006. As the Fool's Director of Investment Planning, Dan oversees much of the personal-finance and investment-planning content published daily on Fool.com. With a background as an estate-planning attorney and independent financial consultant, Dan's articles are based on more than 20 years of experience from all angles of the financial world. Follow @DanCaplinger
A stock market index is a measure of a stock market, or a smaller subset of the market, that helps investors compare current price levels with past prices to calculate market performance. Investors use the calculated values of stock market indexes as an indicator of the current value of their component stocks, and they can determine returns over time by comparing current and past index levels.
Stock market indexes come in many different sizes. Some indexes have only a handful of stocks that determine their value, while others take thousands of stocks into account. You can't invest directly in a stock market index, but by investing in index funds that allow investors to track the performance of those indexes, you can make money and profit when those indexes go up . These index funds can be structured as mutual funds or exchange-traded funds (ETFs).
Why should I follow stock market indexes?
Stock market indexes can be useful to follow for a few key reasons:
Tracking the most-followed stock market indexes can give you a general sense of the health of the overall stock market.
Tracking lesser-known indexes can help you see how a particular segment of the market is performing compared to the market as a whole.
If you don't want to invest in individual stocks but rather simply want to match the performance of the overall market, then a cost-effective way to earn solid returns over time is by investing in index funds that track the stock market indexes you're most interested in.
Stock market indexes make it easier to know how the market is performing without having to follow the ups and downs of every individual stock. They also open up simple investment opportunities that even novice investors can use to participate in the long-term success of the stock market.
How should I read a stock market index?
Reading an index correctly requires that you look at how the index value changes over time. New stock market indexes always begin with a certain fixed value based on the stock prices on its starting date. Thereafter, future index values measure rising and falling prices for those component stocks.
Not all stock market indexes use the same starting value, however, so just measuring index changes by using points can be misleading. For instance, if one index rises 250 points in a day while another rises just 10 points, it might seem as though the first index performed far better. However, if the first index started the day at 25,000 while the second index was at 250, then you can see that in percentage terms, the gains for the second index were far greater. A higher percentage gain means a bigger profit for you if you invest in funds that track the index, so it's better to focus on percentages than on point movements.
Moreover, even the most popular stock market indexes don't generally measure the performance of the entire market. Knowing which stocks are in an index can tell you which parts of the stock market are contributing to that index's performance and can explain why other indexes might not be performing the same way.
What are the major stock market indexes?
Most investors track the performance of three key stock market indexes:
The Dow Jones Industrial Average ( DJINDICES:^DJI ) is the oldest stock market index in the U.S., dating back to the 19th century. It tracks 30 stocks that encompass a wide array of different market sectors, excluding only transportation and utility companies. The manager of the Dow tends to keep its 30 component stocks unchanged for years at a time, replacing companies only when necessary to keep up the index's reputation of including only stocks of top-quality companies.
The S&P 500 ( SNPINDEX:^SPX ) is a broader index that includes about 500 large-company stocks. Its component stocks get replaced much more frequently, as the index attempts to include a representative mix of companies that reflect the overall U.S. economy.
The Nasdaq Composite ( NASDAQINDEX:^COMP ) is an index of stocks that trade on the Nasdaq Stock Market. Investors often use the Nasdaq as a gauge of the performance of the technology sector, because many of the largest and most influential components of the Nasdaq are tech stocks.
Beyond these well-known indexes, however, there are hundreds more stock market indexes. You can find indexes that reflect the performance of stocks in a certain country or that do business in a given sector of the economy. Some indexes separate large, mid-sized, and small companies into different categories. Others use investing strategies like growth, value, or dividend investing to select component stocks. Pretty much any type of stock you might be interested in, there's an index for that. The rise of index mutual funds and ETFs has led to a proliferation of indexes to help fund managers use passive investing strategies to minimize costs and let investors tailor their portfolio exposure as precisely as they like.
Each component stock in an index has a weighting assigned to it. Stocks with higher weightings have more influence on the index's movements than those with lower weightings, and there are three different ways that indexes typically assign weightings to their stocks:
Price-weighted indexes give more weight to companies with higher stock prices. For example, in a hypothetical index made up of three stocks with share prices of $70, $20, and $10, the $70 stock would make up 70% of the total index, regardless of the relative size of the company. The Dow Jones Industrials is the most important example of a price-weighted index.
Market-capitalization-weighted indexes give more weight to companies with higher market capitalizations. Both the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite are market-cap weighted, and large companies like Apple and Microsoft have much greater weightings than the smaller companies that make up the indexes.
Equal-weight indexes simply assign the same weighting to each stock, regardless of price, market capitalization, or any other factor.
There are some other stock market indexes that use proprietary methods to come up with weightings. For example, some indexes assign weightings based on the dividends that a stock pays out. For the most part, though, market-cap-weighted indexes are most prevalent, as they're often the easiest for index funds to track.
