As he talked, I realized that I — and millions of other people — are implicitly endorsing this view. We have been buying stocks and bonds in mutual funds through workplace retirement accounts, even though falling prices mean we have been losing a lot of money lately.
That’s painful, whenever I think about it, so I try not to focus on the losses. If I need that money to live on before prices rebound — as I expect they eventually will — I’ll regret those losses. But I’m betting that won’t happen.
In fact, Mr. Romick’s comments reminded me that there is a positive side to falling prices for people who continue to be regular buyers. By investing regularly with every paycheck, I’m getting better prices now than I did a couple of months ago. What’s more, the average price I’m paying for long-held mutual funds is dropping. (That’s what the asset management trade calls “dollar cost averaging.”)
Assuming I can hang in long enough for the markets to recover, as I did during the last financial crisis more than a decade ago, my long-term returns will be better because of these lower-priced purchases.
But don’t get me wrong. Buying now is not a prudent short-term bet. And Mr. Romick emphasized that it would be foolish to buy in this market with the expectation of making a quick profit. To the contrary, he said, he has no idea where the stock market is heading over, say, the next three months, except: “I expect that there will be a lot more pain, unfortunately.”
With that in mind, Mr. Romick suggested a thought exercise. Imagine that the stock market, with all its lurches and false signals, won’t even exist for those three months. “The question then is: When the market comes back three months from now, what should I have in my portfolio that I’ll want there for the next five to seven years?” he said “We’re making investments with that kind of horizon in mind.”
With its long view, the FPA Crescent fund has become more bullish now that we’re in a bear market, the fund’s data suggests. Its net allocation to stock on Feb. 19 — the peak for the S&P 500 — was 57 percent. By March 13, it had risen to 67 percent. In that same stretch, the S&P 500 declined 20 percent, according to FactSet. In other words, the overall market represented by that index became 20 percent cheaper. (The bad news, or the good, depending on whether you are buying or selling, is that it has become cheaper still.)
Unlike index fund investors — and I am one — Mr. Romick isn’t putting money into the entire stock market. Instead, he buys individual stocks. Citing regulatory constraints, he would not disclose his most recent purchases. But he cited Alphabet, the parent of Google, and the American International Group as longtime portfolio holdings that are even more appealing now that they’re being pounded.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
Google relies on advertising for the bulk of its revenue, worrying some investors in this environment, and A.I.G., a global insurance group that was bailed out in the last financial crisis, will face insurance losses connected to the coronavirus, Mr. Romick said. He is confident that both stocks will continue to be profitable for his fund, however, even if their prices fall further in the next few months.
Still, he’s not recommending that ordinary people jump into stocks in a big way right now.
Others are even more emphatic. For example, Richard Bernstein , a former Merrill Lynch strategist who now runs his own firm, said he thought investors were still barely coming to grips with the reality of a bear market. That’s not surprising, he said, because a falling market typically has three important phases.
In the first phase, he said, people tend to say things like: “The worst is over. There are bargains out there. I’ve got to jump in.” The second is: “No, this is worse than anybody ever imagined.” Right now, he said, people are probably teetering between these two attitudes.
The last phase is: “This will never end. It’s hopeless.” That’s when you want to be fully invested in stocks, Mr. Bernstein said, and when there are easy profits. It happened in March 2009, when the market began to take off, yet few people believed it.
James W. Paulsen , chief investment strategist of the Leuthold Group in Minneapolis, put it this way: He’s not confident about where the market will be in three months, is a bit more comfortable with a six-month horizon and is “very confident about a year from now.”
With the caveat that the coronavirus adds a dimension of uncertainty that he can’t really assess, he said, “I think it’s highly likely that in one year, the stock market will be higher than it is today.”
I’m not that confident. Still, I fully expect the market will be higher at some point. And so I expect to keep buying.
