The CEFC was established under the Gillard government in 2012 to spur investment in the sector while it introduced a carbon pricing scheme. Touting Australia's clean-energy credentials to Pacific leaders, Prime Minister Scott Morrison last week called it "the world's most successful green bank".
But private funds are exploring the potential to take over the $6.6 billion the CEFC has invested through loans across the country. Emma Herd, the head of the Investor Group on Climate Change - which represents investors with more than $2 trillion in funds under management - told The Sydney Morning Herald and The Age that "everyone is keeping that option open".
Asked if a sale was possible, Mr Learmonth said the CEFC was increasingly positioning itself "to the next frontier of investment" and also "making sure that we are not out crowding out banks".
Ian Learmonth, CEO of Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
"It is completely up to the government whether they want to sell us or not, but it's probably well documented that the government sees us as a critical lever in helping with this transition," he said.
"We have now for some time been thinking about where do we start to reposition ourselves and that is increasingly around the stability and reliability of the grid and storage.
Mr Learmonth said as the utility solar and wind-power renewables market had matured, more private capital had flowed in. The CEFC earned $320 million last year from maturing loans, which have been written on a commercial basis allowing for a transfer to private entities if required.
The fund has been criticised by some fund managers for competing with the private sector in some more conventional investments, driving up costs for investors and taxpayers.
Mr Learmonth said fixing the grid, which has been criticised for failing to handle renewable energy transmission following a 2016 state-wide black-out in South Australia, was "not straightforward" due to myriad private networks and regulations.
Planum Partners director Sang Shin said there would be "natural buyers" for assets in the fund if the government decided to put part or all of it up for sale.
"If there is no longer a requirement for CEFC to provide publicly funded support to the private sector it is because the private sector is self-functioning," he said.
The UK's Green Bank was bought for £2.3 billion [$3.9 billion] in 2017 by Australian financial services firm Macquarie.
Ms Herd said as some earlier investments come to maturity then they are likely to be rolled off.
"It is really hard to find the right deals that have the right risk return profile and when they do appear they are very hard fought over," she said. "They are very competitive because everyone wants to do more low carbon investment."
The Macarthur Wind Farm in Victoria drew the attention of parts of the private sector.
Herbert Smith Freehills partner Gerard Pike, who has acted on behalf of the CEFC, said equity deals had drawn the attention of parts of the private sector.
"That was when people in the market realised that they were a competitor to commercial banks in the market," he said.
But he said despite competing with the private sector, other uncertainties had made the CEFC's involvement worthwhile as government energy policy paralysis crimped long-term investment.
"I think history will tell that it has been a positive," he said. "If we look back in 10 years' time, a return will be generated for the taxpayer."
Mr Learmonth said the fund was also looking increasingly towards smaller scale investments like rooftop solar and energy efficient lighting in residential and office developments.
The fund invested $60 million in a Cromwell-Aspire seniors village in Canberra in July to build high-efficiency lighting, heating, ventilation and solar. It follows another $150 million invested in property giants Mirvac and Lendlease for developments in Melbourne and Sydney.
"When you are looking to decarbonise the economy, it's important to look at different areas like the property sector," Mr Learmonth said.
