When it comes to energy stocks, "safety" is in the eye of the beholder.
The world faces a massive supply glut as the coronavirus pandemic has simply removed much of the world's demand for oil. Energy has become so depressed that, a few weeks ago, the unthinkable happened: crude futures went negative. This means producers were paying contract holders to take crude off their hands.
The energy market has normalized since then, and oil has moved higher, but we're still looking at low average prices not seen since the Clinton administration. Prices are still well below breakeven costs for most energy stocks, even some of oil's elder statesmen. Dividends have been cut or suspended. Some - including Whiting Petroleum ( WLL ) and Diamond Offshore ( DOFSQ ) - have filed for bankruptcy, and other oil and gas stocks could face the same fate .
Thus, few energy investments feel "safe" right now. But as is the case after every oil crash, some energy stocks will survive. And of that group, some represent considerable bargains. They might not look pretty at the moment; a few have had to cut back on capital projects, even buybacks and dividends. But these moves have made them likelier to survive this downturn and come back swinging on an upturn in oil prices.
Here are seven of the best energy stocks to speculate on as oil tries to claw its way back. It could be a bumpy ride - every one of them could experience more volatility if oil prices swing wildly again. But thanks to smart fiscal management so far in this crisis, they might pan out well for adventurous investors.
Historically, pipeline and other energy infrastructure companies - often structured as master limited partnerships (MLPs) - were billed as "toll road operators" for the energy sector. Crude, regardless of price, needs to be stored and shipped, and these infrastructure players do just that, collecting fees along the way. There was little commodity price risk because they were paid on volume.
In an effort to boost profits, many MLPs and other pipeline plays moved into processing and other tangential businesses. This exposed them to directly to the price of crude, which intensified their pain in the current downturn.
Magellan Midstream Partners, LP ( MMP , $42.72), however, has largely stuck to its guns. It continues to operate one of the largest networks of pipelines moving crude oil and refined products around the country, with some storage assets as well. In other words, Magellan mostly just moves crude and refined products from Point A to Point B.
In May, the company reported a 38% year-over-year jump in first-quarter net income despite oil's crash during the first three months of the year. Distributable cash flow (DCF) - a non-GAAP (generally accepted accounting principles) measure of profitability that represents cash that can be used to pay distributions - declined, but only by 3.6%.
Better still, Magellan says distribution coverage is expected to be 1.1 to 1.15 times what the company needs to pay shareholders for the rest of the year, despite the weakness in energy prices. This, a month after the company extended its streak of quarterly distribution increases that stretches back to 2010.
In the end, Magellan is as classic a toll-taking pipeline play as they come. Thanks to that, the MLP should be among the best energy stocks to ride out oil's current malaise.
* Distributions are similar to dividends, but are treated as tax-deferred returns of capital and require different paperwork come tax time.
