Oil stocks, natural gas producers and other commodity-based firms stand apart from one another based on factors such as where they're located and how efficient their operations are.
Oil stocks, natural gas producers and other commodity-based firms stand apart from one another based on factors such as where they're located and how efficient their operations are. But much of their success boils down to this simple idea: The higher the price of the commodity, the bigger the profits.
Unfortunately, the inverse is also true, which is why many energy stocks are getting pummeled right now.
Oil prices were already struggling with the fallout from the U.S.-China trade war and its effect on the global economy. But the coronavirus' economic ripple effect across the world – combined with Saudi Arabia's volley against other oil producers – has sent West Texas Intermediate (U.S. crude) oil prices to around $20 per barrel. Those are lows not seen since February 2002.
The specific issue: Oil prices (and natural gas, for that matter) are well below the cost of production for even some of the leanest companies out there. Thus, many energy producers are losing money simply by virtue of operating their businesses. Mounting losses, rising debts, cut dividends and even bankruptcies are all on the table.
Here are seven oil stocks and natural gas producers that are in considerable danger at the moment. While it's understandable that investors might want to seek out values in the beat-up energy sector, these are seven stocks to avoid.
Data is as of March 29. Dividend yields are calculated by annualizing the most recent payout and dividing by the share price.
Chesapeake Energy ( CHK , $0.17) has long been the poster child for energy excess and heartbreak long before the coronavirus came into play.
Chesapeake Energy, which was founded in 1989, was one of the first natural gas and oil stocks to dive into fracking shale with gusto. To do that, CHK took out a staggering amount of debt to buy acreage, accumulate equipment and keep the oil and natural gas pumping. That was fine as long as both commodities enjoyed high and rising prices, but the 2014-16 bear market in energy prices forced Chesapeake to re-evaluate its model. Chesapeake sold assets, paid off some debt, invested in technology and focused on higher-quality/lower-production-price shale regions.
It helped, but now, all that still might not be enough.
After reporting a small net profit in 2018, Chesapeake fell into the red in 2019. That was with an average price of $56.98 per barrel for WTI, and natural gas prices averaging $2.57 per million Btu (MMBtu). With oil recently below $20 per barrel and natural gas recently below $1.80 per MMBtu, and still no light at the end of the tunnel, CHK could face some ugly results for Q1 2020, and possibly for another few quarters.
The company's $9.5 billion in total debt is problematic, too. In late February, some of Chesapeake's second-lien bonds due in 2025 had declined to 66 cents on the dollar – a worrisome sign of investors' confidence in CHK's ability to pay its debts.
Chesapeake was an S&P 500 component as recently as two years ago. It has since dropped into the S&P MidCap 400, which jettisoned the company in February. Now, CHK is a penny stock with a poor outlook as long as oil and gas prices remain in the cellar.
More than a decade ago, when oil prices were in the realm of $150-$160 per barrel, energy firms were willing to pay north of $600,000 per day to rent the most state-of-the-art deep-water drilling rigs. This was manna from heaven for Transocean, ( RIG , $1.17), whose portfolio featured some of the most advanced rigs on the planet, capable of digging deep to find large pockets of crude in the oceans.
But at $20 per barrel, it simply doesn't make sense to give Transocean a call.
For the three months ended Dec. 31, 2019, the company brought in $792 million in revenues – better than the $748 million in sales it registered in the year-ago quarter, but a far cry from the $3 billion-plus quarterly revenues it earned during "peak oil." Utilization rates did rise a bit, but the total number of rigs in Transocean's fleet continues to drop. Several of its deepwater-drilling rigs are sitting idle; if oil prices remain depressed, it's unlikely these rigs will be utilized anytime soon.
Debt, which as you'll see, is problematic for a number of oil stocks, is a real concern at Transocean. It has $8.7 billion in long-term IOUs, with $4.3 billion of that set to mature by 2024. It needs every rig in its fleet working and churning out as much cash as possible to pay that off. Credit agency Moody's isn't optimistic about RIG's prospects, however, downgrading its "corporate family rating" on March 23 from an already-junk B3 to Caa1, one level down. Moreover, it increased Transocean's default potential and issued a "negative outlook" on its debt.
"The commodity price collapse in the first quarter of 2020 poses a substantial challenge for the company to improve its cash flow outlook, as near-term improvement of offshore fundamentals is unlikely," writes Moody's senior analyst Sreedhar Kona . "Transocean's very high financial leverage could worsen making its capital structure untenable."
Pittsburgh-based natural gas firm CNX Resources formerly operated as Consol Energy before spinning off its coal business in November 2017. That coal business retained the Consol Energy ( CEIX ) name, while the natural gas business was renamed CNX. Why were the two companies broken apart? Cheap and abundant natural gas, as well as a focus on lower carbon emissions, has basically driven coal to the brink of extinction. The split was meant to unlock value in the natural gas side of the business.
However, CNX has spent most of its time post-spinoff trending lower, and it has been particularly hard-hit of late as natural gas prices have sunk into the ground.
CNX already lowered its full-year 2020 estimates for natural gas prices in the company's fourth-quarter earnings report, from $2.40 per MMBtu to $2.27. At that number, it expected organic free cash flow to hit $200 million, but natural gas has plumbed far lower levels since then. Meanwhile, CNX's "fully burdened" cash costs of production had jumped nearly 11% year-over-year.
If there's any good news, it's that CNX's total debt of $2.9 billion is far less than the oil and gas stocks we've discussed so far. But while CNX might not be headed toward bankruptcy, it appears extremely risky given the current cost of natural gas and no discernable end in sight to the commodity's weakness.
Many oil and gas stocks are known for its big personalities, and Harold Hamm has to rank right up there. Under his leadership, Hamm managed to guide Continental Resources ( CLR , $8.52) into the Bakken shale long before anyone else, giving it plenty of prime acreage in the low-cost region.
But even the low-cost Bakken is too costly for Continental given current energy prices.
In mid-March, CLR announced a 55% decrease in its capital expenditures budget for the rest of the year. The oil and gas producer originally planned to spend $2.65 billion to fund its drilling program, but that has been hacked down to $1.2 billion. Average rig count in the Bakken will slump from nine to just three. Overall production is expected to decline 5% year-over-year.
Most importantly, however, is that Continental said in the same release that the company expects to be cash flow-neutral with oil under $30 per barrel.
Two problems: 1.) Continental stands to be in worse shape with oil now closer to $20 per barrel. 2.) CLR shareholders have been getting used to excess cash flows. With oil in the $50s, the low-cost Bakken producer was generating a decent amount of cash – cash that was used to reduce debt, buy back stock and even initiate a dividend in 2019.
But being cash flow-neutral (and having just $39.4 million in the bank) means that Continental likely will have to raise cash from asset sales or debt if it wants to keep those dividends and buybacks flowing. Considering CLR already has $5.3 billion in debt – including about $1.1 billion in senior notes due in 2022 – it's clear the company is between a rock and a hard place.
Continental doesn't seem likely to go away outright unless oil prices drop precipitously more from here. But any further weakness in oil is likely to weigh on CLR's stock. Shareholders also shouldn't ignore the possibility of reductions to the dividend and/or buybacks, at least temporarily.
