By American Electric Power;Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners;
By American Electric Power;Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners;
COLUMBUS, Ohio, July 1, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- American Electric Power's (NYSE: AEP) AEP Energy subsidiary has signed a long-term power purchase agreement with an affiliate of Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners (CIP) for the output of 400 megawatt (MW) of renewable energy from Panther Grove Wind Energy Facility in Woodford County, Illinois.
Construction of Panther Grove is scheduled to begin in early 2021, with commercial operation expected in late 2022.
AEP Energy will use the power from Panther Grove to serve customers, such as Google, who want clean energy for their retail supply. The Panther Grove project will contribute renewable power for Google's New Albany, Ohio, data center, which AEP Energy will supply and match their load on an annual basis with 100% renewable energy from new resources.
"AEP Energy is focused on providing customers with integrated, carbon-free energy supplies that deliver long-term price stability and environmental benefits. Agreements like the one with CIP demonstrate the innovative energy solutions we can put in place to help our customers power their homes and businesses with clean, reliable energy," said Greg Hall, president, AEP Energy.
AEP Energy, a subsidiary of American Electric Power (NYSE: AEP), is a certified competitive retail electricity and natural gas supply provider operating in 28 service territories in six states and Washington, D.C. AEP Energy supplies electricity and natural gas solutions for over 500,000 residential and business customers and takes pride in making it easy for customers to buy, manage and use energy. Based in Columbus, Ohio and Chicago, Illinois, AEP Energy is committed to excellence by delivering value, innovative energy solutions and excellent customer service.
American Electric Power, based in Columbus, Ohio, is focused on building a smarter energy infrastructure and delivering new technologies and custom energy solutions to our customers. AEP's approximately 17,400 employees operate and maintain the nation's largest electricity transmission system and more than 221,000 miles of distribution lines to efficiently deliver safe, reliable power to nearly 5.5 million regulated customers in 11 states. AEP also is one of the nation's largest electricity producers with approximately 31,000 megawatts of diverse generating capacity, including more than 5,200 megawatts of renewable generation. AEP's family of companies includes utilities AEP Ohio, AEP Texas, Appalachian Power (in Virginia and West Virginia), AEP Appalachian Power (in Tennessee), Indiana Michigan Power, Kentucky Power, Public Service Company of Oklahoma, and Southwestern Electric Power Company (in Arkansas, Louisiana and east Texas). AEP also owns AEP Energy, AEP Energy Partners, AEP OnSite Partners, and AEP Renewables, which provide innovative competitive energy solutions nationwide.
