This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Alternative Energy Stocks Have Taken a Beating. Why They Are Still Buys for the Longterm.
Updated March 16, 2020 4:22 pm ET / Original March 16, 2020 1:50 pm ET
The decline in oil prices reduces the attractiveness of alternative energy investments in the short term, observers say. But don’t overlook these stocks for the longterm.
Crude prices dropped below $30 for the first time in four years on Monday as the scale of the global economic meltdown became clear in the fallout from the coronavirus and a price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia.
Some alternative energy stocks have taken a beating. In late February, SolarEdge Technologies (SEDG) was at $143. Recently it fetched $78. Similarly, Vestas Wind Systems (VWS.Denmark), the world’s largest wind turbine manufacturer, was at 734 Danish kroner ($110). Today it’s at 522 kroner.
These are big companies, not fringe players. Likewise, clean energy plays collapsed. Hannon Armstrong Sustainable Infrastructure Capital , (HASI), a REIT that finances alternative energy projects like residential solar, is down sharply to $20 from its 52-week high of $39.91.
“I can’t think of a single direct connection between the assets we own in our portfolio and the price of oil whether it’s $10 a barrel or $100 a barrel,” Jeff Eckel, Hannon CEO, told Barron’s in an interview. Most electricity isn’t generated by oil.
Meanwhile, the selloff in oil should buttress the price of natural gas, Eckel pointed out. “If the price of oil is lower, there will be less drilling. If less drilling, less associated gas that comes up, which means higher natural gas prices.”
The short-term outlook isn’t very positive. According to BloombergNEF, an energy research service, new solar generating capacity could fall this year. Wind installations are also at risk. The researchers also said that policymakers “distracted” by coronavirus could slow efforts on renewable and battery policies. Electric vehicle sales will slow but fare better than internal combustion engines.
“It’s unlikely [the oil price] will be at $30 for the next three years,” says Lucas White, manager of both the GMO Resources Fund (GOFIX) and GMO Climate Change Fund (GCCHX). “It could last for a year, for sure. At some point it will mean revert to something more reasonable.”
“When you’re investing in clean energy solutions that compete with fossil fuels, you get indirect exposure to fossil fuel prices,” White added. “This is short-term noise that’s very common in commodity markets.” Even if oil prices remained at current levels “for the next 10 years, [it] doesn’t change the long-term story in any way” of the attractiveness of alternative energy investments.
White’s natural resources fund has just 25% in fossil fuels compared to 65% in its benchmark, the MSCI ACWI Commodity Producers Index. Its largest fossil fuel holdings are Lukoil (LKOH.Russia) and Novatek (NVTK.Russia), both Russian producers. “Russian oil companies are very cheap and significantly more stable” with production costs of $15 to $20 per barrel, significantly lower than spot crude, says White.
Meanwhile GMO’s Climate Change Fund focuses on companies benefiting from efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change—wind, solar, geothermal, clean power generation, biofuels, batteries and storage. It has merely paced the MSCI ACWI index over that time, partly because it has focused on smaller value plays.
White points out that the strategy has outperformed everything except large cap U.S. equities. White has invested in copper, which is used heavily in electric vehicles (he likes Norilsk Nickel (GMKN.Russia), as well as fertilizer companies like Mosaic (MOS), a phosphate and potash producer, on the theory that it will help boost agricultural productivity which is being hurt by climate change.
In a statement, Francesco La Camera, director general of the International Renewable Energy Agency, said the long-term thesis for renewables remains intact.
Renewables are the dominant source of new power generation capacity, because costs are competitive with coal. Oil price volatility could undermine the viability of unconventional oil and gas resources like fracking, La Camera pointed out. That could “provide a window of opportunity” to redirect fossil fuel subsidies towards clean energy.
Coincident with the oil price crash of 2014, La Camera observed, investment in renewables surged in 2014 and 2015. “What is critical to understand is that the long-term planning horizons involved, and the momentum that currently exists in the energy transformation, means neither low oil prices nor COVID-19 will interrupt or change our path towards decarbonisation of our societies,” he said.
In the last financial crisis, for economic stimulus, countries turned to shovel-ready infrastructure that included building more coal or fossil fuel plants, according to Helen Mountford of the World Resources Institute.
That could change. For example, under the Sustainable Europe Investment Plan, the European Union plans to spend €503 billion ($559 billion) as part of a total €1 trillion plan to reduce greenhouse gases by phasing out coal and boosting renewables.
“It’s not like climate change is going away,” says Eckel of Hannon Armstrong. “Sustainable investments are going to make better money in a world defined by climate change.”
Eckel noted that Hannon is raising its quarterly dividend to 34 cents a share next month. That would put its annual dividend yield at 6.6%. And while many retirees like oil companies for their high yields, they’re beginning to cut their dividends .
An income-focused investor who wants to decarbonize their portfolio has options, says White of GMO, including European and U.S. electric utilities with a high portion of renewables in their generation mix or are upgrading aging grids and yieldcos that generate electricity mostly via wind and solar plants. Some favorites include Endesa (ELE.Spain), yielding 7.3%; Red Electrica (REE.Spain), yielding 6.9%, and Drax Group (DRX:U.K.), yielding 6.9%.
Hannon Armstrong Sustainable Infrastructure Capital’s 52-week high was $39.91. An earlier version of this article gave an incorrect price.
Alternative Energy Stocks Have Taken a Beating. Why They Are Still Buys for the Longterm.
The decline in oil prices reduces the attractiveness of alternative energy investments in the short term, observers say.
