An Electric Pickup Truck Brings New Energy To Lordstown, Ohio
Dan Tasiemski, director of general assembly at the Lordstown Motors assembly plant in Ohio, works to revive a robot on the assembly floor of the factory. Carter Eugene Adams for NPR hide caption
When the General Motors plant in Lordstown, Ohio, went dark last year, it was a familiar story for the region. Yet another manufacturing powerhouse — a pillar of the local economy and a rare source of good jobs — was shutting down.
But the closure of the plant was not the end of the story. The factory was sold to Lordstown Motors, a startup building an electric pickup truck that's scheduled to be unveiled on Thursday.
A poster for Endurance is seen in the office of Lordstown Motors CEO Steve Burns. Carter Eugene Adams for NPR hide caption
A poster for Endurance is seen in the office of Lordstown Motors CEO Steve Burns.
Steve Burns, the CEO of Lordstown Motors, says the company has ambitious plans to eventually hire thousands of people back to the plant. But one of the selling points of electric vehicles — their simplicity — also means they require fewer human hands to assemble them.
In its heyday, the General Motors plant in Lordstown bustled with more than 10,000 workers. The vast parking lots were full.
Youngstown native Frances Turnage worked at the plant for more than three decades starting in 1972, doing everything from assembly to welding. She says the work was difficult, but the pay and benefits for a unionized auto worker far surpassed the other jobs in the region.
Over the decades, she saw the plant transform.
"I looked around one day and I saw a lot of the jobs were empty and were replaced with robots," she says. "It got lonely. I actually would go in and make fun ... talking to the robots, you know, because that was all I had to talk to sometimes."
She retired well before GM shuttered the plant, but still wept at the decision. "That was just another blow," she said, to a region that had already lost so many jobs.
She's followed the news about Lordstown's plans for the facility. Like many in the community, she's wishing for the best.
"Oh, I hope it works," she says. "I pray it does work."
Rows of tools and cabinets sit, unused, on the assembly line of the former GM Lordstown assembly plant. Carter Eugene Adams for NPR hide caption
Inside the plant, teams have been working for months to convert assembly lines designed for the Chevy Cruze — a sedan with a gasoline-powered engine — so they can build a pickup truck powered by batteries instead.
Pickup trucks are popular and profitable, and multiple automakers are racing to bring electric versions to market within the next year or so. Tesla, which drove the industrywide shift toward electrification, has the Cybertruck . Ford is electrifying the F-150, and GM's new Hummer is an electric pickup. Then there are the startups: Nikola, Rivian and Bollinger, as well as Lordstown Motors.
