Applications are now being accepted for the 2020-21 cohort of the Financing and Deploying Clean Energy Certificate Program, a yearlong online course created by the Yale Center for Business and the Environment (CBEY).
The program is designed for working professionals in finance, energy, policy, research, advocacy, and other areas who seek to contribute to the transition to a low-carbon economy. It includes a self-paced  foundational course on energy and finance concepts, a weeklong residency at Yale, and four eight-week online core courses on clean energy policy, technology, renewable energy project finance, and innovation.
“We are bringing Yale to professionals who don’t traditionally have access to it, and whose work could jumpstart climate mitigation efforts,” says Vero Bourg-Meyer, program director for clean energy and conservation finance at CBEY. “This includes environmental advocates who see the value of new financial models, bankers who are curious about clean energy, and engineers who would benefit from understanding how policy is made.”
The lead faculty member for the program is Daniel Gross ’98, a private equity investor and a lecturer at the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies, in collaboration with Dan Esty, the Hillhouse Professor of Environmental Law & Policy; Michael Oristaglio, senior research scholar in geology and geophysics; and Richard Kauffman ’83, chair of the board of the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority and a lecturer at the Yale School of Management.
Todd Parker, director of programs for the green bank Michigan Saves, is part of the 2019-2020 cohort. He says that he learns from his peers as well as the program faculty:
“I love the diversity of backgrounds. It’s nice to be in a room that is not just all financing people. You have your engineers, you have your funders, you have your policy folks, your state regulators. I think that brings in the best perspectives. You get the perspective of both the finance and the social side or the state regulators side, and it adds a lot of value and a lot of depth to our conversations. You can see it when you read people’s responses on the platform, particularly in the policy course; it really adds to and expands learning.”
Applications are accepted online through March 1, 2020. Learn more and apply .
