The Australian share market has retreated from early gains to close lower, dragged down by banks and health care stocks, while mining and energy stocks have risen following a rebound in oil prices.
The Australian share market ended in the red, while mining and energy stocks rose
The major US share indices rose between 2-2.8 per cent overnight, led by the Nasdaq
Brent crude oil prices jumped 8.5 per cent, but are only just back above $US20 a barrel
The benchmark ASX 200 index ended the session 0.1 per cent weaker at 5,217 points, while the All Ordinaries shed just one point.
The major bank stocks finished in the red by off their lows, while AMP shares had lost 0.7 per cent after assets under management in its Australian wealth business fell to $116.3 billion in the first quarter, down from $134.5 billion at the end of December.
Shares in Ramsay Health Care fell 5.9 per cent after returning to trade following a $1.2 billion share sale to big investors to boost its war chest in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Energy stocks made gains after an overnight rise in oil prices, coming off their record lows — shares in Santos (+6.8 per cent), Oil Search (+3.7 per cent) and Beach Energy (+5.7 per cent) all closed higher.
The rise in Santos shares comes despite the company reporting a 13 per cent drop in revenue for the first quarter of the financial year because of lower prices.
However, it said 70 per cent of its forecast production volumes are fixed price domestic gas contracts, so it won't be hit too hard as the oil price slump flows through to gas prices.
Mining stocks were among the best performers on the market, including gold miners Silverlake Resources (+7.1 per cent), Resolute Mining (+6.6 per cent) and Regis Resources (+7.8 per cent).
Shares in rare earths miner Lynas rose 16.9 per cent after it got funding from the US Department of Defence for a heavy rare earths separation facility in Texas.
The US military put out a tender for the factory in order to secure domestic supply after last year's trade war raised concerns that China may restrict output of rare earths, which are used for a wide range of industrial uses such as mobile phone components, magnets, aircraft engines and computer drives.
More money from Congress, a rise in oil prices from record lows and more optimistic corporate outlooks saw US stocks gain for the first time in three days.
The US Senate approved a bill unlocking nearly half-a-trillion US dollars in new assistance for small businesses to help them cope with the coronavirus fallout.
That is on top of trillions of dollars of stimulus already passed by Congress.
A week after major US banks issued dismal forecasts for 2020, consumer stocks and technology firms fared slightly better thanks to home delivery and online streaming.
The Dow Jones index put on 2 per cent, or 457 points, to 23,476.
The S&P 500 rose 63 points, or 2.3 per cent, to 3,799 and the tech index, the Nasdaq Composite, gained 2.8 per cent to 8,495.
US President Donald Trump praised steps by a handful of Republican-led states to reopen their economies, but New York's governor and the boss of Coca-Cola warned against it.
Both Texas and Georgia plan to reopen their economies, with Georgia allowing firms such as hair salons and massage parlours to restart business as early as next week.
European stocks closed higher on the partial recovery in oil prices and hopes of more stimulus.
The FTSE 100 index in London added 2.3 per cent to close at 5,771. The Euro STOXX 600 index rose 1.8 per cent after falling more than t3 per cent on Tuesday because of the collapse in oil prices.
UK inflation fell as COVID-19 hit clothing sales.
Brent crude oil jumped 8.5 per cent to $US20.68 a barrel, boosted by talk of more supply cuts and growing US stockpiles that were not as high as expected.
West Texas crude rose by more than a fifth to $US14.14 a barrel.
However, both were coming off even steeper falls in the previous session.
