This content has been funded by an advertiser and written by the Nine commercial editorial team.
Australia stands to become an energy superpower if we can manage our transition to a cleaner energy future well but it will take very close cooperation between government, industry, regulatory bodies and research institutions suggests the chief executive officer of the Clean Energy Council Kane Thornton.
Thornton says there is a pretty strong global consensus that our energy future is going to be dominated by renewable energy complemented by energy storage but the challenge at present is managing the transition to a cleaner energy future.
Australia has leading wind and solar resources.
He says there is room for improvement when it comes to managing the transition away from coal, which currently supplies over 60 per cent of Australia’s baseload power, but the good news is business and to a lesser extent government is already thinking deeply about what might happen.
“We need to be investing in our transmission system because quite clearly the grid and the network was designed very much around the 20th century energy model with a small number of large centralised generators sending power out to customers,” Thornton says.
Commonwealth Bank Institutional Banking managing director of Natural Resources and Energy, Grant Willis, agrees we face a challenging energy future but we can alleviate the challenge if we get the transition right.
“Big decisions have to be made now, which impact not just our generation but those of our children and grandchildren. But I do believe that Australia is arguably better equipped than most to face those challenges,” he says.
Moreover, Willis also believes Australia can play a major role in the world’s transition to a cleaner energy future.
Willis says when you review the state of Australia’s resources it is in an enviable position globally. Australia has leading wind and solar resources which should position the country well to play a key role moving forward, including the potential to export renewably generated power to other national consumers.
Yet ensuring Australia can maximise this potential requires a delicate balance and Commonwealth Bank’s ecosystem approach brings all the sub-sectors that are central to the energy debate into one area.
Willis says what Commonwealth Bank’s Natural Resources and Energy ecosystem does is to bring all the stakeholders together so they’re talking to “power generators, both conventional and renewable as well as oil and gas producers and the mining industry”.
What this allows Commonwealth Bank to do is to consider the many diverse views and discuss Australia’s energy transition with all the key players including the community, government, non-government organisations and industry associations such as the Clean Energy Council.
Willis says clients understand and appreciate this modern multi-stakeholder engagement world is the only way to operate.
For Thornton, banks have a big role to play in the transition.
“CBA’s role has been critical in unlocking investment and assisting in the deployment of renewable energy because of their insight into what’s happening in the market.
“Importantly, that insight is very valuable because we as an industry can get a better understanding of other industries and how they have matured or developed.
“It’s their economy-wide insight which is helping us develop more sensibly,” Thornton says.
For Commonwealth Bank, developing more sensibly involves understanding we’re not going to transition to a clean energy future overnight.
“We have to be realistic in this debate,” Willis says. “The key is we have to act more quickly and decisively today.
According to Thornton, Australia is already moving faster than was originally anticipated in terms of uncovering new power and storage technologies.
“If you look at the history of renewable energy over the years, governments have repeatedly set targets,” he says. “They were fairly modest targets initially and then they slowly build up. And every time they've set a target, it's been delivered ahead of time and at lower costs than anticipated.
“And, I don't think the smartest analysts and advisers would have anticipated where we are today, in terms of the energy mix and how much renewable energy is in the system, compared to three or four years ago.
A case in point on the energy storage front is South Australia’s big battery which was installed with much fanfare in 2017 and it “has proven to be very successful from a technical perspective, from a system support perspective, from an economic perspective and most importantly for customer outcomes,” Thornton says.
So much so that the lithium-ion battery’s capacity is now being boosted by 50 per cent with funding from the federal government’s Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
Willis says while the rapid increase of renewables into the energy mix is heartening, we shouldn’t ignore investment into other technologies such as hydrogen. Equally, in the interim, gas has a role in the transition to a clean energy future and that gas fired generation will be an important component of the energy mix over the medium term.
“I think over the near to medium term and by that, I would say over the next 15-20 years, gas has a vitally important role to play in the transition story,” he says.
As for the future, Willis and Thornton agree Australia is well-placed to face the energy transition challenge and we do have an exciting future especially as technology continues to move so quickly and costs come down dramatically.
“The technology's proven and we are seeing this around the world, so very clearly we can transition much faster now than people had anticipated,” Thornton says.
Furthermore, by decarbonising the energy sector first and quickly, it gives us a “little more flexibility in other sectors such as manufacturing, agriculture and transport where the abatement options are a little more challenging from an emissions perspective,” he says.
According to Willis, one of the key reasons Australia can afford to be bullish about the future is we’re already proven first-movers in energy innovation.
“Put simply, Australia stands up as well as anyone globally,” he concludes.
This content has been funded by an advertiser and written by the Nine commercial editorial team.
