The energy investment arm of the Ayala group has slated ₱49.6 bil¬lion worth of shares subscription into its international subsidiary Presage Corporation to cement the consolidation exercise for its energy ventures in the Philippines and offshore.
In a disclosure to the Philippine Stock Exchange (PSE), the Ayala firm stipulated that 16,685,800,533 shares of Presage will be issued to AC Energy Inc., priced at ₱2.97 per share.
The transaction, it indicated, shall be “in exchange for 100-percent of ACEI’s shares of stock in Presage,” which is its subsidiary for international business and investments.
The Ayala energy firm emphasized that  this transaction has already been approved by its board of directors and executive committee as part of the ‘merging process’ of the conglomerate’s energy businesses in the Philippines and various parts of Asia.
The step on fusing together the energy ventures of the Ayala group is set for completion within the year – and this shall also warrant a change in their company name to AC Energy Corporation.
The Ayala firm is targeting up to 5,000 megawatts of installation until year 2025, leaning primarily on renewable energy developments.
The company has lined up several solar projects in the Philippines which are advancing into construction phases this year; plus the 150-megawatt first phase of its propounded diesel-fired power facility to help meet the country’s need for peaking power capacity.
It also disclosed just recently that it would be injecting additional investment of US$300 million for wind farm development in Ilocos Norte; and a new energy technology installation in Mariveles, Bataan.
Overseas, the key markets that the Ayala energy firm has been focusing on are Vietnam, Indonesia, Australia and Myanmar; then there are key target markets in India, South Korea and Taiwan.
In Vietnam, the company’s next venture will be on wind farm installation to be lined up for availment of the feed-in-tariff (FIT) incentive being dangled by the host government for that technology type.
And while it has been pursuing robust investment growth in international markets, the company has indicated that a significant fraction of the targeted investments shall be injected in the Philippines.
The next wave of RE investments in the Philippines is seen being perked up by the Renewable Port-folio Standards (RPS), an incentive scheme providing guaranteed market for RE-generated electricity as anchored on capacity purchase mandated for distribution utilities.
