Earnings per share: You can calculate the earnings per share (EPS) of a company by dividing its net income by its total number of outstanding shares. Stocks with negative EPS are considered bad investments and may imply that the company is running under loss.
P/E ratio: The price-earnings (P/E) ratio helps you determine if a stock is undervalued or overpriced. The lower the P/E ratio, the better an investment it is. Many stocks under $5 have the lowest P/E ratios.
Liquidity: Take into account the company’s average volume of shares traded per day before you make a decision. Renewable energy stocks can seem like an attractive investment but make sure there are enough takers before you buy into these stocks.
Looking to invest in renewable energy stocks? Here are our top picks from this sector in 2020.
With a mission to deliver sustainable sources for living a sustainable life, Canadian Solar provides solar solutions to customers in more than 160 countries. It owns and operates 17 solar power plants in Asia and the Americas. Canadian Solar has shipped more than 43 gigawatts of solar energy and has more than 15 gigawatts of solar projects planned in the pipeline.
The solar stock has a market cap of $1.1 billion and trades over 800,000 shares per month. It has an EPS of $4.96 and a P/E ratio of 3.79. Canadian Solar generated total revenue of $3.2 billion in 2019. It is one of the best stocks under $20 in the renewable energy market.
Recurrent Energy LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Canadian Solar, has received approval from the Mississippi Public Service Commission on the build-transfer agreement with Entergy Mississippi. The agreement was purchased at $138 million with Entergy on a 100-megawatt project. Upon completion, Entergy will own the largest solar power plant in the state of Mississippi.
Historical EPS reports and estimates of Canadian Solar Inc. over the last fiscal year.
As a global leader in smart energy systems, SolarEdge Technology has manufactured more than 1 million photovoltaic systems for its customers. It has shipped over 16.2 gigawatts of energy across 130 countries.
The company stock has a market cap of over $7 billion and trades more than 1 million shares per day. It has an EPS of $3.36 and a P/E ratio of 42.23. SolarEdge Technologies generated total revenue of $1.4 billion in 2019.
In February 2020, SolarEdge Technologies announced that it entered into a contract to supply 1 gigawatt of solar solutions to the international solar investor, Enfindus. The 4-year agreement is intended for commercial and industrial rooftop photovoltaic systems.
The company also announced that its award-winning single phase inverter has received certification from Japan Electrical Safety and Environmental Technology Laboratory, designed specifically to comply with Japanese market requirements.
Historical EPS reports and estimates of SolarEdge Technologies Inc. over the last fiscal year.
3. JinkoSolar Holding Company Limited (NYSE: JKS)
Founded in 2006, JinkoSolar is one of the largest solar module manufacturers in the world. It owns and operates 7 production facilities and provides solar solutions to international utility, commercial and residential customers in 15 countries.
The solar stock has a market cap of $702 million and trades more than 1 million shares per day. It has an EPS of $1.94 and a P/E ratio of 8.15. JinkoSolar generated a total revenue of $4 billion in 2019.
Recently, JinkoSolar launched its 2020 flagship Tiger Pro module series. Tiger Pro modules can generate up to 580 watts of energy. It will commence mass production in Q3 2020 and could be a mainstream choice for utility-scale projects. It also announced that JinkoSolar Australia has signed a 1-year AUD $37 million line of credit agreement with the National Australia Bank.
Historical EPS reports and estimates of JinkoSolar Holding Company Ltd. over the last fiscal year.
Headquartered in Juno Beach, Florida, NextEra Energy serves renewable energy to more than 5 million customers. It primarily operates an electric company — Florida Power & Light Company. NextEra Energy has a net capacity of generating 45,500 megawatts.
The company stock has a market cap of $125 billion and has an average daily trade volume of 3 million shares. It has an EPS of $7.22 and a P/E ratio of 35.4. NextEra Energy has an annual dividend yield of 2.32%. It generated total revenue of $19 billion in 2019.
In February 2020, NextEra Energy announced that it has agreed to sell $2.5 billion of equity units to J.P. Morgan, Wells Fargo Securities and BofA Securities. More recently, the Board of Directors at NextEra Energy declared a regular quarterly dividend of $1.40 per share to its shareholders.
Historical EPS reports and estimates of NextEra Energy Inc. over the last fiscal year.
As the largest biodiesel producer in the U.S., Renewable Energy Group (REG) is helping people transition by transforming renewable resources into high-quality, cleaner fuels. It owns 13 refineries and has produced 700 million gallons of fuel to date.
The company stock has a market cap of $1.1 billion and trades more than 600,000 shares per day. It has an EPS of $11.17 and a P/E ratio of 2.55. Renewable Energy Group generated total revenue of $2.6 billion in 2019.
Last year, Renewable Energy Group celebrated the grand opening of its first diesel fueling station in Seneca, Illinois. REG Seneca is visited by 17,000 trucks each year and now they can fill up their tanks with biodiesel-blended fuel right at the station to reduce harmful greenhouse emissions.
Historical EPS reports and estimates of Renewable Energy Group Inc. over the last fiscal year.
Take a look at these renewable energy stocks with the biggest price movements today.
Session: Jun 30, 2020 4:00 pm – Jul 1, 2020 11:15 am
