But cash on the balance sheet is less of interest to investors if it can’t be grown or put to use in the coming years. First Solar CEO Mark Widmar said in early 2020 it has a pipeline of contracted shipments that extend through 2023.
Investors who are concerned with rapidly shifting changes in politics or global trading policies related to China shouldn’t be concerned. The company has factories in Vietnam as well as in Ohio, which positions it to actually compete against Chinese crystalline silicon giants.
Shares of First Solar fell as low as $30 amid the market-wide coronavirus sell-off which offered investors a great opportunity.
NextEra is the global leader in terms of energy output from solar and wind sources. The company has certainly taken advantage of the industry growth over the year, and this shows in its EPS and dividend growth over more than a decade.
Back in 2004 the company earned $2.49 per share and paid investors a dividend of $1.30 per share. Fast forward to the end of 2019 and EPS has grown at a compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of nearly 8.5 per cent and dividend growth grew faster at a CAGR of nearly 9.5 per cent.
Granted, the current coronavirus environment has investors wondering if its payouts can be sustained during an uncertain time. Concerns were eased when NextEra said in a February press release it expects to lift its dividend payout by around 10 per cent per year through at least 2022. A commitment towards a multi-year dividend growth profile makes NextEra one of the best renewable energy stocks to invest in 2020.
“I believe we continue to offer a best-in-class total return potential, with above-average dividend growth and clear visibility to deliver financial results at or near the top end of our adjusted earnings per share expectations ranges in 2020, 2021 and 2022, while at the same time maintaining our strong credit ratings,” NextEra Chairman and CEO Jim Robo said in the press release.
Norway-based Scatec Solar is an integrated solar power producer and confirmed in a late-March press release it is seeing zero impact on its business from the coronavirus. While European regulations only started to impact its business, management said it is “too early” to model any impact on its business.
In addition, the company plans to merely delay a dividend payment to investors, marking a stark contrast from an overwhelming trend of companies cancelling their payouts to investors.
Scatec Solar could also emerge from the coronavirus pandemic in a stronger financial position compared to when it entered. The company signed multiple new and expanded credit facilities to better position itself to pursue new opportunities in the growing European and global renewable market.
None of the three stocks listed here are considered to be among the best performing renewable energy stocks regarding their recent performance, but this shouldn’t come as a surprise. Investors are naturally nervous and in the current environment, cash is king and all stocks are vulnerable.
Renewable energy stocks 2020 are likely to show continued volatility and it remains just as likely the coronavirus pandemic will resolve in the coming months or continue into 2021. This is why investors need to be selective in the renewable energy shares they purchase and should focus on industry leaders or those with sufficient cash to pursue opportunities in the future and a commitment toward rewarding shareholders.
Follow the latest renewable energy stocks price news and spot the best trading opportunities with Capital.com.
