for proposals (RFP) targeting women-led renewable energy projects in Africa.
By focusing on women in particular, UK-government funded REPP is aiming to channel sources of funding to help create equal opportunities for women in the continent’s rapidly expanding renewable energy sector.
The call follows a recent report by Global Entrepreneurship Monitor that found there are over 250 million women entrepreneurs globally, with the highest prevalence of emerging female entrepreneurs being in sub-Saharan African – and at more than double the global average.
However, businesswomen across the region face a raft of gender-specific challenges accessing finance, with the African Development Bank previously estimating a $20 billion financing gap for African women.
Majority woman-owned or managed private sector entities that have a renewable energy project under development; and/or,
Private sector entities or projects whose focus is to promote economic empowerment of women through enabling the productive use of energy for women as end-users, and/or access to energy finance for female entrepreneurs.
development loans, gap financing and access to risk mitigation instruments.
fair, affordable and clean energy future for Africa, but they are currently
grossly underrepresented in the renewables sector, just as they are across the
energy sector as a whole.
Sinclair continued: “REPP is seeking to address this damaging imbalance by calling for applications from projects where women are the leaders, the innovators and the beneficiaries, so that we can help provide access to funding to bring their plans to life and help unleash the immense opportunity women offer for economic and social development in Africa.”
Get involved in the Women in Power sessions at the African Utility Week and POWERGEN Africa conference. Click here to register to attend or for more information about the event.
Detailed information about the application, evaluation and selection process can be found on the REPP website here .
