Bridging the two fuels in an economy: energy and finance
Investors remain wary of investing in renewable energy particularly in developing countries, which have large untapped potential for both solar and wind energy.
Renewable energy projects in emerging economies face several real risks.
An energy revolution is under way. Globally, renewables-based electricity capacity has seen more investments than fossil fuels in the past three years.
Yet, many remain wary of investing in renewable energy particularly in developing countries, which have large untapped potential for both solar and wind energy. These are generally perceived as challenging markets in which to operate, especially by risk-averse investors.
So, why do clean energy investments continue to be viewed as risky, despite evident trends pointing to the contrary? More importantly, what are these risks and just how real are they?
Renewable energy projects in emerging economies face several real risks. Some are unique to the sector itself, such as technology risk or integration of infirm power supply. Other risks are economy-wide, such as currency risk, counter-party risk, policy and political risk, etc.
However, there is a third risk category that is playing spoilsport for clean energy markets in emerging economies: the perception of risk. Specifically, in the case of renewables, there is often a delta, or variance, between perceived risk and actual recorded risk. This arises from lack of data on actual ground realities, which results in lack of coherence among various stakeholders in the clean energy industry. This deters investment.
In India, renewable energy is no longer a fringe player. Nearly 80 gigawatts (GW) have been installed and India is making timely progress on realising the target of 175 GW of renewable energy capacity by 2022. With variable renewables expected to contribute as much as 20% of generation capacity by 2022 (much higher shares if all renewable energy sources, including hydropower, are considered), there is a growing need to better understand the project-level performance of renewable energy assets and identify impediments that can retard progress. Continuous tracking of the sector and a strong data regime are needed for energy planning in the future, cost-effective monitoring and management of the grid. This will aid the process of reducing information asymmetries regarding renewable energy, and aid in better decision-making by system operators, policymakers, project developers, and investors.
Information asymmetry can be bridged with dedicated efforts to monitor market activity and increase transparency. The Central Electricity Authority recently formed a renewable energy monitoring division. At the Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW), we have been collating project-level data, along with the International Energy Agency, to analyse trends in clean energy markets. Our most recent analysis indicates rising levels of market consolidation. Firms with access to financing on favourable terms dominated solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind auctions in 2018. The top 10 developers in the solar and wind sectors accounted for over 80% of the capacity awarded. This kind of information helps both existing and potential investors.
Further, growing familiarity with renewables has also boosted confidence among lenders, resulting in a decline in interest rate spreads over benchmark bank lending rates for both wind and solar PV by 75-125 basis points during 2014-2018. The reduction in interest rate spreads, coupled with improved bankability of projects, and improved debt-to-equity ratios for solar PV (80:20), and wind energy (75:25), is a significant contributor to rapidly reducing renewable energy tariffs in India to among the lowest in the world.
