NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION OR RELEASE, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, IN OR INTO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA (INCLUDING ITS TERRITORIES AND POSSESSIONS, ANY STATE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA) (THE "UNITED STATES"), AUSTRALIA, CANADA, THE HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGION OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA OR JAPAN, OR ANY OTHER JURISDICTION IN WHICH THE DISTRIBUTION OR RELEASE WOULD BE UNLAWFUL.
Reference is made to the announcements on 17 February 2020, whereby BW Energy Limited ("BW Energy", OSE ticker code "BWE") and BW Offshore Limited ("BW Offshore", OSE ticker "BWO") announced the successful completion of the initial public offering of BW Energy's shares (the "IPO" or the "Offering") and the listing of BW Energy shares on the Oslo Stock Exchange (the "Listing").
The following primary insiders of BW Energy and BW Offshore have been allocated shares in the Company ("Shares") in the Offering in accordance with the terms set out in the prospectus dated 29 January 2020 and the supplementary prospectus dated 13 February 2020:
Carl K. Arnet, BWE CEO, has been allocated 204,918 Shares in the Offering and 471,369 Shares as dividends from BW Offshore, increasing his holding of Shares at the time of Listing to a total of 2,406,288 Shares. In addition, close associates of Carl K. Arnet will receive 16,324 Shares as dividend from BW Offshore.
Knut R. Sæthre, BWE CFO, has been allocated 81,967 Shares in the Offering and 25,507 Shares as dividends from BW Offshore, and his holding at the time of listing will be 107,474 Shares.
Lin G. Espey, BWE COO, has been allocated 20,491 Shares, which will be his holding following the completion of the Offering.
Anders S. Platou, BWO Head of Corporate Finance, has been allocated 20,491 Shares, which will be his holding following the completion of the Offering.
Marco Beenen, BWO CEO and BWE board member, has been allocated 20,491 Shares and 8,459 Shares as dividends from BW Offshore, and his holding at the time of listing will be 28,950 Shares.
Maarten R. Scholten, BWO board member, has been allocated 37,909 Shares and 32,804 Shares as dividends from BW Offshore, and his holding at the time of listing will be 70,713 Shares.
Ståle Andreassen, BWO CFO, has been allocated 20,491 Shares and 46,784 Shares as dividends from BW Offshore, and his holding at the time of listing will be 67,275 Shares.
Kei Ikeda, BWO COO, has been allocated 20,491 Shares and 2,428 Shares as dividends from BW Offshore, and his holding at the time of listing will be 22,919 Shares.
Magda Vakil, BWO General Counsel, has been allocated 8,196 Shares and 2,531 Shares as dividends from BW Offshore, and her holding at the time of listing will be 10,727 Shares. In addition, close associates of Magda Vakil will receive 495 Shares as dividend from BW Offshore.
Hans Kristian Langsrud, BWO Head of Asset Engineering & Maintenance, has been allocated 8,196 Shares, which will be his holding following the completion of the Offering.
Rune Bjorbekk, BWO CCO, has been allocated 8,196 Shares and 31,250 Shares as dividends from BW Offshore, and his holding at the time of listing will be 39,446 Shares.
BW Group Limited, a major shareholder in BW Energy and BW Offshore, and represented on the board of directors of both companies, has been allocated 6,378,971 Shares in the Offering and 18,841,067 Shares as dividends from BW Offshore, thereby increasing its holding of Shares at the time of Listing to a total of 82,310,071 Shares (35.13%).
BW Offshore, a major shareholder represented on the board of BW Energy, holds approximately 90,839,066 Shares (38.77%) following the Offering and distribution of dividends.
DNB Markets, a part of DNB Bank ASA and Pareto Securities AS are acting as joint global coordinators and joint bookrunners in the Offering (the "Joint Global Coordinators"). Arctic Securities AS, Danske Bank (Norwegian Branch), Nordea Bank Abp (filial i Norge) and Swedbank AB (publ) (in cooperation with Kepler Cheuvreux) are acting as co-managers (the "Co-Managers", and together with the Joint Global Coordinators, the "Managers").
Advokatfirmaet Thommessen AS is acting as Norwegian legal counsel to the Company, whilst Conyers Dill & Pearman Limited is acting as special Bermuda legal counsel to the Company. Advokatfirmaet Schjødt AS is acting as Norwegian legal counsel to the Managers.
BW Energy is a growth E&P company with a differentiated strategy targeting proven offshore oil and gas reservoirs through low risk phased developments. The Company has access to existing FPSOs to reduce time to first oil and cash-flow with lower investments than traditional offshore developments. The main assets are 73.5% of the producing Dussafu Marine Permit offshore Gabon and a 95% interest in the Maromba field in Brazil, both operated by the Company. Total net 2P+2C reserves are 247 million barrels at the start of 2020 and gross average production from Dussafu was 11,779 bbl/day in 2019.
Not for distribution in or into the United States, Australia, Canada, the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China or Japan.
These materials do not constitute or form a part of any offer of securities for sale or a solicitation of an offer to purchase securities of the Company in the United States or any other jurisdiction. The securities of the Company may not be offered or sold in the United States absent registration or an exemption from registration under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "U.S. Securities Act"). The securities of the Company have not been, and will not be, registered under the U.S. Securities Act. Any sale in the United States of the securities mentioned in this communication will be made solely to "qualified institutional buyers" as defined in Rule 144A under the U.S. Securities Act. No public offering of the securities will be made in the United States.
In any EEA Member State, this communication is only addressed to and is only directed at qualified investors in that Member State within the meaning of the EU Prospectus Regulation, i.e., only to investors who can receive the offer without an approved prospectus in such EEA Member State. The expression "EU Prospectus Regulation" means Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 (together with any applicable implementing measures in any Member State).
In the United Kingdom, this communication is only addressed to and is only directed at Qualified Investors who (i) are investment professionals falling within Article 19(5) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Financial Promotion) Order 2005 (as amended) (the "Order") or (ii) are persons falling within Article 49(2)(a) to (d) of the Order (high net worth companies, unincorporated associations, etc.) (all such persons together being referred to as "Relevant Persons"). These materials are directed only at Relevant Persons and must not be acted on or relied on by persons who are not Relevant Persons. Any investment or investment activity to which this announcement relates is available only to Relevant Persons and will be engaged in only with Relevant Persons. Persons distributing this communication must satisfy themselves that it is lawful to do so.
The Target Market Assessment is without prejudice to the requirements of any contractual, legal or regulatory selling restrictions in relation to the Transaction.
For the avoidance of doubt, the Target Market Assessment does not constitute: (a) an assessment of suitability or appropriateness for the purposes of MiFID II; or (b) a recommendation to any investor or group of investors to invest in, or purchase, or take any other action whatsoever with respect to the Company's shares.
Each distributor is responsible for undertaking its own Target Market Assessment in respect of the Company's shares and determining appropriate distribution channels.
Matters discussed in this announcement may constitute forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are statements that are not historical facts and may be identified by words such as "anticipate", "believe", "continue", "estimate", "expect", "intends", "may", "should", "will" and similar expressions. The forward-looking statements in this release are based upon various assumptions, many of which are based, in turn, upon further assumptions. Although the Company believes that these assumptions were reasonable when made, these assumptions are inherently subject to significant known and unknown risks, uncertainties, contingencies and other important factors which are difficult or impossible to predict and are beyond its control. Such risks, uncertainties, contingencies and other important factors could cause actual events to differ materially from the expectations expressed or implied in this release by such forward-looking statements. The information, opinions and forward-looking statements contained in this announcement speak only as at its date, and are subject to change without notice.
This announcement is made by and, and is the responsibility of, the Company. The Managers are acting exclusively for the Company and no one else and will not be responsible to anyone other than the Company for providing the protections afforded to their respective clients, or for advice in relation to the contents of this announcement or any of the matters referred to herein.
Neither the Managers nor any of their respective affiliates makes any representation as to the accuracy or completeness of this announcement and none of them accepts any responsibility for the contents of this announcement or any matters referred to herein.
This announcement is for information purposes only and is not to be relied upon in substitution for the exercise of independent judgment. It is not intended as investment advice and under no circumstances is it to be used or considered as an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy any securities or a recommendation to buy or sell any securities of the Company. Neither the Managers nor any of their respective affiliates accepts any liability arising from the use of this announcement.
Each of the Company, the Managers and their respective affiliates expressly disclaims any obligation or undertaking to update, review or revise any statement contained in this announcement whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise.
The distribution of this announcement and other information may be restricted by law in certain jurisdictions. Persons into whose possession this announcement or such other information should come are required to inform themselves about and to observe any such restrictions.
