Approximately 30% of the energy we produce in the UK is from renewable energy sources. The target is to increase this to 50% by 2025 if we are to alleviate the ongoing concerns about climate change. SSE (LSE:SSE) wants to capitalise on this demand and has re-shaped its business to focus on renewable energy, alongside its energy networks. If the strategy is executed well, SSE has the potential to be a future renewable energy star.
In reality, SSE is already well established in the renewable energy market: the profits it generates from renewables already account for 38% of its overall profit. Its desire to treble its renewable energy output by 2030 is motivated by capitalising on sector growth and its undoubted profitability. This is in direct contrast to its energy networks business, which is slow-growing and highly regulated. It does have the potential to become a renewable energy star, but I suspect part of the upside may already be included in the current SSE share price.
The decision to offload its challenging household energy supply business was well received by investors. The income from this sale and the disposal of other assets is desperately needed to help fund the £7.5bn capital investment programme over the next five years. Ensuring net debt remains under control whilst funding new assets will be its biggest challenge.
Income investors were relieved that SSE maintained its dividend policy, despite the short-term challenges the coronavirus will have on its business. Whilst the dividend was cut for the first time since 1998, income investors will be buoyed that its current yield is still above 5%.
The SSE share price has only fallen 15% since the end of February. This is far less than the wider market during the same period and demonstrates the company’s good defensive qualities. The share price has upward momentum and is currently higher than it has been since the summer of 2018.
SSE is clearly on the right track, but I am not convinced it will become a renewable energy star just yet. My concern is that a lot of the positive news is already included in SSE’s share price. I don’t see it growing rapidly in the next few years as it struggles with the burden of financing a hefty capital investment programme, managing debt and maintaining the all-important dividend.
Financing large capital investment programmes is the biggest barrier to entry in the renewable energy market. However, this is not a problem for The Renewables Infrastructure Group Limited, which cleverly funds its acquisitions using its revolving credit facility, which is then repaid via new equity releases. The company is multi-national, free from debt and pays a growing quarterly dividend of 5.5%. More than 75% of its revenues come from national governments, which provides it with relative revenue certainty and defensive qualities.
If you prefer to invest in a company with no debt and a growing dividend, this could be the renewable energy star you were looking for.
A top income share that boasts a reliably defensive business model… plus a current forecast dividend yield of 4.2% to boot!
With global markets in turmoil as the coronavirus pandemic tightens its grip, turning to shares to generate income isn’t as simple as it used to be…
As the realities of ‘life under lockdown’ begin to bite, many of the stock market’s ‘go-to’ high-yielding companies have either taken an axe to their dividend pay-outs… or worse, opted to suspended them altogether – for the near-term at least.
With so many blue-chip and mid-cap companies scrambling to hoard cash right now, where are we income investors to turn for decent yields?
Our analyst has unearthed what he believes could be a very attractive option for income- seeking investors – a company that, in his view, boasts a ‘reliably defensive’ business model, combined with a current forecast dividend yield of 4.2% to boot!*
This business even has form in riding out this kind of situation, too… having previously increased sales and profits back in 2008 and 2009 when the world was gripped in the deepest economic crisis since the Great Depression.
*Please be aware that dividends are variable and not guaranteed.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Income Share… free of charge!
Ben Race has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
