CBN to finance renewable energy initiatives, sets up N500 billion fund for manufacturers
As you may well know, the Coronavirus pandemic has come with its devastating impacts on the social/economic lives of people around the world. The CBN is, therefore, putting measures in place to deal with the aftermath of the pandemic.
The outbreak of the Coronavirus pandemic has come with its devastating impacts on social and economic life around the world. While it is primarily a health scare, it has also caused some unprecedented economic damages on different sectors such as aviation, tourism & hospitality, financial services, manufacturing, logistics & supply chain, oil industry, agricultural sector and so on.
These, in addition to the crash in crude oil prices, have thrown the global economy (especially that of Nigeria) into recession. As a result of the dislocations caused by this recession and in a bid to survive, some developed and emerging countries have placed an export restriction on some of their products and supplies.
Consequently, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) believes that this presents Nigeria an opportunity to aggressively follow through with its diversification efforts. In other words, this is an opportunity for Nigeria to start producing those imported products and services that can be sourced locally. This has always been the logic behind the CBN’s restrictive foreign exchange policy which it has been implementing for some years now.
Therefore, in the medium term post-Covid-19, the CBN will roll out policies that will be targeted at renewable energy, light manufacturing, affordable housing and cutting edge research. According to information contained in a letter by the CBN Governor titled “Turning the Covid-19 tragedy into a new opportunity for Nigeria”, these policies will entail the following:
Setting aside an initial intervention fund of N500 billion over the medium term for manufacturers to procure state of the art machinery and equipment and automated manufacturing models that will fast track local production and support increased patronage of locally made products.
Supporting and financing environmentally-friendly energy production with long term health benefits.
The apex bank will encourage efforts aimed at driving innovation and research in every sector through our universities, research institutions, creative industries initiative and all other media of novelty and inventions.
Chike Olisah is a graduate of accountancy with over 15 years working experience in the financial service sector. He has worked in research and marketing departments of three top commercial banks. Chike is a senior member of the Nairametrics Editorial Team.
You may contact him via his email- chike.olisah@nairametrics.com.
How does one go about applying for the N500bn fund?
Your email address will not be published.
The entire $23 billion process will ship natural gas from Africa to the global markets.
The Mozambique Liquefied Natural gas project by French firm, Total SA has started its initial process of finalizing the first $15 billion finance needed for its development.
According to Total , the construction period which started in August 2019 has a goal of rewarding $2.5 billion in contracts to indigenous Mozambican firms and will be the biggest private investment in Africa.
The project located at the Rovuma Basin will have approximately 65 trillion cubic feet of recoverable natural gas with initial plans for two train project with scope to expand up to 43 million tonnes per annum.
The project requires a series of documents to be signed, a process that will take 3 days.
The entire $23 billion process will ship natural gas from Africa to the global markets and as many as 20 banks have been involved in the financing.
FDI to the continent fell 10% to $45 billion in 2019 according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and expects FDI to drop between 25%- 40% in 2020.
Last month, Africa’s biggest economy, Nigeria announced plans to raise N163.32 billion ($420 million) through concessions of 10 major highways as African nations look for alternative sources of revenues during the recession caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Note that this was the first time Ecobank Transnational Incorporated would be holding its AGM by proxies.
Ecobank Transnational Incorporated (ETI) held its 32nd Annual General Meeting (AGM) and an Extraordinary General Meeting on Tuesday, June 30, 2020. Attendance during these meetings was mainly by proxies, as part of the company’s adherence to COVID-19 preventive measures.
A statement released by ETI to the Nigerian Stock Exchange, as seen by Nairametrics, noted that a number of resolutions were reached during the meetings. For one, the company’s shareholders gave ratification to the co-option of the following new directors:
Mr Deepak Malik, a representative of Arise B.V,
ETI’s shareholders also approved the resolution to renew/retain the services of professional services firms — Deloitte & Touche (Nigeria) and Grant Thornton (Côte d’Ivoire) — as the banking group’s joint auditors.
Meanwhile, as ETI proceeded to hold an Extraordinary General Meeting right after the AGM, more resolutions were reached. Shareholders approved the cancelation of a 2016 resolution on the consolidation of the company’s shares.
Nairametrics understands that in 2016, during an Extraordinary General Meeting after ETI’s 28th AGM, the company’s shareholders had reached a resolution which directed “that the nominal value of the ordinary shares of the company be increased from two point five (2.5) US cents per share to fifty (50) US cents per share, by consolidating every twenty (20) ordinary shares held into one (1) new ordinary share each and issuing in replacement thereof new ordinary shares of fifty (50) US cents each.” Apparently, this earlier resolution on share consolidation was canceled yesterday after four years.
READ ALSO: PenCom dissolves interim management committee for First Guarantee Pension, appoints new board
Finally, ETI’s shareholders, yesterday, voted in favour of amending the company’s articles of association and including a provision for electronic general meetings. Note that yesterday was the first time Ecobank Transnational Incorporated would be holding its AGM by proxies.
In its latest earnings report for Q1 2020, the banking group reported interest income of $340.1 million, marking a 5% increase when compared to $322.5 million in Q1 2019. On the other hand, ETI’s profit after tax for the period declined by 20% to $67.5 million, down from $84.5 million in Q1 2019 .
The company’s stock is currently trading at a share price of N4.95 on the Nigerian Stock Exchange. Year to date, the stock has declined by more than 22%.
