The federal government's green bank is in talks to back the $3.2 billion Marinus Link transmission project that would unlock Tasmania's pumped hydro resource for the mainland as it expands the range of its investments to support the transition to clean energy.
Chief executive Ian Learmonth said the $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation could take a minority equity stake in the project or provide debt funding, noting the proposed second interconnector across the Bass Strait would also allow further development of Tasmania's wind energy resource.
The CEFC backed its first waste-to-energy plant last year, at Kwinana in Western Australia.
Energy storage is also increasingly on the CEFC's radar as the traditional wind and solar sectors that used to rely on its resources find funding in the commercial finance sector.
Last financial year, some $524 million of the CEFC's $1.46 billion in new funding commitments were in areas outside renewables, in a range of energy efficiency and low-emissions investments, according to the annual report released on Thursday.
"As some of the more conventional renewable energy technologies we may be making less investments in those, we've seen increasing activity or certainly we anticipate that in storage, and grid investment potentially," Mr Learmonth told The Australian Financial Review.
The annual report showed that $718 million in CEFC capital had been repaid or returned since its inception. That included a record $321 million in 2018-19, which the CEFC said underscored its ability to earn a positive return on investments on behalf of taxpayers.
Mr Learmonth said last financial year also saw a jump in the ratio between CEFC's investments and the private finance it has helped secure. Each dollar of CEFC finance committed was matched by more than $3 from the private sector, up from $1.80 in 2017-18.
"Part of what we are trying to do is draw in the private sector: it's a very large task that the clean energy transition requires and we can't do it by ourselves."
Last financial year saw the CEFC's first commitment to a waste-to-energy plant. It has supported what will be the country's largest municipal waste-to-energy project, a 36MW plant at Kwinana south of Perth.
Mr Learmonth said the CEFC was hopeful that waste-to-energy would become a growing area for the corporation, utilising waste that would otherwise have gone to landfill and generated methane – a greenhouse gas 25 times more powerful than carbon dioxide.
"We have plenty of interesting transactions in the pipeline" in waste-to-energy, he said.
But carbon capture and storage projects still remain strictly off limits for the CEFC, despite the growing consensus worldwide among industry, governments and environmental groups that the controversial technology will be required if the world is to meet a target of net zero emissions.
Mr Learmonth noted that an amendment to the act governing the CEFC had been moved and introduced to Parliament under the Turnbull government, "but as we stand today we can't invest in CCS". He declined to comment on whether it should be on the table.
Gas peaking plants are also off limits for the CEFC. But the corporation is advising the federal government on gas peaking and pumped storage projects on the shortlist of the Underwriting New Generation Investments program, he noted.
Mr Learmonth said he expected the next 12 months would see the CEFC make financial commitments to pumped hydro and battery storage projects, and make "good progress" on investment in other technologies and projects that would supply the security and reliability of the grid through the transition process.
Angela Macdonald-Smith writes on the resources industry with a focus on energy, including gas, oil, electricity and renewables. Connect with Angela on Twitter . Email Angela at amacdonald-smith@afr.com
