Chesapeake Energy has had a very strange 24 hours.
Chesapeake Energy stock started trading again on Tuesday afternoon after being halted for more than three hours pending news. After trading resumed around 1 p.m., shares plunged 66% to $23.10, before rebounding slightly to $32.21. Trading had to be halted again after it was resumed.
The “pending news” was expected to be some sort of update on the company’s enormous debt load— perhaps even a bankruptcy filing, which had been rumored the day before . But once trading resumed, there was no news release or securities filing sent out. Chesapeake (CHK) declined to comment.
The oil and gas producer’s stock shot 182% higher on Monday along with other risky oil and gas stocks. That move appeared to be driven by three factors, according to SunTrust Robinson Humphrey analyst Neal Dingmann.
The first was that retail investors started buying in. “Yesterday was initially driven by a ton of retail trades,” he said. More than 20 million shares were traded on Monday, versus average volume of 5 million.
“On top of that there was a ton of short-covering,” he said. “More forced short-covering than I’ve seen.”
And then the machines started getting involved, he said. “For some reason it even tripped up some of the algorithms for some guys I know, the algos started buying the stock,” he said.
“Frankly I have never seen a day like yesterday,” he said. Dingmann called retail interest in the stock “bizarre.”
“It’s odd to me,” he said. “There’s a ton of retail and family offices that are long the stock or short the stock. To me, I don’t really see it, based on my numbers. I’m sell-rated. With the debt they have, [natural] gas prices would have to go north of $3.50 and stay there. Other than that I don’t know how they get away from the near-term debt that they have.”
Natural gas futures are trading at $1.77 per million British thermal units on Tuesday. Chesapeake had more than $8 billion in net debt on its balance sheet as of the end of the last quarter.
Dingmann said the company had told him there would be some sort of news out today after “some sort of conversation with their credit holders.” He expects a planned bankruptcy filing that gives more power to creditors. The company may be able to negotiate a deal that wouldn’t involve bankruptcy, but Dingmann thinks that’s a longshot.
Chesapeake Energy stock started trading again on Tuesday afternoon after being halted for more than three hours pending news.
