The federal government's green finance fund has extended its reach into the hospitality sector with a $50 million equity investment into a hotel development fund run by  Pro-invest.
Backed by the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, Pro-invest’s Australian Hospitality Opportunity Fund II C will build hotels that aim for a five-star rating under the National Australian Built Environment Rating System (NABERS) system.
The fund aims to achieve a minimum of 25 per cent in energy savings on its new developments, for as many as 15 new hotels across the country.
“Sustainable design and construction can make hotels more attractive to energy-conscious guests, as well as improve their value by making them more resilient to climate change and, in the face of rising energy prices, more energy efficient, ” the CEFC's property lead, Chris Wade, said.
An artist's impression of the Holiday Inn Express that will be built on the Sunshine Coast.
Mr Wade said the hotel sector’s split owner-operator model was usually an obstacle to low emissions adoption because the operator mostly benefited from energy cost savings even though it is the owner that has made the capital investment.
“With the Pro-invest Fund II developing, owning and operating the hotels, the energy savings will be passed on to investors,” he said.
The new hotels will have clean energy plans and efficiency innovations, including low-carbon construction techniques, while Pro-invest is also investigating the purchase of green power as well as carbon offset schemes.
“As we have seen through our first fund, investing in sustainability measures is value accretive and will drive investor returns,” said Pro-invest chief executive Ronald Barrott.
The new fund will develop, operate and manage Holiday Inn Express and IHG lifestyle hotels, with projects under way at Parramatta and Maroochydore.
The fund is also considering developing new Holiday Inn Express hotels in Sydney, Canberra and Wollongong, as well as several hotels under the IHG lifestyle brand.
