Petronet LNG share price falls 2% after profits dive 20%, brokerages still upbeat; check target price
Across the globe oversupply has accelerated, deflating prices for Asian gas consumers. “We believe India is the biggest beneficiary as consumer prices have fallen 25% and remain structurally low at a time when gas infrastructure is doubling and the advent of renewables is making gas even more prominent in the fuel mix,” Morgan Stanley said. Acting as a catalyst to support this move are the changing regulatory policies and stricter standards on pollution and the opening up of India’s first Gas Exchange.
Beneficiaries from this change include players from various sectors. Gas pipeline owners like Indraprastha Gas Limited and Gujarat gas , along with auto giant Maruti which is pushing for CNG in vehicles are some of the obvious names. To add to the list, enablers like fuel retailers, infrastructure builders like L&T, and end industrial consumers Ambuja and Tata Steel are the stocks that Morgan Stanley highlighted.
In the oil and gas industry, the report says, by 2025 dependence on domestic gas will increase, proving to be beneficial for GAIL , Petronet LNG along with the already mentioned players. With the usage of gas increasing, the automobile sector where only 4% vehicle run on CNG will increase to 7% proving to be beneficial for players like Maruti and Bajaj Auto . Reducing coal-fueled power stations and increasing gas utilization might be in favour of Tata Power. Increasing the number of CNG stations and improving the pipeline length will also help GAIL but may also help Larsen and Turbo.
Currently, despite having large coal reserves India still imports 25% of its energy needs and for oil, the country imports 80% of its demand. “We estimate that India’s current account deficit will be in the range of 1-1.5% of GDP over the next five years. Taking into account the annual saving of approximately $4 billion (on average, for next five years) as a result of the shift towards gas, implies a net saving of about ~7.5% on the current account deficit,” Morgan Stanley said.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
