This FAQ was last updated on June 18, 2020. A PDF version of the updated, which includes changes from the last update marked in red, is also available.
This page is the product of collaborative efforts to gather current information. DOE appreciates everyone’s patience during this dynamic event. Send any updates, concerns or questions to energyresponsecenter@hq.doe.gov . These Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) will be updated as new information becomes available.
The U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER) has been closely monitoring the 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) since January 31. Within CESER, the Emergency Support Function #12 (ESF#12) Energy Response Organization (ERO) continues to support the federal mitigation and response to COVID-19. CESER and the ERO continue to coordinate with federal, state, and energy sector partners to discuss preparations, provide awareness, and assess issues that may require federal support.
The DOE’s ESF#12 Regional Coordinators are at an enhanced watch, supporting activations in the National Response Coordination Center and in many of the FEMA regions. The DOE Regional Coordinators are monitoring and staying in regular contact with states in their designated regions to identify needs.
CESER advises energy sector partners to remain vigilant to cybersecurity threats. Energy sector partners are encouraged to work with the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC), the Downstream Natural Gas ISAC (DNG-ISAC), and the Oil and Natural Gas ISAC (ONG-ISAC) to remain vigilant to cybersecurity threats, including COVID-19 themed phishing emails, and to ensure that the latest cybersecurity guidance is provided to their organizations.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) released guidance on defending against video-teleconferencing hijacking.  Alerts were issued in April and May on recommended steps to mitigate Korean cyber-threats and threat groups . On June 16 2020, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) released an Industrial Control System (ICS) advisory . CESER also urges energy sector companies to assess the full breadth of risk within the supply chain, including that of managed and industry service providers to evaluate how COVID-19 may affect service.
American Fuel and Petrochemical Manufacturers: COVID-19 page
State, Local, Tribal and Territorial Web Links:
What guidance is available for energy sector personnel & social distancing?
Protective measures for access to homes and businesses in restricted areas should follow CDC and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) guidance:
OSHA COVID-19 Worker Safety ; Guidance on Preparing Workplaces; Control and Prevention
OSHA released guidance for workers performing in-home repairs services.
Non-essential work orders at customer homes or businesses that require workers to enter may be deferred or postponed when possible to preserve PPE for essential emergency work and to protect the health and safety of personnel.
Are energy personnel and services considered essential?
CESER worked with industry and DHS to put together a list of essential critical infrastructure workers, which included electricity (across all sources), petroleum, natural gas and propane workers. DHS CISA updated the guidance on essential critical infrastructure workers on May 19, 2020.
The National Governor’s Association (NGA) sent a memorandum to Governors and their Energy Advisors on March 25, 2020, highlighting three areas where Governors can support the energy sector during the pandemic response. The three items identified are:
Critical infrastructure workers may need priority access to testing, PPE, and cleaning supplies
On May 6, 2020, U.S. Department of Energy Secretary Dan Brouillette sent letters to all of the U.S. Governors encouraging support for essential workers in the energy sector. The letter highlighted the joint statement from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and NARUC urging the consideration of utility workers as essential, as well as FERC’s recent orders and actions to assure the reliable operation of energy infrastructure. The letter is the second from DOE’s Secretary to the states in support of Essential Critical Energy Infrastructure Workers (ECIW). In addition to calling for continued freedom of movement within restricted areas for ECIW, the letter notes that additional measures are needed. It is equally important that ECIW have access to personal protective equipment (PPE), testing services, and cleaning supplies. Reliance on energy is a key interdependency amongst all Critical Infrastructure sectors, making energy reliability and resilience a fundamental need for national safety and security.
How can essential personnel gain access to restricted areas?
In cases where access is restricted, the State Emergency Operating Centers (SEOCs) have defined protocols for allowing access for essential personnel. County Public Health Departments are also involved and will have representatives at the SEOC for coordinating purposes. DOE ESF#12 Regional Coordinators are supporting SEOCs virtually and can assist if needed. Send an e-mail to energyresponsecenter@hq.doe.gov if you need to contact your DOE Regional Coordinator.
How can my company acquire PPE for essential personnel?
At Secretary Brouillette's direction, the Department of Energy conducted a thorough review of inventories of PPE and other supplies across the DOE enterprise (including our labs, plants and sites across the nation) to assist with the President’s response to COVID-19. The Department, working with FEMA, will make its excess PPE available for the national COVID-19 response, so they may get supplies to the communities in need as quickly as possible.
DOE continues to support the safety and security of the energy sector workforce who maintain the surety of our energy system 24/7. Providing for this vital strategic asset helps maintain the American way of life and underpins the strength of our national security. Energy sector companies are monitoring the availability of PPE for essential workers. Currently the first priority is to ensure PPE is available to healthcare workers and first responders.
On April 28, 2020, FEMA released a fact sheet with information about the distribution of cloth masks.
Energy sector companies can connect with local or state energy officials and emergency operations centers in jurisdictions where they operate to identify prioritization of any future needs for PPE.
What are the guidelines for optimizing PPE?
Organizations are encouraged to review existing health and safety plans and procedures for opportunities to reduce, reuse, or repurpose PPE. The CDC issued a PPE optimization strategy for use when PPE supplies are stressed, running low, or absent. FEMA issued a PPE preservation best practices fact sheet with the following items:
Reuse PPE by implementing optimization, decontamination, and reuse procedures
Repurpose alternative types or sources of PPE, including NIOSH-approved respirators in lieu of N-95 FFR for activities for which respiratory protection is required per CDC direction
How can my company acquire testing for essential personnel?
On April 27, 2020, the CDC updated the criteria to guide evaluation and laboratory testing priorities. The new guidance identifies two categories; High Priority and Priority.  Decisions about testing remain at the discretion of state and local health departments and/or individual clinicians. The new guidance includes screening of persons without symptoms if prioritized by state or local plans.
CESER is working with multiple FEMA task forces and federal, industry and state partners to identify new testing options and best practices as they become available. Energy industry suppliers and infrastructure operators are identifying “essential” and "mission essential" employees for prioritized COVID-19 testing. More information regarding prioritized testing requests can be found in this industry letter to national organizations representing state and local government leaders. The Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council also updated Testing and Protecting Mission Essential Control Center and Generation Facility Personnel .
On April 23, 2020, CISA released guidance for operations centers and control rooms across the 16 critical infrastructure sectors, including energy, required to operate in a pandemic environment. The guidance recommends prioritized testing by medical professionals for asymptomatic personnel performing essential jobs in support of operations centers and control rooms. Some states have begun prioritizing testing of non-symptomatic essential energy workers prior to sequestration.
The CDC updated the testing overview page with testing strategies in high-density critical infrastructure workplaces after a case is identified and a flowchart . The guidance recommends testing for asymptomatic individuals without known or suspected COVID-19 exposure for early identification in special settings, which includes:
High-density critical infrastructure workplaces where continuity of operations is a high priority.
Approaches for early identification of asymptomatic individuals include:
Regular testing of everyone residing and/or working in the setting, and
Testing of new entrants into the setting and/or those re-entering after a prolonged absence.
What are the different types of covid-19 tests?
There are two types of kinds of tests available for COVID-19 according to the CDC : viral tests and antibody tests . A viral test is used to detect a current infection. An antibody test can detect a previous COVID-19 infection. An antibody test may not show a current infection and should not be used as the only way to diagnose someone as being currently sick with COVID-19. It is not yet known if having antibodies to the virus can protect someone from getting infected with the virus again, or how long that protection might last.
What are some measures industry is using for sequestration of essential critical infrastructure workers?
Some energy companies are implementing sequestration protocols for mission essential personnel to ensure the uninterrupted operations of energy functions, including:
Organizing “units” or “crews” with appropriate skillsets that will share the same shift, but not be exposed to other personnel
Creating a total separation of living, sleeping, cooking, laundry, and rest/entertainment areas for the individual work crews
Providing individually assigned peripheral equipment (e.g., mice, keyboards, chairs)
How are wellness checks being implemented in the sector?
Based on the CDC guidance to monitor for symptoms of COVID-19 and the OSHA guidance to prevent exposure in the workplace many organizations are implementing wellness checks throughout the work shifts of essential workers. The wellness checks may include questions on how the workers are feeling and a temperature check to monitor for symptoms of COVID-19. The medical or non-medical professionals conducting the wellness checks should have instructions on how to proceed and who to notify if symptoms of COVID-19 are detected.
The federal government will distribute non-contact infrared thermometers (NCIT) to support phased reopening of states. FEMA announced that states, tribal nations, and territories will be responsible for distributing NCIT and will have significant flexibility as to how they are distributed within their jurisdiction.
The CDC issued guidance for critical infrastructure workers who may have had COVID-19 exposure. Workers who were exposed but remain asymptomatic should adhere to the following practices prior to and during their work shift:
Pre-Screen: The employee’s temperature and symptoms should be checked prior to them starting work and ideally before entering a facility.
Regular Monitoring: As long as the employee does not have a temperature or symptoms, they should self-monitor under the supervision of their employer.
Wear a Mask: The employee should wear a facemask at all times while in the workplace for 14 days after last exposure.
Social Distance: The employee should maintain 6 feet and practice social distancing as work duties permit.
Disinfect and Clean workspaces: Clean and disinfect all areas such as offices, bathrooms, common areas, shared electronic equipment routinely.
What does “shelter in place” and area restrictions mean & how will these orders affect critical energy services?
Some Governors and local government leaders have instituted “Stay at Home” or “Shelter in Place” orders to limit the spread of COVID-19. The orders vary, but generally include provisions to allow essential services to remain open and for essential workers to continue working. Links to these types of orders can be found on the NGA website .
Federal authority is generally limited to preventing the spread of COVID-19 from foreign countries into the United States and through interstate commerce. The FEMA Coronavirus Rumor Control web page has confirmed that there is no national lock-down or quarantine in place.
What guidance is out there for workplace reentry & reopening states?
States have begun to lift their “Stay at Home” orders and adopt phased restrictions as outlined by the White House’s guidelines for Opening Up America Again . The CDC has issued guidance identifying community actions that individuals, businesses, and health departments can take to slow the spread of COVID-19. OSHA released guidance on June 17, 2020 to assist employers and workers in safely returning to work.
The ESCC updated their COVID-19 Resource Guide on April 27, 2020, to provide responsible re-entry guidance to the electric sector. Four strategic priorities were identified:
On May 11, 2020, the ESCC Resource Guide was updated to identify additional guidance on responsible re-entry, including engagement with state and local governments and messaging.
FEMA has issued further reconstitution planning recommendations for state, local, tribal, territorial, (SLTT) and private sector stakeholders. The CDC also posted support resources for SLTT and staffing resources for the public health workforce. The NGA issued a state-by-state summary of public health criteria for reopening. The Oil and Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating Council (ONG SCC) released an ONG COVID-19 Responsible Recovery Compendium identifying challenges and mitigation strategies for the different ONG value chains.
Will domestic travel restrictions affect access?
Domestic travel advisories are not expected to affect critical services or travel for energy sector employees. The advisories do not apply to employees for critical infrastructure as defined by the Department of Homeland Security essential staff guidance, which includes energy sector services and personnel supporting essential energy services.
The CDC updated travel health notices to include COVID-19 travel recommendations by country. Although the CDC recommends people stay home as much as possible, new guidance for the different modes of travel was issued for when travel is required.
What is the current role of the National Guard?
The President issued a Memorandum , offering National Guard troops to support states by operating under Title 32 status . This allows the National Guard to be managed by state Governors, but be funded by FEMA and DHS. Additional detail on National Guard activities in states can be found on the COVID-19 Response website and the FEMA website . On May 6, 2020 the Council of Governors Co-Chairs sent a letter requesting the Secretary of Defense work with the White House to extend the use of Title 32 National Guard operations beyond May 31, 2020.
As of June 17, 2020, nearly 45,000 National Guard members are supporting homeland operations at the direction of their Governors. The current number includes activations for COVID-19, civil unrest, and natural disasters. Air and Army National Guard professionals continue to support the COVID-19 response activities below, but are not limited to:
What are the U.S.-Canada and U.S.-Mexico border travel restrictions?
The United States and Canada, as well as the United States and Mexico are temporarily restricting all non-essential travel across the U.S. border. The restriction allows travel for essential workers and deliveries for supply chains to ensure that food, fuel, and life-saving medicines are maintained. DOE ESF#12 responders are available to work with the FEMA National Response Coordination Center and DHS to coordinate any issues or concerns for critical energy infrastructure located near the U.S. border to allow travel across the border to support critical work. The updated travel restrictions for U.S./Canada can be found here and for U.S./Mexico here .
What guidance has been issued to industry to ensure energy reliability amid potential coronavirus impacts?
The North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), in consultation with FERC, as well as the DOT Pipeline and Hazardous Material Safety Administration (PHMSA) has issued guidance to provide additional flexibility to operators and staff to help ensure continued operations. Operators for transportation including hazardous liquid and gas pipeline, underground natural gas storage, liquefied natural gas, and bulk electric systems are focusing their resources on keeping people safe and providing critical services during this unprecedented public health emergency. Additional guidance: PHMSA Stay of Enforcement , Guidance for State Partners , and the NERC and FERC Industry Guidance to Ensure Grid Reliability .
NERC issued a special report Pandemic Preparedness and Operational Assessment assessing the reliability considerations and operational preparedness of the bulk power system owners and operators during pandemic conditions in April and May 2020. NERC included spring, summer and longer-term risks, but did not identify any specific threats or degradation to the reliable operation of the bulk power supply at this time. In June, NERC issued the 2020 Summer Reliability Assessment , noting that protecting critical electric industry workers remains a priority and the risk potential of the wildfire season.
Can the use of winter blend fuel continue beyond the May 1 switch to summer blend?
To minimize or prevent the disruption of an adequate supply of gasoline throughout the United States, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued a nationwide fuel waiver that waives certain federal fuel standards under the Clean Air Act. This waiver applies to the following regulations:
Federal Gasoline Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP) Standards require the sale of low-volatility summer gasoline by refiners, importers, distributors, resellers, terminal owners and operators, and carriers beginning May 1. Without a waiver of the summer gasoline requirements, regulated parties would be required to stop selling high-volatility winter gasoline in their storage tanks on May 1. The waiver does not permit refiners to produce gasoline after May 1 that exceeds the summer gasoline standard and does not permit any party to blend butane to cause the gasoline to exceed the summer gasoline standard. Regulated parties must continue to comply with applicable state or local requirements, or restrictions related to RVP, unless waived by the appropriate authorities.
Federal Reformulated Gasoline (RFG) Requirements in all RFG covered areas that apply to terminal owners, terminal operators, distributors, carriers, retailers, and wholesale purchaser-consumers. Additionally, EPA is waiving provisions that prohibit combining any RFG blendstock for oxygenate blending with any other gasoline, blendstock, or oxygenate, unless certain conditions are met.
In addition, several states have issued waivers that apply to state-level RVP requirements that typically begin April 1. The EPA has also issued a Memorandum that allows discretion for COVID-19 implications for EPA’s enforcement and compliance assurance programs. For more information on waivers, visit the DOE Energy Waiver Library .
How can my company ensure timely and efficient transport of goods and services? Is there an hours-of-service waiver?
The U.S. Department of Transportation’s (DOT) Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) issued a Federal Motor Carrier Administration Declaration and an updated Expanded Emergency Declaration that provides regulatory relief for commercial motor vehicle operations that are providing direct assistance in support of emergency relief efforts related to COVID-19. An extension was issued on May 13, 2020 allowing regulatory relief until June 14, 2020. On June 8, 2020, FMCSA extended and modified the hour of service waiver for motor carriers to July 14, 2020 but eliminated delivered fuels from this extension.
