Southern California Gas is engaged in a wide-ranging campaign to preserve the role of its pipelines in powering society.
SoCalGas hopes to replace 20% of the fossil gas in its pipelines with renewable gas by 2030, which the utility claims would reduce climate pollution just as much as nearly all its residential and commercial customers switching to electricity.
That claim stems from a SoCalGas-commissioned report and is based on the “negative emissions” potential of renewable gas.
When natural gas is burned in a furnace or a kitchen stove, it generates carbon dioxide, fueling the climate crisis.
But if that natural gas was originally captured at a dairy farm or another industrial source — where it otherwise would have gone into the atmosphere — there’s also an emissions reduction. And because methane traps heat much more powerfully than carbon dioxide does, the planetary benefits of less methane can outweigh the damages from more carbon dioxide.
SoCalGas officials have also touted a recent report from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, a federal research institute.
The report concluded that California can achieve its long-term goal of “carbon neutrality” — removing as much carbon from the atmosphere as it emits — at a cost of less than $10 billion per year, through strategies that include producing and utilizing large amounts of renewable gas from dairies, landfills and sewage treatment plants.
Lyle Schlyer, president of Calgren Renewable Fuels, stands atop a manure separator that separates cow dung into liquid and solid parts.
The whole thing hinges on capturing and storing the carbon dioxide that bubbles up alongside methane at those facilities — an expensive process that would essentially be subsidized by renewable gas sales.
“If you follow the carbon, it always started from the atmosphere and then was taken up by a plant,” said Sarah Baker, a chemist at Lawrence Livermore and lead author of the report. “And now it’s stored safely underground.”
Still, the lab’s results suggest that SoCalGas’s preferred use of renewable gas — injecting it into pipelines and selling it to homes and workplaces for use in heating and cooking — is not the most cost-effective carbon removal strategy.
California could remove more carbon from the atmosphere, at a lower cost per unit of carbon, by sending renewable gas to power plants to be burned for electricity. That way the CO2 generated at those plants could be captured as well — which wouldn’t be possible if the gas were instead burned in millions of individuals furnaces and stoves.
Even studies funded by the gas industry suggest a relatively limited role for renewable gas.
Take a May 2019 report funded by SoCalGas and fellow Sempra subsidiary San Diego Gas & Electric, among other industry players, and written by the Energy Futures Initiative, which is led by Ernest Moniz, President Obama’s second-term energy secretary.
The report described renewable gas as one of several “critical clean energy pathways” for California. But it also found renewable gas has the potential to replace just 9% of current statewide gas consumption by 2030. That’s not enough to fully replace the fossil gas now used by commercial buildings, let alone homes, power plants and industry.
A December 2019 report commissioned by the American Gas Foundation concluded the United States is likely to produce, at most, enough renewable gas by 2040 to supply just 14% of current U.S. gas consumption, although that percentage could rise as overall gas use declines due to efficiency improvements.
Cow dung oozes down a mechanical separator, which sorts the manure into liquid and solid parts.
Environmentalists say those limited quantities of renewable gas should be dedicated to fossil fueled activities that are impossible or prohibitively expensive to electrify, such as cement and steel production, aviation or power generation. They say it would be a waste to use the fuel for heating and cooking, where electric alternatives are increasingly affordable.
In a recent report for the California Energy Commission, the consulting firm Energy and Environmental Economics, known as E3, concluded that renewable gas is so much more expensive than fossil gas, and its availability so much more uncertain, that all-electric buildings are “likely to be a lower-cost, lower-risk long-term strategy” for reducing climate pollution.
“Electrification of buildings, and particularly the use of electric heat pumps for space and water heating, leads to lower energy bills for customers over the long term,” E3 wrote.
SoCalGas has pushed back , arguing that E3 underestimated how much electricity rates will rise as electric utilities upgrade their infrastructure to prevent power lines from starting fires. SoCalGas also says the electric grid can be unreliable during disasters, with utilities increasingly resorting to shutting off power to reduce the risk of deadly blazes.
Gas company spokesman Chris Gilbride pointed to California’s clean energy mandate — which will require electric utilities to get 60% of their supplies from renewable sources by 2030 — as the type of policy lawmakers ought to pursue for renewable gas.
Such a policy “can help us deliver increasingly renewable energy to our customers, promote reliable gas and electricity services and keep energy bills affordable,” Gilbride said in an email.
But at least for now, none of the renewable gas running through SoCalGas’s pipelines is meant to serve homes.
Prompted by state and federal programs that incentivize cleaner vehicles, Calgren supplies methane to fueling stations for heavy-duty trucks that run on compressed natural gas, an alternative to diesel. Nearly all of the 120 or so dairy digesters operating or in development in California are targeted at that same end use: transportation, not heating and cooking.
Schlyer said gas company officials “like to take credit for our project,” even though they’re just moving his fuel.
“I don’t have anything to do with SoCalGas,” he said, “other than we built an injection point for their pipeline.”
Lyle Schlyer with equipment that dries out methane and carbon dioxide gas coming out of an anaerorbic digester.
