One of the pioneers of the shale oil and gas boom in the US filed for bankruptcy on Sunday (US time). Another former giant of the sector, backed by Warren Buffett, is teetering. There are predictions that US shale companies could have to slash $US300 billion ($437 billion) off the value of their assets this year.
The sector has, it seems, hit a crunch point. It has been assailed by the collapse in oil and gas prices earlier this year as the coronavirus pandemic and a fracturing of the alliance between Saudi Arabia and Russia produced a plunge in oil prices.
Chesapeake was a trailblazer for the "fracking" processes that helped make the US the world's largest oil producer.
While a new commitment by the OPEC+ oil producers has cut about 10 per cent from global supply, roughly balancing it with the pandemic-reduced demand and stabilising the price at around $US40 a barrel, there is still a massive glut of oil inventories over-hanging the market.
For the US shale sector, much of which has been funded by the junk bond market in the US, the pandemic is ravaging economics that have always been fragile.
The Deloitte analysis that predicted the $US300 billion of write-downs said that over the past decade and a half – effectively the lifespan of the sector – it had generated $US300 billion of negative cash flows, written down $US450 billion of invested capital. In the past decade it has experienced 190 bankruptcies
Other analysts say there could be 200 or more shale companies bankrupted over the next two years without a material rise in oil and gas prices.
The collapse of Chesapeake Energy at the weekend has broader resonance. It was a founder of the industry in the US, one of the trailblazers for the fracking processes that helped make the US the world’s biggest oil producer and transformed the global energy market.
At its peak, in 2008, the company was capitalised at more than $US38 billion. Ahead of its collapse it was valued at only $116 million after losing $US8.3 billion in the first quarter of this year. It has liabilities of nearly $US12 billion, including about $US9 billion of debt, that it hopes lenders will allow it to restructure by wiping out $US7 billion of the debt.
BHP shareholders will be familiar with the company – it was Chesapeake that sold BHP the $US4.7 billion portfolio of shale gas assets in 2011 that started its ill-fated entry to the sector. BHP lost about $US20 billion on that foray before it exited the shale industry in 2018 with the $US10.8 billion sale of its assets to BP.
Chesapeake isn’t the only big shale company in trouble. There has already been a spate of bankruptcies, including former high-flyers like Whiting Petroleum and Extraction Oil and Gas. Another of the real heavyweights, Occidental Petroleum, is wobbling.
Occidental was involved in an ill-timed contest with Chevron for control of Anadarko Petroleum, another shale pioneer.
The solution to the problem of companies having too much debt and too little cash flow isn’t more debt, however cheap it might be, and that’s an issue confronting a wider spectrum of US companies, not just shale producers.
Oxy, as it is dubbed, won that contest with a $US55 billion bid last year that was supported by Buffett, who invested $US10 billion in Oxy preference shares to help fund an offer that left the company with about $US40 billion of debt.
So far this year Oxy has lost more than 60 per cent of is sharemarket value, after a plunge in its share price from more than $US47 early this year to less than $US18 a share.
Having cut its production by about 85,000 barrels a day because it is uneconomic, written down its assets by about $US12 billion over the past nine months and paid Buffett $US200 million of dividends on his preference shares in scrip rather than cash, Oxy is trying to re-finance its debt.
It’s "solution" to its financial woes is to replace $US3 billion of its existing junk bonds that are due to mature over the next two years with more junk debt.
The existential challenge for the shale sector in the current environment relates to the nature of its economics.
BHP’s retiring chief financial officer, Peter Beaven, explained why BHP’s venture into the industry had been so disastrous in an analysts’ briefing last year.
Shale had a fast payback and the internal rates of return signalled by conventional analysis indicated producers should invest aggressively. The sector was, however, extremely capital-intensive, all-in costs were high, cash margins were thin, the assets were short-life and they generated modest value relative to the investments.
Oil prices have been hammered by the coronavirus pandemic and a fracturing of the alliance between Saudi Arabia and Russia.
"You have one shot at making money," he said.
The near-term cycle has definitely gone against the producers’ expectations, given that the West Texas Intermediate price for oil started the year above $US60 a barrel.
Conditions in the sector confirm the prudence of BHP in exiting the sector when it did and point to a looming threat to the wider $US1.2 trillion junk bond market.
In March, yields on junk bonds were soaring as prices tanked and the market was closed to new issues as fears of a wave of defaults spiked.
Then the US Federal Reserve Board came to the rescue, announcing that it would buy corporate bonds – including the high-yield bonds of companies whose credit ratings had fallen from investment grade – initially indirectly via exchange-traded funds and then directly. The market stabilised and re-opened to new issues.
In April, US companies issued $US265 billion of new bonds, including "high-yield" bonds, or more than twice the amount issued in April last year.
Energy companies account for about 12 per cent of the US high-yield bond market, or close to $US150 billion.
If Deloitte is proven right, and shale companies write down 40 per cent of their net asset values this year, there will be a wave of insolvencies in the sector and a wave of defaults on those bonds. The larger high-yield market will be subjected to severe stress.
The willingness of the Fed to provide ultra-cheap debt would, in those circumstances, be rendered almost irrelevant.
No amount of ultra-cheap debt can deal with the predicament confronting shale producers – the more they invest to produce more oil and gas in the current demand and price environment the more cash they burn – and therefore the limitations of the Fed’s "whatever it takes" approach to the economic impacts of the pandemic would be laid bare.
The solution to the problem of companies having too much debt and too little cash flow isn’t more debt, however cheap it might be, and that’s an issue confronting a wider spectrum of US companies, not just shale producers.
