It's been rocky, but the worst is probably behind us.
The energy industry still faces a very difficult environment, but the outlook brightened somewhat during the second quarter. The Morningstar US Energy Index mirrored the broader market rebound, gaining 37% in the period. And oil prices rallied sharply, with the West Texas Intermediate benchmark roughly doubling since the end of March. But by and large, the sector remains undervalued and trades at a 23% discount.
U.S. energy recovery mirrors the market. - source: Morningstar
Energy stocks still priced attractively. - source: Morningstar
The worst of the pandemic-related collapse in oil and gas consumption is probably behind us, given that most economies around the world are showing signs of reopening. In the U.S., reduced social distancing and unprecedented fiscal stimulus should continue to support the recovery in the second half of 2020. And on the supply side, OPEC and its partners have U-turned after recklessly launching a price war in March and have now pledged substantial production cuts (collectively withholding almost 10 million barrels per day). Producers outside OPEC are also tightening their belts and truncating growth plans. In the U.S., the number of active horizontal drilling rigs has fallen by almost two thirds since the end of March, which means domestic output is likely to decline by 1.5 mmbpd over the course of 2020.
Current oil prices are well below our long-term estimate. - source: Morningstar
These cutbacks won’t stop crude stockpiles from ballooning temporarily, but we still expect inventories to drift back to normal levels during 2021. Accordingly, we see no reason to change our midcycle price estimates of $55/bbl WTI and $60/bbl Brent. U.S. shale is still the marginal producer in our global framework, and the shale business model does not work in the current price environment. Without a rebound in oil prices, producers will have no incentive to grow their production or even replace declines, resulting in a downward spiral for supply that could eventually turn the current glut into a shortage. But prices cannot sustainably exceed our midcycle forecasts, either. Shale wells today are much cheaper on a per barrel basis than the large, complex megaprojects that would have set prices in a world without U.S. shale. Over the long run, we think U.S. shale well cost inflation will remain subdued, due to the no-moat nature of many shale services, and that wider adoption of current technologies coupled with decades of attractive drilling opportunities will cap unit costs.
Long-term demand will be nearly unscathed by COVID-19. - source: Morningstar
