The Lloyd's Register building at Prime Four business park. Photo by Colin Rennie
Dozens of jobs have been lost at a north-east energy firm, with its parent company stepping back from part of the market.
A total of 46 people have been made redundant from the Lloyd’s Register upstream consulting team, who had been working from the Prime Four site in Aberdeen and an office in London.
The firm had previously opened up a consultation with employees and made the cuts last week, blaming a “dramatic shift” in the oil and gas industry and the global pandemic.
It has now closed its reservoir consultancy business altogether, but will remain in the energy sector overall, including with support for its reservoir optimisation software.
The firm said the changes made would enable it to continue working long-term.
A number of those made redundant had previously worked for Aberdeen firm Senergy, which was taken over by Lloyd’s Register in 2013.
Many, including geologists and engineers, have since taken to the internet in search of new opportunities.
The team’s former subsurface manager, Alison Kerlogue, wrote on social media: “I would like to say an enormous thank you to my team.
“It truly has been a pleasure working with you over the last eight years, when I have learnt a lot, laughed a lot, enjoyed the technical challenges and met some wonderful people – both staff and clients.
“So team, as you move on to the next chapter in your working history, hold your head up high, believe in yourselves, have confidence in your abilities and be positive.”
She added: “The adjustments we’re making reflect the changing landscape and market needs, as well as our longer-term strategy.
“As one of the world’s leading providers of professional services for engineering and technology, in our 260-year history we have been through enormous change and many periods of extreme adversity, remaining resilient throughout.
“We are committed to helping our clients in the energy industry continue to safely and efficiently operate, both during these unprecedented times and in the future.
“We will continue to offer our extensive portfolio of wells project management and engineering, performance asset optimisation services and risk management solutions across all energy markets, from concept to decommissioning.”
For as little as £5.99 a month you can access all of our content, including Premium articles.
