The cuts outlined above approximate to roughly a 25% cut in capital spending plans for 2020. That's obviously bad news for the oil services companies, and their stock prices have slumped accordingly.
On top of the obvious candidates (oil services companies), there's also a secondary impact on the industrial companies that service and supply the oil industry and connected heavy industries. In fact, these industries were so badly hit in 2015 to 2016 that, for the first time ever, U.S. industrial production went into a recession without the overall economy being in recession.
The consequences will be felt across the industrial sector, and it's likely that energy-related companies will delay or shelve major projects. Unfortunately, this is likely to hit process automation companies like Emerson Electric. The company has already seen delays in projects toward the end of 2019 , but with the slump in energy prices, it's hard not to think that some of its major energy customers won't shelve some large projects altogether.
For reference, Emerson's underlying sales decreased 2% in 2015 and 6% in 2016, with particular weakness in oil and gas-related spending -- not a good omen for 2020.
Drilling and production technology company Apergy is another obvious choice for a company that's likely to get hit hard in 2020.
Indeed, management recently announced it would reduce headcount, cut salaries, and cut its own capital spending plans by some $50 million.  It's not the ideal environment to be engaging in a merger with another company tied to the upstream oil and gas industry -- in this case Ecolab's ChampionX business.
The impact doesn't stop at the heavy industries companies that service the energy industry, because if there's slowdown in their manufacturing activity, then it will be felt by their customers too.
In this context, MSC Industrial looks set to take a hit. Going back to the 2015 to 2016 period, the company's revenue growth and operating margin declined due to its exposure to heavy industries customers servicing the energy industry .  It's fair to expect more of the same this year given the cut in capital spending plans from the oil and gas companies at the top of the pyramid.
All told, it's likely to be a very difficult 2020 for all these companies, and until the demand environment (economic activity is dropping thanks to actions taken to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic) or the supply environment (Russia and Saudi Arabia are in disagreement over production cuts) improves, then the outlook is going to continue to be negative -- and Emerson Electric, Apergy, and MSC Industrial earnings continue to be under pressure.
