Oil pumping jacks at an oilfield in Russia this month.
U.S. energy stocks crashed Monday after the one-two punch of a brewing price war among major oil-producing countries triggering a deep plunge for U.S. equities already battered by fears related to the novel coronavirus outbreak.
The S&P 500 index’s SPX,
energy sector index has fallen nearly 17% Monday, on pace for its lowest close since September 2004 and its largest one-day percentage decrease on record, based on available data going back to 1994.
The energy sector index SP500.10,
Several investment banks unleashed price-target and share-rating cuts for energy stocks, with SunTrust taking the “unprecedented” step of downgrading its energy-related stocks under coverage to sell or hold. And one U.S. shale producer was the first of the many that Wall Street expects will have to announce cost-cutting measures to face the downturn.
Saudi Arabia and Russia are enmeshed in price wars as Russia late Friday balked at a plan that called for additional oil-production cuts. Saudi Arabia over the weekend lowered prices on its crude and reportedly is ready to increase production.
That’s an “apparent decision to desist with a policy of rational guardianship and, instead, embrace a Darwinian market-share grab by burning the village down,” analysts at Simmons said in a note.
Diamondback announced spending cuts earlier on Monday, including plans to drop rigs over the next few months. In the next two to three weeks, other U.S. exploration and production companies are likely to announce “plans to decisively cut activity,” analysts at Stifel said in a note.
There will be likely a “swift response from the E&Ps as no CEO can reasonably walk into conference season (beginning mid-March) with a capital plan based on $50-55/bbl oil,” the analysts said.
While refiners would benefit from cheaper oil prices, their margins are likely to suffer as well — unlike previous bouts of lower oil prices, crude moved lower “due to demand destruction as opposed to crude oversupply, making for a tougher backdrop for product margins to improve,” analysts at Goldman Sachs said in a note Monday.
Amid the carnage, the Goldman Sachs analysts said they “still see a rich environment for stock-picking and alpha generation,” singling out Chevron over Exxon, on Chevron’s stronger balance sheet; Canadian oil-sands producer Suncor Energy Inc. SU,
and Phillips 66 as the companies with “significant” operations on coastal areas and thus ready to take advantage of crude oversupply.
On Monday, Cabot Oil & Gas Corp. COG,
was the rare spot of green among energy companies in the S&P. Analysts at Tudor Pickering Holt kept their buy rating on Cabot shares, their only buy-rated U.S. natural-gas producer. There’s still “further room to run” for the shares, trading at about $16 but worth up to $24, they said.
“Worth adding to at these levels, as we believe the equity will find strong foundational support at current prices while potentially benefiting over the coming months from capital flows if crude prices remain weak,” the Tudor Pickering Holt analysts said.
Analysts at SunTrust took another tack, saying that given the current market — price wars and continued oil demand destruction due to COVID-19, “we have taken the unprecedented steps of bringing our full coverage group to hold or sell even after the recent selloff that puts many of our names already at multi-year lows.”
SunTrust’s ratings changes to sell included ratings on Chesapeake Energy Corp. CHK,
