In this edition of WWL: Energy, we recognise almost 900 of the leading lights in the energy sector from more than 380 firms across 85 jurisdictions. They are singled out for their excellence in the exploration, production, marketing and transportation of all types of energy including oil, gas, nuclear and renewables.
The Global Elite Thought Leaders are those individuals who received the highest number of nominations from peers, corporate counsel and other market sources this year. Our research has identified them as truly outstanding practitioners and the very best in their field.
Who’s Who Legal does not list law firms, only individual lawyers. The leading firms are those in each region whose listed practitioners received the most total nominations in our research.
Steven Galbraith - Slaughter and May, London
Juan Ignacio González Ruiz - Uría Menéndez, Madrid
Marc Grüninger - GHR Rechtsanwälte AG, Zurich
Michael Meyer - Gorrissen Federspiel, Copenhagen
Thierry Lauriol - Jeantet AARPI, Paris
Alex McLean - Arthur Cox, Dublin
Peter M Polak - Fiebinger Polak & Partners Rechtsanwälte GmBH, Vienna
Rabbe Sittnikow - Hannes Snellman Attorneys Ltd, Helsinki
Dirk Uwer - Hengeler Mueller, Düsseldorf
Damien Verhoeven - Liedekerke Wolters Waelbroeck Kirkpatrick, Brussels
Stéphane Brabant is an “internationally renowned” energy specialist with a wealth of experience in and knowledge of projects across Africa.
Rebecca Major is a “top pick” in the energy market, applauded as “really good on the corporate side” according to market commentators.
Paula Hodges QC is a “superb” and “very well regarded” energy specialist with over 30 years of experience in the sector.
Nina Bowyer is well thought of among sources thanks to her sweeping knowledge of energy and mining project financing and development, notably across Africa.
Mark Newbery is recognised as an “exceptionally good and incredibly experienced” energy lawyer, renowned for his work on sector-related projects spanning financing and development.
Martin Kavanagh is looked upon with enormous favour for his expert handling of high-value project financings in the energy sector.
John Geraghty is a “very impressive” lawyer, highly recommended for his exceptional work handling high-value energy transactions on an international level.
Marinus Winters is hailed a “regulatory expert” in the energy sector by sources, who hold him in high esteem as a “great guy and a very good practitioner”.
Gareth Price draws widespread praise as an “outstanding energy practitioner” with profound understanding of project development across the sector.
Sheila Connell ranks highly among peers for her excellence on the financing side of complex energy and infrastructure projects.
Munir Hassan has “extensive technical knowledge”, “remarkable expertise” and the “focus to provide solutions” for clients across all aspects of energy and climate change matters.
Cecile van der Weijden comes “highly recommended” for her strong experience in corporate, M&A and energy-related matters.
Charles Currier is a “very well regarded” energy practitioner, with deep experience of renewables and infrastructure deals.
Charles Wood is “one of the best energy lawyers in the industry”, and is highly commended for his LNG expertise.
Gregory Hammond comes highly recommended as “a hands-on and very involved” practitioner, with exceptional attention to detail.
Hein Tonnaer is “very strong in project finance” and “regularly does big offshore wind work”, according to peers.
With 30 years of experience, Russell Wells is “among the best practitioners” thanks to his tremendous knowledge and experience of the energy sector.
Audley Sheppard QC draws praise as a “very experienced” and “excellent” energy disputes practitioner.
Kai Uwe Pritzsche is a “hugely experienced” and “excellent energy lawyer”, with an abundance of expertise in oil and gas matters.
With over 20 years of experience, John Pickett comes “highly recommended for UK renewables” work.
Jeremy Gewirtz is commended for his excellence in oil and gas, and power-related project financing and development.
Global Elite Thought Leader Peter Polak of Fiebinger Polak & Partners is a “excellent energy lawyer” with a “very knowledgeable, efficient and client-oriented” approach.
At Schima Mayer Starlinger, Thomas Starlinger is “a strong regulatory lawyer”, distinguished by sources as “an expert in all things gas-related, and particularly gas transportation”.
Milan Pandev of Djingov Gouginski Kyutchukov & Velichkov is a “very responsive” and “excellent energy lawyer”, well versed in M&A and corporate finance matters within the energy sector.
Andrew Demetriou of Ioannides Demetriou is internationally renowned for his considerable experience in financing and projects within the energy sector.
Michael Meyer of Gorrissen Federspiel is “absolutely first class” according to peers who note he is “very impressive” in handling significant energy transactions.
With over 30 years of experience in the sector, Paul Griffin of White & Case is “greatly experienced” and a “leading name” in the energy space.
Simon Tysoe at Latham & Watkins gains strong recognition from sources, one of whom notes he is “a great person to have across on a deal ­– an expert and a gentleman”.
Rabbe Sittnikow of Hannes Snellman ranks highly among peers, and is hailed as “a brilliant mind, and an excellent energy and natural resources lawyer”.
Thierry Lauriol of Jeantet sits “among the top leaders in energy law in France”. He enjoys an “excellent reputation among high-profile clients” for his leading expertise in the sector.
Alex McLean of Arthur Cox is a “fabulous energy lawyer” and is “extremely well versed and efficient” when handling complex regulatory issues and high-value transactions relating to renewables and natural resources.
Fiorella Alvino leads a "great team of energy lawyers at Nunziante Magrone" and draws praise for her considerable energy and natural resources experience.
Arjan Kleinhout of De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek is a “top-notch” lawyer, held in high regard for his “excellent energy law practice”.
Krzysztof Cichocki of Soltysinski Kawecki & Szlezak is “highly recommended” by clients as a “first-class energy practitioner” when it comes to infrastructure and energy projects.
Uria Menéndez’s Juan Ignacio González Ruiz is a “first class, very knowledgeable, efficient” lawyer, “very experienced” in project financing across the energy sector.
Jakob Falkman of Hammarskiöld comes “highly recommended” for his “excellent skills and efficiency” in the energy sector.
GHR Rechtsanwälte’s Marc Grüninger draws praise from market commentators for being “hugely experienced and great to work with” on energy transactions and corporate financing.
David F Asmus - Sidley Austin LLP, Houston
Jason Bennett - Baker Botts LLP, Houston
Andrew B Derman - Thompson & Knight LLP, Dallas
Donald E Greenfield QC - Bennett Jones LLP, Calgary
Sean Korney - Burnet Duckworth & Palmer LLP, Calgary
Steven P Otillar - White & Case LLP, Houston
Patrick T Maguire - Bennett Jones LLP, Calgary
James L Rice III - Sidley Austin LLP, Houston
Donald Greenfield possesses over 35 years of experience in the energy sector, where he enjoys a stellar reputation for his excellence handling high-value oil and gas, and LNG development projects.
Patrick Maguire is a “leader in the market” distinguished for his deep knowledge of financing international energy projects.
Vivek Warrier is widely regarded as an “excellent lawyer” with extensive knowledge of, and expertise in, LNGs and renewable energy matters.
Jason Roth draws plaudits from market commentators for his impressive practice spanning sophisticated infrastructure and energy projects.
Global Elite Thought Leader Sean Korney is an “excellent oil and gas lawyer”, widely considered the “best in the field” by peers and clients alike.
Alicia Quesnel is singled out by peers as “one of the finest energy lawyers” in the Canadian market, and is credited with great “diligence and unbelievable work ethic”.
John Cuthbertson QC is an “excellent” oil and gas lawyer with a significant experience in energy disputes and contractual matters.
David Asmus is “very well-known and respected in the energy field”, notably for his work on oil and gas development projects and related transactions.
Global Elite Thought Leader James Rice III is very well regarded among peers for his oil and gas expertise, and “great communication of complex topics for clients”.
Cliff Vrielink is an “excellent energy finance lawyer”, widely considered a “top-drawer” transactional specialist by sources.
Jason Bennett is looked upon with enormous favour by sources for his deep experience and knowledge across a wide array of energy matters, from oil and gas, to LNGs and water development.
Steven Miles is a “very well-known energy lawyer” in the field with a wealth of knowledge of domestic and international LNG matters.
Joshua Davidson is a “really helpful, extremely reasonable and knowledgeable” energy lawyer, commended for his great work on related securities transactions.
Michael Irvin receives widespread plaudits for his domestic and international energy practice, where he is well known for his top-tier handling of complex transactions.
Kevin Johnson QC comes highly recommended by peers and clients for his deep experience of oil and gas transactions.
The “very knowledgeable” Mungo Hardwicke-Brown of Blake Cassels & Graydon is an “excellent energy lawyer” who excels in sector-related M&A and project development.
J Jay Park QC of Park Energy Law is an “excellent international lawyer” with over 30 years of experience handling the gamut of energy matters, including exploration, development and production.
At Dentons, William Jenkins is singled out by market sources for his impressive work across the renewables energy sector.
The “excellent” Janice Buckingham of Osler Hoskin & Harcourt “definitely deserves to be in the list” for her combined knowledge and experience of joint ventures developments and energy storage projects.
Andrew Derman of Thompson & Knight is a “big name in the oil and gas industry” recognised for his top-tier international energy practice.
White & Case’s Steven Otillar is a “well respected” practitioner highly commended for his “excellent knowledge of oil and gas” projects.
David Sweeney of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld is a Global Elite Thought Leader distinguished for his “excellent” handling of high-value oil, gas and infrastructure transactions.
Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher’s Michael Darden is widely acknowledged as a “top-shelf oil and gas lawyer”, well versed in related transactions and project developments.
John Cogan Jr of Cogan & Partners is an “excellent energy lawyer” who “definitely should be on the list” according to impressed sources.
Liskow & Lewis’ William Pugh is an impressive energy lawyer, singled out as “hugely knowledgeable and excellent to work with”.
