'Energy superpower' hub hopes dim as Germany, Australia stop funding
The future work of dozens of researchers seeking to develop a low-carbon "energy superpower" vision hangs in the balance after support from both the German and Australian governments was halted.
The Energy Transition Hub , a five-year $20 million venture signed in 2017 to foster research by Australian and German universities, stops receiving funds from Germany this quarter, with the Morrison government's support ending in June.
Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull and German Chancellor Angela Merkel agreed in 2017 at the G7 leaders' summit to back an energy transition hub that is now facing an uncertain future after both nations ended their support.
The German government did not extend its 2.5-year initial funding, while Australia's Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade reneged on its five-year pledge two years early, saving $1.75 million.
In an email to staff and researchers on Friday, the hub's directors said they had been "recently informed by DFAT" of its decision not to "follow through on its original commitment" to fund the hub until 2022.
"DFAT wish the hub to continue to deliver, but want to 'refocus their resources' at 'a time of tight budgets'," the email said.
"Remaining funding will be reallocated to support our strategic priorities with Germany and other European partners more effectively, including potential collaboration with Germany on hydrogen," the spokesman said.
The sudden funding halt comes as Angus Taylor, the federal energy minister, is preparing to release a so-called technology roadmap of how Australia can reduce its emissions without resorting to the net zero 2050 goal proposed by Labor. The Sun-Herald and Sunday Age approached Mr Taylor's office for comment.
Dylan McConnell, an energy researcher at the hub, said it was "hypocritical and counterproductive" for the government to be talking up technology investment targets "while cutting funding".
Mark Butler, Labor's climate spokesman, said the Coalition was "all talk when it comes to clean technology and climate action", noting it had cut funding to the Australian Renewable Energy Agency and CSIRO and had tried to abolish the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
"If the Liberals were serious about reducing emissions they wouldn’t cut funding to climate research," he said.
The hub expanded beyond its core partners – the University of Melbourne and the Australian National University – to include the University of Technology Sydney, Monash and others. Its German partners include the Potsdam Institute.
Negotiations are under way to decide if the universities will step in to take over the funding.
"We’ve achieved much," the email to staff said. "We have created an expanding network of industry, government and academic partners and delivered lots of excellent research.
"All we can say at the moment is that the re-negotiations of the Funding Deed between the University of Melbourne and DFAT are underway," it said.
High hopes are being placed on hydrogen as a fuel to replace oil, gas and coal.
Justin Zobel, a Pro Vice-Chancellor at the University of Melbourne, said there would be no impact on PhD candidates from his institution who were working with the hub.
"These students are counted as part of the university’s contribution to the hub via the Australian-German Climate and Energy College," Professor Zobel said. "It’s an internally funded PhD program that preceded the hub. It is not funded by it."
Concern, though, remains among the 50-odd researchers linked to the hub. One noted that the Climate and Energy College will soon lose its director, with Anita Talberg set to join the Clean Energy Council.
"In part, the DFAT funding was cross-subsiding the college because the uni wouldn't support it themselves," the researcher said.
"Basically, we are not being funded by the university at all – we sit outside of traditional faculty structures – and the faculties have not been willing to give resources to us," the researcher said. "As of late last year, we lost a key admin/professional staff person [as] the university – either faculties or chancellery  – was [not] willing to resource that."
"This slashing of funding is extremely disappointing and calls into question whether the federal government has any real commitment to cutting emissions and transitioning to new energy sources," Ms D'Ambrosio said.
