This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Energy Stocks Achieve a Mini-Bull Market. Now They Need an Oil-Production Cut.
Global oil markets could see an oversupply in the second quarter of as much as 10 million barrels a day.
Energy stocks ended the day in a bull market, a small bit of positive news for a sector that has been facing its most dramatic downturn in decades. It marks the third-fastest energy bull market in history.
But the rebound still leaves the sector down 50% this year. And it is unlikely to last unless OPEC, Russia and the U.S. come up with an agreement to cut production that would bring the oil-and-gas industry into closer alignment. Even with an agreement, the loss of demand because of coronavirus is likely to rattle energy stocks for months.
The energy sector of the S&P 500 is up more than 20% over the past five days, rising from about 180 to 220 over that period. The energy stocks with the biggest gains include some of the names that fell the most over the previous few weeks. Oil-services company Halliburton (ticker: HAL), for instance, is up 38% between last Thursday and Tuesday’s close. Halliburton is still down 72% this year. Large oil producers that had fallen precipitously have also rebounded in the past few days, with Pioneer Natural Resources (PXD), EOG (EOG) and Diamondback Energy (FANG) all rising more than 20%.
The sudden rise in energy stocks marks the quickest rebound from a bear-market low to a bull market since a 4-day rally in November 2008. The rise has been helped by the government stimulus package that was getting closer to completion in Congress , and by positive news from individual companies, such as Chevron ’s (CVX) move to cut capital expenses and maintain its dividend .
Can it last? If current market trends persist—high levels of supply from Saudi Arabia and Russia and low demand because of the coronavirus—there is little chance that markets will rebound. Based on those trends, global oil markets could see an oversupply in the second quarter of as much as 10 million barrels a day, an unprecedented shock for a market that normally balances at about 100 million barrels a day.
But there is a wild card in the mix now. The U.S. could ostensibly find a way to come to a deal with foreign oil producers to limit U.S. production in return for less production growth from overseas producers. That could assuage concerns from Saudi Arabia and Russia that U.S. shale drillers will steal their market share if they cut production. A drawn-out supply war could shift market share to Saudi Arabia, but it would become hugely expensive, as that country depends on oil revenues to fund the government.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
The Texas Railroad Commission, which regulates the oil industry in the state, could put limits on oil production, though it hasn’t done so since the 1970s. The Wall Street Journal reported last week that the commission has considered that possibility at the urging of some oil producers. Since then, the chairman of the commission, Wayne Christian, came out with a statement expressing reservations about the plan , in part based on free-market ideals and in part because Texas wouldn’t be able to guarantee that other states would also follow the rules. But Commissioner Ryan Sitton wrote in an opinion piece for Bloomberg that he thinks the federal government could make a larger deal that would work .
“In theory, Texas could cut production by 10%, and if Saudi Arabia is willing to cut production by 10% from its pre-pandemic levels and Russia is willing to do the same, it would return the market to precrisis levels (and only somewhat oversupplied),” Sitton wrote. “While Texas controls its destiny, it doesn’t control that of others. We would need our federal government, and our president, to make a deal that stabilizes oil markets.”
On Thursday, the G-20 nations are set to meet (virtually) to discuss the global response to the pandemic, and oil production may be one item on the table. Some analysts think a deal is likely to be made.
“We suspect that the world’s top three oil producers—Saudi Arabia, Russia and the U. S.—will aim to stabilize prices soon,” the Wells Fargo Investment Institute predicted in a note on Wednesday. “We expect a bottom to be found in oil prices soon and a bounce to follow.”
Energy Stocks Achieve a Mini-Bull Market. Now They Need an Oil-Production Cut.
Energy stocks ended the day in a bull market, a small bit of positive news for a sector that has been facing its most dramatic downturn in decades.
