We re-bought BTE today for our portfolio and decided to add it to our oil trading portfolio as well for leverage to the upside.
WTI needs to make a sustained move above $40/bbl for many of these energy names to rally.
Fundamentally, we should start to see US crude storage draw as high levels of imports from Saudi vessels unwind by the end of this week.
This would give support to WTI, and we see a sustained move above $40/bbl soon.
Given our position in BTE for our oil trading portfolio is short term in nature (different than the portfolio holding), we will be looking to exit around the previous gap high of $0.78. If it manages to break above that level, it will likely retest the previous gap left around $1.13.
This idea was discussed in more depth with members of my private investing community, HFI Research. Get started today »
Welcome to the breakout edition of Oil Markets Daily!
We will keep this article brief. We re-bought BTE today for our portfolio and decided to add it to our oil trading portfolio as well for leverage to the upside. There is currently no good oil trading vehicle in the market, so BTE was, in our opinion, the best beta vehicle.
Over the weekend, we wrote an article exclusive to subscribers titled, "Inflection Point Will Come For Energy Stocks Above Sustained $40/Bbl." There are still many energy names trading at distressed valuations when they shouldn't be. For example, Baytex (NYSE: BTE ) has already announced that they do not foresee any covenants being breached at today's STRIP. The market, however, remains concerned about BTE's long-term viability with WTI STRIP between $40 and $43/bbl.
This is, of course, obvious to anyone following these energy names closely. All-in-breakeven for BTE is around $43/bbl, so we would need to see WTI rise above this level and more to see the stock really inflect.
Given our fundamental analysis on the oil market, we do see much higher prices on the horizon as US crude storage is set to draw. Saudi's armada of vessels are expected to finish unloading in the US by this week, so import figures are going to start rather materially.
This would give support to WTI, and we see a sustained move above $40/bbl soon.
Other names that broke out to the upside today include MEG ( OTCPK:MEGEF ) and Cenovus Energy (NYSE: CVE ), both of which we are very long in.
For those of you looking to play some beta without picking individual stocks, you can look at XOP as the trading vehicle. We wouldn't recommend GUSH since it suffers from volatility decay.
Given our position in BTE for our oil trading portfolio is short-term in nature (different than the portfolio holding), we will be looking to exit around the previous gap high of $0.78. If it manages to break above that level, it will likely retest the previous gap left around $1.13.
To reduce risk exposure and to avoid false breakouts, we would recommend setting a stop-loss below the support level of around $0.42.
Thank you for reading this article. We launched our oil trading portfolio in 2019. The oil trading portfolio is designed to take advantage of short-term long/short oil trades in the market. For readers interested in our positioning along with real-time trades, we are now offering a 2-week free trial . Here's our trading result from 2019:
Disclosure: I am/we are long BTE, MEG.TO, CVE. I wrote this article myself, and it expresses my own opinions. I am not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). I have no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.
