The current dynamics are perfect for oil refiners.
The energy sector didn’t get much help in the stimulus package passed by the Senate late Wednesday night , despite attempts by both parties to use the bill to help these companies. Still, energy stocks were mostly higher on Thursday, as some of the money going to consumers is likely to be spent on products including gasoline.
President Donald Trump said last week that he wants the U.S. to buy millions of barrels of oil for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, a plan that was likely to cost about $2 billion if filled at current prices. Trump had asked for $3 billion in the bill to fill the reserve “to the top,” but money for those purchases was stripped from the Senate bill. Environmentalists spoke out against the purchases, calling them a bailout of the oil industry . It isn’t clear whether the Energy Department could find another way to make those purchases and it didn’t respond to a request for comment.
Exclusive data, tables and charts from Barron's Market Lab.
Oil prices were falling Thursday morning, with Brent crude futures down 0.3% to $27.30 and West Texas crude down 4.3% to $23.43. Nonetheless, energy stocks were rising, led by refiners, which often benefit from low crude prices because crude is an input price for them. In fact, the current dynamics are perfect for refiners. Gasoline prices are rising, and refiners make money on the spread between the crude they process and the products such as gasoline they produce. And as consumers get stimulus money to spend, the demand for gas should rise. Shares of Marathon Petroleum (MPC), a large U.S. refiner, jumped 14%. Energy stocks have enjoyed a mini-rally in the past week , rebounding a bit from a deep slide this year.
The bill also didn’t include money or credits for green energy. Republicans balked at plans by Democrats to try to stimulate renewable-energy industries such as wind, solar and electric vehicles. Associations supporting those industries had asked Congress to extend tax credits for renewable-energy adoption, claiming they would make it possible to add thousands of jobs. But Republicans pushed back, with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell saying that “Democrats won’t let us fund hospitals or save small businesses unless they get to dust off the Green New Deal.”
Heating-oil prices were falling on Thursday despite a provision in the bill to give aid for low-income heating assistance.
The energy sector didn’t get much help in the stimulus package passed by the Senate late Wednesday night, despite attempts by both parties to use the bill to help these companies.
