European equities erased their earlier advance as oil slipped, weighing on energy stocks, and as investors assessed steps to relax lockdowns across major economies.
The Stoxx Europe 600 Index retreated as much as 0.3% after rising 0.7%. Travel stocks tumbled the most among industries, while oil shares were under pressure because Brent fell. The FTSE 250 Index of mid-caps gained as much as 1.3% after Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced the “first careful steps” to easing lockdown rules in a three-point plan, before trimming the advance.
While the coronavirus pandemic remains a key concern, France, Italy and the U.K. all reported the fewest deaths since March and governments around the world have given more details on how their economies will gradually restart. European equities have rallied more than 20% since March lows on the optimism of stimulus and the easing in the number of new infections. However, investors are now looking for fresh reasons to keep buying and are evaluating the risks of a second wave of infections.
“Although the news is largely encouraging, it is too early to say that we are out of the woods,” said Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management. “Meanwhile, as economies open up, investors will be concerned about whether it’s possible to avoid a significant threat of a second wave.”
JPMorgan Chase & Co. strategists led by Mislav Matejka poured cold water on prospects for the cheaper and more volatile shares that benefit from an economic recovery. They said that while there will be attempts at a reflation trade, with relief bounces in value and cyclicals, these rotations won’t be able to be sustained for as long as bond yields are constrained, oil is directionless, inflation forwards are down, lending standards are tightened, and core inflation, wage growth and labor market remain weak. In the meantime, tech and defensive stocks are likely to remain the winners, they said.
Investor positioning points to continuing caution. Equity funds saw their largest redemption in the week through May 6 since the March market crash, with a $16.2 billion outflow, according to Bank of America Corp. and EPFR Global data. In the meantime, cash funds continued to see inflows.
The OMX Copenhagen 25 Index today jumped 1.4%, erasing year-to-date losses.
