Investment in wind farms and battery projects have been suggested by experts.
The Federal Government has committed $1 billion to help improve the reliability of the electricity grid, in a move it says will help households get "a fair deal on energy".
No specific investments have yet been identified, but battery, solar and wind projects have been suggested by experts
Energy experts and Labor have welcomed the investment, but called for more
In what energy experts described as good signal but a drop in the ocean compared to requirements over the coming decades, the $1 billion will be handed to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC) for investment in technologies that help to maintain the reliability of Australia's electricity grid.
The CEFC, set up under the 2012 Labor government, is required to turn a profit for the taxpayer. In the last financial year it leveraged $3 worth of private investment for each taxpayer-dollar lent.
If that ratio continued, the new money could result in a total of about $4 billion being invested into grid-reliability projects.
Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the $1 billion investment was given to ensure there was enough energy in the system during periods of high demand.
"It is no secret that the National Electricity Market is under pressure," Mr Taylor said on Wednesday. "This fund is designed to tackle that."
Australian National University Centre for Climate and Energy Policy director Frank Jotzo said the funding was "thoroughly positive" but only a tiny percentage of what was needed in the coming years and decades.
He said projects helped by the fund would improve the grid's reliability but, more importantly, it sent a signal about the Morrison Government's future direction.
"We've heard a lot of rhetoric about the Federal Government wanting to support the continued operation of coal-fired power plants," he said.
With few concrete details released on Wednesday on how the CEFC would be directed to use the new money, it is not yet clear what technology will be funded.
However it pointed to transmission infrastructure and "grid stabilising technologies" as well as pumped hydro or batteries projects as potential projects.
Frank Jotzo said by 2050 Australia would need large storage facilities to cover energy shortfalls.
But Professor Jotzo said the fund might support projects such as high-voltage transmission lines, allowing the creation of renewable energy "hubs".
Grid stabilisation technology might include batteries like the Hornsdale battery in South Australia built by Tesla, which stabilises frequency and voltage in the system, he said.
Professor Jotzo said these investments could bring down energy bills by allowing more — and cheaper — wind and solar generation to be built into the grid and distributed across the country.
The CEFC can only finance projects that produce less than half the emissions of the grid average, which rules out coal.
Asked on Wednesday why none of the $1 billion would be spent on coal projects, Mr Taylor said: "We're not excluding coal, we are just dealing with it in a different way."
The Government is pursuing a number of different ways of supporting new generation, such as a government-backed Underwriting New Generation Investment fund which is considering funding a coal project.
Projects such as Tesla's Hornsdale battery project have been suggested for the fund.
Speaking on potential uses of the $1 billion fund, Dylan McConnell from the Australian-German Climate and Energy College said the Hornsdale battery project cost about $90 million, and could be replicated several times by the new financing.
But Mr McConnell said the stabilisation services provided by that type of battery would be saturated quickly.
"This 17th energy policy from the Morrison Government will do nothing to lower power prices for Australian households and businesses," he said.
The Coalition tried to abolish the CEFC in 2013, but the move was blocked by the Senate.
Labor leader Anthony Albanese said the Government had "finally come around to the realisation" that clean energy could produce a return.
"There needs to be a greater investment than what they have promised and you can't really reduce energy prices unless you have an energy policy that is comprehensive," he said.
