Refrain from posting comments that are obscene, defamatory or inflammatory, and do not indulge in personal attacks, name calling or inciting hatred against any community. Help us delete comments that do not follow these guidelines by marking them offensive. Let's work together to keep the conversation civil.
Be the first one to review.
We have sent you a verification email. To verify, just follow the link in the message
Feeling tired all the time? Try these 5 energy bar recipes for an instant boost!
TIMESOFINDIA.COM | Last updated on - Jul 1, 2020, 10:07 ISTShare fbshare twshare pinshare Comments (0)
All of us feel a sudden drop in energy sometimes while working from home or going to the office. There are times when we are left feeling weak and tired after completing a strenuous workout. While we can’t always spare the time for making an elaborate, nutrient-rich and energising meal, these 5 energy bar recipes come together quickly and only needs easily available ingredients! You can store each of these in cling wraps for up to 5 days in the refrigerator.
Prepare yourself for an instant punch of energy with Flapjacks! Add 1 cup each of butter & brown sugar in a pan and cook on sim until the sugar melts and then add 2 tbsp honey. After switching off the flame, mix with 2 cups of rolled oats. Spread some butter paper in a baking dish and evenly spread the folded mixture in there. Preheat the oven at 180 degrees C and bake for 10 to 12 minutes or until it becomes light brown. You can make variations of it by adding fruits, dry fruits, cinnamon etc.
Let the goodness of dry fruits without any sugar or jaggery fill you with energy! Steep 1 cup dates in 1 cup hot water for 1:30-2 hours. Without adding extra water, blend into a smooth paste after deseeding. Roast ¼ cup each sesame seeds, pistachios & pumpkin seeds, ½ cup walnuts, 1 cup each of cashews and almonds and ½ cup desiccated coconut in a kadhai for 5 minutes. In another pan, saute the dates paste until it thickens then add the nuts, ½ tsp cardamom powder, ¼ tsp salt and ½ cup honey. In another pan dry roast ½ cup oats and blend into a fine powder. Combine everything in a thick mixture and transfer to a lined dish. Let set in a refrigerator for at least 1 hour. Cut into bars and serve.
This nutty bar will energise you while giving you a chocolaty surprise! Put 1 cup chopped almonds, 1 ½ cup uncooked oats and ½ up choco chips in a bowl. Then heat up ½ cup honey (or maple syrup), 1 cup almond butter (or any nut butter), 2 tbsp melted coconut oil in a pan until everything melts and mixes together. Now combine both the mixtures until everything is properly coated with liquid ingredients. Transfer to a baking tray and spread in a 1 inch thick. Cover with a cling wrap and place it in the fridge overnight or at least 2-3 hours.
Munch on these yummy bars of protein blast! Soak 12 pitted dates in 1 cup warm water for 2 hours and later make a paste. In a pan, heat up ¼ cup peanut butter, ⅓ cup honey and 2 tbsp coconut oil. Ensure that everything mixes properly. Now mix this with dates paste, 1 cup rolled oats, ⅓ cup dark chocolate chunks, ½ cup chopped peanuts and ¼ tsp salt. You can also choose to blend the oats in a fine powder. Stir until a thick mixture forms. Spread out evenly in a dish with a parchment paper. Put in a freezer for at least 2 hours.
Finally a boosting bar with fruity goodness! Make a fine flour of 1 cup rolled oats. Chop 12-13 dates and 1 cup dried apricots into fine pieces. Transfer them in a mixing bowl and add 2 tbsp desiccated coconut, 2 tbsp flaxseeds and 5 tbsp melted coconut oil. Mix until a sticky mixture is formed. Pour into a lined baking dish and spread evenly. Press it down with a flat bottom glass jar or dish. Now put it in the freezer to set for 2 hours.
