‘Disciplined and smart and charming and down to earth’: Finn Wolfhard according to the actor Ryan Reynolds; clothes by Saint Laurent. Photograph: Danielle Levitt/The Observer
And yet here he is, moving from one side of his parents’ home to the other and back again. Wolfhard describes himself as someone with “so much crazy energy”, even for a 17-year-old – so much that he often feels he must start doing something even when he is already doing something. (Before the pandemic, he thought standing still was a waste of time.) He also describes himself as “a crazy workaholic”, which shows in his output. In the past two years alone he has appeared in several major films: the big-screen adaptation of Donna Tartt ’s novel The Goldfinch; the second chapter in the popular It films – as well as the third series of Stranger Things , the hit Netflix show that has made him a star. He auditioned for Stranger Things when he was 12, and he has worked almost nonstop ever since – two films one year, three the next, a remarkable schedule. We were due to discuss his latest project, a big-budget Ghostbusters reboot directed by Jason Reitman. But the film has been postponed, another casualty of the pandemic, and so his publicist suggested we discuss his other interests: not just the acting, but also the fact that he is a screenwriter and a short-film director and the frontman in a bona fide garage-rock band, the Aubreys.
Wolfhard’s professional career began when he landed a role in a music video, aged nine. “You could go on Craigslist and search for gigs,” he remembers. “And some were, like, sketchy, but you would also find, like, ‘Looking for eight- to 11-year-old boy and girl to play younger versions of Canadian indie band.’” He had begun making his own short films as a seven-year-old – “mostly sci-fi rip-offs” – and he had always marvelled at the finished result, rapt by the magic of it, as though it weren’t something he had made himself. For a while he thought he would go to film school and become a director. But his first experience of being an actor on set “totally changed my life”, he says, and his second experience – another music video, this one very high drama (his character shoots a policeman) – confirmed the passion. He fell in love: with being on set, with being part of a group of like-minded people who somehow managed to film a load of independent scenes and make it into a whole. He had seen the filmmaking process up close, “and it was mind-blowing”.
Wolfhard is best known for Stranger Things, in which he plays Mike Wheeler, the de-facto leader of a bunch of kid-nerds who have to investigate the paranormal goings-on in their middle American town while also struggling with regular teenage stuff, like figuring out how to act around members of the opposite sex. Wolfhard plays Wheeler as determined but awkward and gawky, and he is so convincingly awkward and gawky that it is easy to think he would be the same in real life, that the boundary between Wolfhard and Wheeler was somehow blurred, though really the only similarity seems to be that they are both decent kids. On comment boards, fans describe Wolfhard as “wholesome”, almost in defiance of what we worry might happen to a child star: that their heads get turned by bad stuff, that they make poor life choices and develop destructive habits, and that these things are inevitable for them because they have been so directly in the spotlight while so young, and who could handle that kind of pressure?
Apparently Wolfhard can. He doesn’t drink. He doesn’t smoke. He doesn’t do drugs. (Because he failed his test, he doesn’t even drive.) In a recent interview, the actor Ryan Reynolds , who is also from Vancouver, said that friends the pair have in common describe Wolfhard as “disciplined and smart and charming and down to earth”, before asking how he stays so grounded. “If I were in the same boat in, let’s say 1990, I think it would be different,” Wolfhard tells me. “But because there are so many rules to keep children safe now, you know? Ask my co-stars. None of us have ever been in the position where, like, we’re at an uncomfortable party being served drinks… Don’t get me wrong, it happens. It depends on the person. But the environment I’ve grown up in has been very positive.” When I ask him to reveal his worst vice, he responds, “I say the word ‘Like’ a lot,” before adding, “And I eat like shit. I still eat like a four-year-old” – burgers, sweets – “which is not a good thing when you’re constantly travelling and feeling crappy because of your diet.”
