Image used for illustrative purpose. A man walks between solar panels set up by Tesla, at the San Juan Children's Hospital, after the island was hit by Hurricane Maria in September, in San Juan, Puerto Rico October 26, 2017.
(TAP) - The first solar energy station in Tunisia "Chams Enfidha" with a capacity of 1 megawatt and located in the delegation of Enfidha, (governorate of Sousse) was inaugurated Tuesday.
It is one of the sixteen projects which recently obtained preliminary agreements for the production of electricity from renewable energies (RE), the Minister of Energy, Mines and Energy Transition, Mongi Marzouk, said on the occasion of the inauguration of the station.
These projects will contribute to lowering electricity production from conventional energy currently estimated at 97%, given that the national strategy is based on the diversification of energy production sources, the full integration of RE and the increase of electricity production from RE to 30% by 2030, he added.
This strategy is based on the system of private generators capable of producing electricity with a capacity of 10 MW, as well as on the projects of the Tunisian Electricity and Gas Company (STEG) with a capacity of 300 MW.
Work is also focused on increasing production to reach 1,000 MW in 2025 and 2,000 MW in 2030.
Marzouk called on investors to invest in RE projects and to take advantage of the advantages and incentives granted by the state to ensure its energy security and contribute to the full integration of RE.
The cost of "Chams Enfidha is estimated at 3.3 million dinars (MD), according to Director General of the National Agency for Energy Management, Fathi Hanchi.
It is composed of 3,000 solar panels to enable the production of 1.6 million kilowatts of electricity per year, which would have required the use of 350 tons of gas to achieve this production, he explained.
He added that the project was awarded a fixed purchase contract with a price of 247 millimes/kwh for the first 12 years and then at a price of 210 millimes for a period of 8 years.
Chams Enfidha" the first 100% Tunisian project, is the result of a Public-Private Partnership (PPP), carried out within the framework of the authorisation regime.
The Ministry of Energy has approved 6 new projects in the category of 10 Mw and 10 projects in the category of 1 Mw, which represent a total investment of 150 MD. These projects will create more than 150 jobs, according to the Department of Energy.
© Tap 2020 Provided by SyndiGate Media Inc. ( Syndigate.info ).
Disclaimer: The content of this article is syndicated or provided to this website from an external third party provider. We are not responsible for, and do not control, such external websites, entities, applications or media publishers. The body of the text is provided on an “as is” and “as available” basis and has not been edited in any way. Neither we nor our affiliates guarantee the accuracy of or endorse the views or opinions expressed in this article. Read our full disclaimer policy here .
