The move in oil futures is all about factors such as storage limits and expiring contracts.
Benchmark crude-oil prices are cratering —sort of. And the steep declines in near-term crude contracts continue to pummel energy stocks. Several “ oily industrial ” stocks—industrial companies that generate a lot of sales selling to the energy sector—are getting hammered.
The decline in oil prices, however, can be used as an opportunity to pick up high-quality industrial stocks at a discount.
Energy components of the S&P 500 are down about 44% year to date, far worse than comparable declines in the broader Index or the Dow Jones Industrial Average .
The 81% drop in benchmark U.S. crude-oil price is the biggest reason for sector stock-price weakness. Near-term futures oil contracts were setting records Monday, dropping nearly 40% to below $12 a barrel. It is a breathtaking move, and energy stocks were down 2.8% near midday.
There isn’t anything much new about demand, OPEC or Covid-19 . The move in oil futures is all about factors such as storage limits and expiring contracts. Oil is a commodity, not a stock price. And futures contracts have dates for delivery associated with them. Often times, market participants quote the near-term contract when referencing energy prices. In normal times there is no issue, because the shape of the commodity future curve doesn’t change.
But these aren’t normal times . The shape of the oil futures curve looks nothing like it did even six months ago. The spread between the May 2020 contract and the September contract is about $28 a barrel. The spread is unusual and bears more explanation. The May 2020 price for oil is about $12 a barrel. The September price is more than $30 a barrel.
Anyone needing crude oil—such as a refinery—later in 2020 can’t really acquire it for $12 a barrel. The state of the entire industry isn’t as dire as the Monday price quote would indicate.
Still, all this strange trading has given investors another reason to sell first and ask questions later. And the selling has left some high-quality stocks at discounted prices.
Flowserve (ticker: FLS) generates about 40% of sales from energy-related customers. Flowserve stock was off 4.1% Monday and 52% year to date. The stock trades at 13 times estimated 2021 earnings and has an average amount of debt relative to the size of the company, compared with other industrials. The company makes valves and seals for a lot of energy producers, including chemical companies and utilities. Investors may want to check out shares as oil prices both bottom and confuse.
Emerson Electric (EMR) generates one-third or more of its sales from the energy sector. Its stock is another one hammered by oil-price declines. Shares are down 34% year to date, worse than the 23% drop of the Industrial Select Sector SPDR ETF (XLI). Emerson shares trade for 15 times estimated 2021 earnings, a discount to the market. It is a higher-valuation multiple than Flowserve, but it is a larger conglomerate and has less debt relative to the size of the company.
United Rentals (URI) and engineering and construction firm Fluor (FLR) trade for roughly 5 times estimated 2021 earnings. Exposure is a little more difficult to pin down, but the energy sector is significant for both. United rents a lot of equipment to the oil patch. Fluor builds things such as refineries and chemical plants. The stocks are down 39% and 56% year to date, respectively. United has some debt, but Fluor has no net debt. (Net debt is cash compared with total debt.) Both companies don’t typically trade at a market multiple, but both are at a discount to recent company history.
The energy sector is an important source of demand for many industrial companies. Low oil prices hurt industrial stocks, but a lot of bad news is reflected in the shares.
Investors might want to check out these four and others to be ready when a turn comes in oil prices.
Benchmark crude-oil prices are cratering—sort of.
