Shares of FuelCell Energy Inc. are up 20% in premarket trading Friday after the company, which makes fuel-cell power plants, reported better-than-expected revenue for its fiscal second quarter. The company recorded a net loss of $14.8 million, or 7 cents a share, compared with a loss of $22.9 million, or $2.06 a share, in the year-earlier period. The loss was in line with what analysts surveyed by FactSet had been expecting. FuelCell's revenue more than doubled, to $18.9 million from $9.2 million, while analysts had been predicting $15.5 million. "Despite the challenges of the current global environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we continued to execute against our project pipeline and advanced our work with ExxonMobil Research and Engineering Company in pursuit of commercializing our proprietary carbon capture solution," Chief Executive Jason Few said. "We still have work to do but are on a clear strategic path to continue making progress and achieving our goals." Shares have added 30% over the past month as the S&P 500 SPX,
Shares of Workhorse Group Inc.  ran up 19% in morning trading, putting them on track for a record ninth-straight gain toward a record high, after the electric van maker announced a $70 million securities purchase agreement from a single institutional investors. The stock has now skyrocketed more than four fold (up 318%) since it last declined on June 17. The company said it agreed to sell to HT Investments MA, LLC $70 million in a senior secured convertible note, which will be convertible into common stock. The notes will bear interest at 4.50% per share and mature on July 1, 2023. Workhorse expects to use the proceeds from the sale of notes to finance the production of its trucks and for general corporate purposes. The stock has soared nearly 10-fold (up 892%) over the past three months. Among other electric vehicle makers, shares of Nikola Corp.  has gained nearly 6-fold (up 489%), Tesla Inc.  has doubled (up 104%) and Nio Inc.  has nearly tripled (up 180%). Meanwhile, the S&P 500  has gained 16% the past three months.
