growth, economic development and technological progress. The broad pluralism
availability, production, distribution, and use at various geographical scales.
From jet fuel and heating oil to fertilizers and plastics,
the extractive industrial spaces produce many products, essential to modern
life across nearly all demographic groups. In contemporary times, the entire
‘Big gas-oils’ and State-owned ‘Gas-oil firms’. Both these, across the nations,
have almost come to a halt.  The first half
national governments around the world. These transformations are historically
and geographically unprecedented in scale, according to current estimates, with
about more than 40% of the global population impacted by these new measures.
Sopore shootout: Civilian shot dead in cold-blood, alleges family; police, CRPF deny charge
subsumed in Fossils-Fuel-Societies across the world for work and production,
for leisure and travel and business etcetera, especially, the physical mobility
drastically as demographic groups around the world started staying indoors.
world in terms of economic, social, cultural and political aspects.
In the beginning of 19th century, with the invention of steam engine, coal became a valuable commodity. It had replaced traditional non-fossils energy sources and supplied for primary energy needs of industrialized countries. By 20th century, in global energy supply chains, coal remained a dominant energy source which supplied close to two-thirds of global energy needs by the end of World War I. However, post World War II there was a peak demand in the market of oil, partly due to oil’s attractiveness for the transportation sector, where demand has risen steadily along with changing geo-politics and geo-economics. Although, coal remains a dominant source of energy in contemporary times even after many paradoxes.
The oil crisis of 1970s brought about two specific events occurring in the Middle-east, the Yom-Kippur War of 1973 and Iranian Revolution of 1979. Both events resulted in disruption of oil supplies from the region which created difficulties for the nations that relied on energy exports from the region. Post-1970s, oil industry have become one of the substantial global extent along with high level of geographical integration. There was a geographical spreading of extractives, activities and diversification of supply outside OPEC countries, started mainly after 1970s. Simultaneously, geopolitical tensions linked to oil continued in following decades, as shown by Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990, which led in few months doubling of oil prices and triggered U.S.A. economic recession and geopolitical tensions in other countries. In wrapping up, oil energy systems are concentrated in ‘difficult’ places and are highly vulnerable and risky, in addition oil systems emit high amount of carbon to the environment.
