In a note published Monday night, analysts at Goldman Sachs listed five reasons investors should add exposure to energy stocks following oil's historic plunge into negative territory .
Goldman said it thinks that energy fundamentals have bottomed and that there is potential for a lasting recovery depending on the pace of the demand rebound.
The risk behind the call, the analysts noted, is a much slower oil-demand recovery, which would likely happen if the coronavirus pandemic lingers longer than expected.
Goldman Sachs thinks now is the time for investors to add exposure to energy stocks following oil's historic plunge into negative territory last week.
The investment bank gave five reasons in a note published Monday night.
Goldman thinks energy fundamentals have bottomed and sees potential for a lasting recovery in energy stocks depending on the pace of the rebound in demand for oil.
The main risk related to the call, according to the analysts, is a much slower oil-demand recovery, which could be exacerbated if the coronavirus pandemic lingers longer than investors expect.
Here are the five reasons Goldman Sachs is bullish on energy stocks.
West Texas Intermediate oil is below the $20- to $25-per-barrel prices often seen as "typical cash cost floors." Goldman thinks the current low prices and even the negative oil prices seen last week are warranted because of the level of oversupply in oil markets. At the same time, these ultra-low prices should force a reduction in production, thus reducing supply and helping put a floor in oil prices.
Read more: Goldman Sachs recommends investors buy 'quality at a reasonable price.' Here are the firm's top 10 stock picks that fit the bill.
"The combination of OPEC+ supply cut and US/Canada shut-ins should reduce the need for prolonged low shale activity needed to rebalance oil prices," Goldman said.
Goldman expects global demand in oil to improve off trough levels before the end of the quarter and "gradually recover over the next two years." Goldman's commodities-research team sees a transition from building oil inventories to drawing on oil inventories by June.
"E&P stocks are trading near $0.50 cents on the dollar per dollar invested adjusted for longer-term degradation in corporate returns — this is slightly above troughs seen since 1995," Goldman said.
Read more: Meet the 20-year-old day-trading phenom who's turned $20,000 into more than $1 million. He details his precise strategy — and shares how he made $11,400 in 2 minutes.
Between dividend cuts, production shut-ins, and lower front-month oil prices, oil stocks no longer appear to be harmed by the poor headlines coming out of the oil industry. Goldman said that "as producer announcements shift from capex/dividend cuts to shut-ins, we expect equity response to inflect more positively."
WTI oil traded down more than 3% on Tuesday morning, to $12.34 per barrel. Energy stocks , as measured by the XLE ETF, were down 40% year-to-date.
Here's a potential timeline for oil's recovery, according to the bank:
