Despite the positive renewable energy investment trends over the past decade, annual investments in renewable energy power alone need to double until 2050 to meet climate goals.
capital to drive the world’s transition to a low-carbon economy, a set of
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) has recently published a series of renewable energy finance briefs looking at tools to scale up renewables. Renewable energy finance: Green bonds highlights green bonds as an innovative instrument that can help channel substantial global capital into renewable energy and other green assets.
between providers of capital and green assets, green bonds can help governments
the bond issuer to raise funds for specific projects or ongoing business. The
European Investment Bank’s first issuance of a Climate Awareness Bond in 2007,
efficiency projects. Since then, the green bond market has grown substantially,
particularly in the past 5 years, with 2019 issuances reaching a record of
More from Power Engineering International:
growing amount of capital raised, the market also expanded a growing variety of
issuers from different regions – firstly from Europe, then North America, and
banks and development finance institutions, green bonds are now issued by
well as private corporations and financial institutions.
energy is present in around half of all green bonds issued. However, green
to renewables. Even though progress to date has been impressive, the green bond
market continues to offer enormous growth potential.
The cumulative issuances of green bonds are below $1 trillion, while the global bond market is valued at around $100 trillion, accounting for less than 1 per cent of cumulative global bond issuances. To grow the green bond market, co-operation between policy makers, standard setters, capital providers and investors is essential. IRENA’s brief highlights specific coordinated actions that various stakeholders can take to untap the potential of green bonds.
Policy makers can help increase both the supply of green bonds (through the adoption of leading climate-aligned green bond standards) and the provision of enabling policies that grow the renewable energy sector.
Public capital providers can do their part to help de-risk renewable assets and can support green bonds through provision of the seed capital, demonstration issuances and capacity building.
Institutional investors can assist by aligning their internal capacities and investment targets with long-term sustainability mandates.
Other stakeholders, such as rating agencies, financial institutions and retail investors, also play a role in strengthening the green bond market and advancing the global energy transformation
This story originally appeared on our sister-site,
