Carl Guardino leaves a ribbon-cutting ceremony for a new BART Berryessa Station in San Jose. Carl Guardino, the long-time top boss at Silicon Valley Leadership Group, has already found his next job — a key executive role at up-and-coming green company Bloom Energy.
SAN JOSE — Carl Guardino, the long-time top boss at Silicon Valley Leadership Group, has already found his next job: a key executive role at up-and-coming green company Bloom Energy.
“Bloom’s mission ‘to make clean, reliable energy affordable to everyone in the world’ is not only inspiring, it is essential,” Guardino said Tuesday. “In a post-COVID world, resilient communities sit at the intersection of social, economic, and environmental security.”
Guardino will take on his new role as executive vice president, government affairs and policy, on Aug. 3, according to Bloom Energy.
“Carl’s extensive track-record solving complex problems and building consensus across a diverse set of stakeholders will bolster Bloom’s next phase of growth and innovation,” said K.R. Sridhar, chief executive officer and company founder.
San Jose-based Bloom Energy makes and sells fuel cell systems for large users.
During the 12 months that ended in March, Bloom Energy produced $784.9 million in revenue and lost $277.9 million. For the 2019 calendar year that ended in December, Bloom Energy produced $785.2 million in revenue and lost $306.9 million.
One of Guardino’s greatest accomplishments as head of Silicon Valley Leadership Group was getting BART extensions to reach into Santa Clara County for the first time. Those include a just-opened BART stop in east San Jose’s Berryessa district.
Guardino also orchestrated multiple sales tax measures for transit and transportation improvements in Silicon Valley and has been a strong advocate for affordable housing and economic growth in the region.
Now, Guardino hopes to parlay his array of contacts and influence to benefit Bloom Energy’s public and government interactions.
“From India to Indio, California, Bloom is focused on building sustainable communities that can improve the lives and livelihoods of everyone on our planet,” Guardino said.
