Wednesday, March 25: Businesses that shut their doors or send workers home don’t need as much power, and that's before accounting for the growing likelihood of a recession. What impact will the coronavirus outbreak have on corporate demand for renewable energy?
Wednesday, March 25: Clean-energy industry groups confirmed Wednesday that the Senate's stimulus bill, the largest of its kind in U.S. history, lacks extensions of the federal wind PTC and solar ITC. The industry will turn its attention to the possibility of future legislation.
Wednesday, March 25: As Europe's utilities, project developers and network operators take stock, early speculation and guesswork on the impact of the coronavirus outbreak are giving way to more informed forecasts and detailed assessments. Some companies, including Ørsted and Total, have established dedicated task forces to deal with the ever-changing circumstances.
There’s a Way to Give Certainty to the U.S. Renewables Market — Regardless of a Stimulus Package
Tuesday, March 24: The American solar and wind industries are pushing for extensions of their federal tax credits in any stimulus package to emerge from Washington, D.C. But there's another way they could find relief: The IRS could confirm that COVID-19-related project delays are an "excusable disruption," allowing projects to remain eligible for the federal Production Tax Credit and Investment Tax Credit while taking pressure off the supply chain, experts say.
Tuesday, March 24: WoodMac cut its forecast for global wind installations this year by 6.5 percent, or 4.9 gigawatts. Shuttered manufacturing capacity, closed borders and the threat of canceled or postponed tenders all play a part in the downgrade, which could hit major European markets hardest.
Monday, March 23: As the coronavirus outbreak empties workplaces across the U.S., the solar industry prepared to argue it should be exempt from mandatory shutdowns. Not every solar sector looks the same: While utility-scale installers can more easily fan out over a large area, residential installers must interact directly with homeowners and cluster closer together on a roof.
Monday, March 23: Pacific Gas & Electric reached a deal with California Gov. Gavin Newsom that could allow it to emerge from bankruptcy by a critical June 30 deadline. Newsom had challenged aspects of PG&E’s plan to come out of bankruptcy, but with the utility's stock price crashing and Californians under an unprecedented stay-at-home order due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the governor agreed to lift his objections.
Monday, March 23: The COVID-19 pandemic is causing sudden shifts in the way we consume energy. What are the long-term consequences to power providers if this goes on for an extended period of time? This week's podcast episode of The Interchange digs into that question.
Friday, March 20: As calls for people to stay home grew increasingly urgent, Tesla announced plans to close two plants making electric vehicles and products for the solar and energy storage markets. Will other U.S. solar manufacturers follow suit? Every Tier 1 solar module factory in the U.S. is located in counties with confirmed coronavirus cases, said Xiaojing Sun, a senior solar analyst at Wood Mackenzie Power & Renewables.
Thursday, March 19: Some deals, at least, are still getting done. Lightsource BP, the U.K.-based solar developer backed by oil giant BP, tied up a $250 million finance package for a 260-megawatt solar project in Texas. Social distancing rules mean construction workers are not allowed to group together for coffee breaks or other meetings. But Kevin Smith, CEO for the Americas, told GTM he expects the project will be allowed to continue rolling forward.
Thursday, March 19: American society has made dramatic changes in response to the COVID-19 crisis. Why hasn't it responded with similar urgency to climate change — another human-propelled global catastrophe that could harm human health and well-being for generations to come? This week's podcast episode of Political Climate takes a look.
