Guidehouse , a leading provider of management consulting services to the commercial and public sectors, today announced that three senior-level industry professionals have joined the company’s growing global Energy, Sustainability, and Infrastructure (ES&I) segment .
Directors Taco de Vries, Scott Grafelman, and Macky McCleary are focused on increasing shareholder and customer value, enabling resiliency, and driving innovation and transformation for energy providers and clients in cross-cutting industries.
"Taco, Scott, and Macky are experts in helping clients navigate complex strategic, regulatory, and operational matters to enable transformation through innovation and technology," says Jan Vrins, leader of Guidehouse’s global ES&I segment. "I am confident they will succeed in helping our clients tackle their biggest challenges as the energy transformation continues to present new opportunities."
Guidehouse partners with energy companies, governments, investors, and global corporations as they adapt and optimize the use of resources and infrastructure to drive toward innovative, sustainable, resilient programs and operations.
"We are excited to be at the forefront of this global transformation with our clients and continue to build out a world-class team to support our mission," Vrins said.
Taco de Vries , Director, Coral Gables, FL
De Vries works to broaden Guidehouse’s footprint with energy providers in North America. He has 25 years of experience driving profitable growth for customers in challenging and competitive markets, and is an expert in establishing and executing smarter energy strategies. De Vries is also experienced in driving large-scale and first-of-a-kind business and technology transformations, with a primary focus on network, asset, and customer service transformation for energy and utility companies. He brings expertise in renewable energy, grid modernization, strategic planning, load forecasting, microgrids, virtual power plants, and IT/OT. Prior to joining Guidehouse, de Vries worked at a utility-focused software firm, where he expanded capabilities in distribution grid analytics and distribution network load forecasting.
Grafelman supports utilities in the development and implementation of grid modernization strategies and business process improvements that enable the transformation to a more reliable, resilient, and intelligent distribution grid of the future. Grafelman has over 30 years of experience in the electric utility industry, where he’s led engagements on process improvement, change management, and strategic planning related to distribution grid operations. He brings subject matter expertise in the areas of electric distribution operations and engineering related to outage management systems and advanced distribution management systems, along with vendor selection and implementation, requirements and roadmap definition, operational analytics and visualization development, and operational strategic planning initiatives. Prior to joining Guidehouse, Grafelman provided smart grid energy and technology consulting services. He is a registered PE in Missouri, and a certified Project Management Professional. Grafelman is also certified in Agile development practices.
McCleary drives innovation for clients in the converging industry sectors of energy, finance, telecom, government, infrastructure, and transportation. He brings expertise in strategy, innovation, operations, branding, consumer and behavioral insights, and business development. Prior to joining Guidehouse, McCleary was a consultant at another large firm. Previously, he oversaw a state division of public utilities and carriers, where he led grid modernization and advanced wireless/5G strategies, among other government transformation efforts. He has also led regulatory agencies in the insurance, banking, gaming, and environment industries, and consulted in the areas of corporate and commercial strategy, environment, and public policy. He was co-founder, president, and COO of a solar power company, where he remains a senior advisor.
With over 700 consultants, Guidehouse’s global Energy, Sustainability, and Infrastructure segment is the largest in the industry. We collaborate with and serve as trusted advisors to utilities and energy companies, large corporations, investors, NGOs, and the public sector to help them thrive in the rapidly changing energy, resources, and infrastructure environment. Our clients include the world’s 60 largest electric, water, and gas utilities; the 20 largest independent power generators; five of the 10 largest oil and gas majors; the 20 largest gas distribution and pipeline companies; European governments; and the U.S. federal government’s civilian agencies involved in the country’s land, resources, and infrastructure. Our highly skilled professionals form exceptional teams to help our clients transform their businesses, manage complexity and change, accelerate operational performance, manage critical programs, manage risk, meet compliance requirements, and improve operations and systems to address today’s most complex issues. We lead through our insights and excel at strategy, transformation, and implementation, creating more sustainable and resilient countries, governments, companies, cities, and infrastructure.
Guidehouse is a leading global provider of consulting services to the public and commercial markets with broad capabilities in management, technology, and risk consulting. We help clients address their toughest challenges with a focus on markets and clients facing transformational change, technology-driven innovation and significant regulatory pressure. Across a range of advisory, consulting, outsourcing, and technology/analytics services, we help clients create scalable, innovative solutions that prepare them for future growth and success. Headquartered in Washington DC, the company has more than 7,000 professionals in more than 50 locations. Guidehouse is led by seasoned professionals with proven and diverse expertise in traditional and emerging technologies, markets and agenda-setting issues driving national and global economies. For more information, please visit: www.guidehouse.com .
View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20200630005261/en/
