Have Insiders Sold Maha Energy AB (publ) (STO:MAHA A) Shares Recently?
Simply Wall St June 8, 2020
We’d be surprised if Maha Energy AB (publ) ( STO:MAHA A ) shareholders haven’t noticed that the Independent Director, Anders Ehrenblad, recently sold kr1.3m worth of stock at kr11.22 per share. That sale was 15% of their holding, so it does make us raise an eyebrow.
The CEO, MD & Director, Karl Lindvall, made the biggest insider sale in the last 12 months. That single transaction was for kr4.2m worth of shares at a price of kr24.83 each. While insider selling is a negative, to us, it is more negative if the shares are sold at a lower price. It’s of some comfort that this sale was conducted at a price well above the current share price, which is kr16.18. So it may not shed much light on insider confidence at current levels.
Maha Energy insiders didn’t buy any shares over the last year. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
I will like Maha Energy better if I see some big insider buys. While we wait, check out this free list of growing companies with considerable, recent, insider buying.
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. We usually like to see fairly high levels of insider ownership. Maha Energy insiders own about kr179m worth of shares. That equates to 11% of the company. While this is a strong but not outstanding level of insider ownership, it’s enough to indicate some alignment between management and smaller shareholders.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Maha Energy Insiders?
An insider hasn’t bought Maha Energy stock in the last three months, but there was some selling. And even if we look at the last year, we didn’t see any purchases. While insiders do own a lot of shares in the company (which is good), our analysis of their transactions doesn’t make us feel confident about the company. So while it’s helpful to know what insiders are doing in terms of buying or selling, it’s also helpful to know the risks that a particular company is facing. For example – Maha Energy has 3 warning signs we think you should be aware of.
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
