Many investors are anxious ahead of the UK general election that will be held on December 12. The structure of Brexit still hangs in the balance and so there continues to be considerable economic uncertainty as we look ahead to the next decade. An investor with £5,000 to invest has a lot to consider in this environment.
In these circumstances, I like to target equities in sectors that are mostly safe from political blow-back and are also set up for attractive growth in the long term. I love the renewable energy sector as an investment target for the 2020s.
According to a recent report from the International Energy Agency (IEA), global renewable energy capacity is set to rise by 50% within five years. This increase will be driven by solar photovoltaic (PV) installations in homes, buildings and industry. The IEA forecasts that total renewable-based power capacity will rise by 1.2 terawatts (TW) by 2024 from 2.5 TW in 2018. Solar PV is expected to account for roughly 60% of this growth and onshore wind approximately 25%.
The share of renewables in power generation is expected to rise to 30% in 2024 from 26% today. Costs have been an oft-cited obstacle in the push for renewable power, but this dynamic has shifted. Solar PV generation costs have fallen in recent years, and those costs are forecast to decline a further 15% to 35% by 2024. In fact, distributed solar PV is already more cost effective than retail electricity prices in most countries.
This promising trajectory is one of the reasons I’m betting on renewable energy equities as we look ahead to the next decade. Today I want to look at one renewable energy stock that investors can purchase before the New Year.
The first stock I want to zero-in on is Renewables Infrastructure Group (LSE: TRIG) . It invests in operational renewable energy generation projects across the UK and Northern Europe, predominately in onshore and offshore wind and solar photovoltaics segments. Its shares have climbed 13.7% year-on-year as of close on November 26.
It currently boasts the most diversified portfolio of renewable infrastructure assets in the London-listed sector. As at June 30, its portfolio was valued at £1,621m, which was up 28% from its valuation at December 31 2018. The company has said that it aims to concentrate more on European investment in the quarters to come. Europe has vaulted ahead of the UK in its renewable energy investment push, which is why companies like this one are looking to the European mainland for more growth.
Income investors should be happy with its 5.1% dividend yield. Net cash flow covered its cash dividend by 1.4 times in the first half of the fiscal year, or 1.9 times before the impact of repaying project-level debt. The stock boasts a price-to-earnings ratio of 8 as of close on November 26, putting its shares in solid value territory before December.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Ambrose has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Open a Fineco trading account today and enjoy up to 50 free share trades over your first two months!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets. Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee.
Sign up today using promo code FINECO-MF to claim up to 50 free trades!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
