5) Innovate on financing AET and the energy transition. LDCs often have high capital costs, which hinder take-up of the most energy-efficient but more capital-intensive technologies. Improving utility risk profiles can help unleash cheaper global capital. Governments should help consumers buying cutting edge “green” solutions or ultra-efficient appliances by making the lowest available interest rates accessible.
6) Build human capacity. While more energy-related staff may be required in general, it isn’t just traditional engineers that energy systems need, or even economists, but IT and security experts, systems-level planners, modelers and behavioral specialists.
As we scale AET, we must be mindful not just of political economy, but also social welfare redistribution . All changes create winners and losers. Instead of ignoring these trade-offs, we should make them transparent so we can devise the best instruments for managing redistribution. Instead of giving free electricity in the name of the poor, we could give direct benefit transfers (DBT) solutions like India is doing (powered by an advanced biometric IT solution for fraud prevention). This is an example where segregated subsidies with properly priced energy — instead of traditionally subsidized electricity—gives consumers an incentive to save energy.
In developed regions, consumers take energy for granted. They don’t want to change their lifestyles much, especially when the potential savings are perhaps just a dollar or two a month. In contrast, many energy consumers in developing regions are deeply engaged with their energy supply due to its relatively high cost and often poor quality. If we tell people, for example, that a smart grid could not just save them a dollar or two, but prevent outages , they’d be very interested.
AETs are an ongoing process and will take learning and multiple iterations to scale. Maybe we’ll get the equivalent of “cold fusion”-style breakthroughs, but we don’t need to wait for those — we aren’t even harnessing existing AET sufficiently. What we do need are policies that enable frameworks which incentivize, accelerate and scale innovation — because the innovation is already happening.
The findings, interpretations and conclusions posted on Brookings.edu are solely those of the authors and not of The Brookings Institution, its officers, staff, board, funders, or organizations with which they may have a relationship.
