Is NextEra Energy a Great Dividend Stock?
It generates more electricity from the wind and sun than any other company on the planet. Does the dividend live up to the renewable energy leader's world-class operations?
Maxx has been a contributor to Fool.com since 2013. He graduated from the State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry (2012) with a Bachelor of Science in Bioprocess Engineering and from Carnegie Mellon University (2016) with a Master of Science in Materials Science & Engineering.
In 2001, NextEra Energy ( NYSE:NEE ) sported a market valuation of just $10 billion, making it the 30th most-valuable publicly traded utility on the planet. Today, the business is valued at $117 billion, making it the world's largest publicly traded utility. The second-most-valuable utility sits at a market cap of less than $80 billion.
The company's enviable growth trajectory was fueled by aggressive bets on onshore wind-power infrastructure in favorable locations, which created a massive stream of cash flow thanks to low-cost production and federal subsidies. That also turned NextEra Energy into a solid dividend stock. In fact, the business paid out $2.1 billion in common stock dividends in 2018. Shares currently sport an annual dividend yield of 2.1%.
But the production tax credit (PTC) will be phased out for wind power projects that begin construction after the last day of 2020, while a recently acquired Florida utility requires sizable investments to improve its operations. Can NextEra Energy maintain its status as a great dividend stock?
NextEra generates cash flow to support its dividend from two sources: a power generation subsidiary called NextEra Energy Resources (NEER) and two Florida utilities.
NEER sites, builds, and operates renewable energy infrastructure (and some natural gas assets, too) across the United States. The subsidiary is one of the largest capital investors in the country and generates more electricity from the wind and sun than any other company. In fact, it owns more installed wind-power capacity than all but seven countries.
Will the phaseout of the PTC diminish investment in the domestic wind power industry? Hardly. NEER estimates that the levelized cost of electricity from onshore wind will actually decline in the years ahead, from no more than $35 per megawatt-hour (MWh) in 2020 (including contributions from the PTC) to no more than $25 per MWh in 2024 (including no contributions from the PTC).
Those numbers will change now that Congress has extended the PTC by an additional year, but the takeaway is that wind industry investment will be just fine without it. NextEra estimates that continuing to walk down the cost curve will result in the addition of 12,000 megawatts to 15,000 megawatts of new onshore wind capacity per year from 2023 to 2030. That could allow wind power to generate at least 20% of the country's electricity by 2030. It also bodes well for NEER's income and cash flow potential in a post-PTC world.
