Oil stocks have gone nowhere for most of the past decade, and energy was the worst performing sector last year, with S&P 500 energy stocks returning just 6%, including dividends.
But Jennifer Marcontell, an Edward Jones investment advisor based near Houston, says investors should pull up to the pump: Selected energy stocks tout solid yields, and modest price appreciation may lie ahead, she argues.
“I think it’s a good time to get into it or add to the positions,” Marcontell says, adding that she has been recommending energy for up to 10% of clients’ stock portfolios. The caveat: Energy should be treated as a long-term investment due to its built-in price volatility.
Energy is a sector that Marcontell, a 20-year advisor, knows well—not least of all because many of her clients are in oil- and natural-gas-related businesses. She points to yields around 4% or higher at integrated, transport, and storage companies.
For income investors fretting over sub-2% yield on 10-year Treasuries, dividend yields of 4% and above are an attention-getter. Yields are attractive due to cheap oil, which has driven energy stocks down. Oil prices fell off a cliff from 2014 to 2016, thanks largely to oversupply triggered by the boom in shale-oil production. At less than $60 a barrel, prices remain around half of what they were just a few years ago, even after perking up a bit in the past year.
Also weighing on oil stocks is pressure to transition from fossil fuels due to global warming. Even under a fossil-fuel-friendly administration in Washington, U.S. clean-energy investment touched a record $55.5 billion in 2019. It hasn’t helped energy stocks’ reputation that they now account for less than 5% of the S&P 500 index, their lowest weighting since 1990.
Integrated companies, meaning those involved in not just the production but also the refining, storage, and transportation of energy products, may be best positioned to withstand price and competitive pressures. “We lean toward the integrateds because they’re a lot more than pure energy,” says Marcontell.
One thing that’s not going away is the demand for energy, whether it’s drawn from the ground, the sun, or the wind, she says. “Renewable energy still has to be held, stored, and moved across the country,” says Marcontell, adding that there are aspects of the energy business that will always be needed, even if oil and gas use decline.
The big integrated oil companies also have side businesses in producing chemicals and plastic, as well as raw materials like helium, she adds.
Right now, Total (ticker: TOT) shares sport a dividend yield of 5.4%, while Chevron (CVX) shares yield 4.2%, and Marathon Petroleum (MPC) yields 3.8%. Companies that specialize in transport or storage are worth a look, as well, says Marcontell. Kinder Morgan (KMI)), which does both, is currently yielding 4.8%. Meanwhile, Enterprise Products Partners (EPD), a master limited partnership that, like Kinder Morgan, is in the so-called midstream business , is yielding 6.3%.
Marcontell says there’s a good chance that energy stocks, down for so long, could start to revert to the mean this year, with price appreciation in the low-single digits. “When things that are have-to-haves are at good prices, with great cash flow and in diversified companies, you have to consider it,” she says.
Such a bullish scenario depends on stable if not rising demand—and oil prices did rise 26% last year as supply and demand started to come back into balance. Investors are also looking for energy companies to use their capital more wisely after spasms of overinvesting in production.
Marcontell is playing energy through common stocks rather than funds, which can include firms that are burdened by expensive debt racked up during the hydraulic-fracturing boom. Some experts expect a round of bankruptcies and consolidation this year, and that could conceivably ripple through such funds.
But for those who swear by diversification within sectors, the Vanguard Energy exchange-traded fund (VDE) is a simple and inexpensive way to do it. Its management and expense fee is a measly 0.10%, it has a 3.6% dividend yield, and it’s down about 5% over the past year.
