Marinus Link could send clean energy across Bass Strait, but the case for it is uncertain
While the $3.5bn project will quadruple the amount of electricity sent across Bass Strait, a final investment decision still remains three years away
Proponents estimate the Marinus Link would create 2,800 direct and indirect jobs during construction, pumping stimulus into both Victoria and Tasmania’s economies. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images
Proponents estimate the Marinus Link would create 2,800 direct and indirect jobs during construction, pumping stimulus into both Victoria and Tasmania’s economies. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images
In a connected world, with scientists warning rapid emissions cuts are needed to address the climate crisis, the Marinus Link reads as an elegant solution.
A proposed 1,500 megawatt undersea electricity cable between Burnie, in north-west Tasmania, and Gippsland in Victoria, it would quadruple the amount of electricity that can be sent in either direction across Bass Strait.
As of Monday, the $3.5bn project is earmarked to have its environmental and planning approvals fast-tracked after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, included it on a list of 15 priority projects .
But while Marinus Link has broad political support, it is three years from a final investment decision, does not yet have anyone to pay for it and has been sharply criticised by Tasmania’s most high-profile environment campaigners. Some energy analysts say it is unclear when, or even if, its electricity will be needed.
The case for the link is straightforward. Unlike the rest of the country, Tasmania already runs on near 100% clean hydro energy. The federal and state governments plan to increase hydro capacity through the “battery of the nation” project , which would introduce pumped hydro storage – additional generation capacity that could be called on when needed to back up wind and solar.
The north of Tasmania is also particularly gusty, making it well suited for wind farms. The Liberal state government has set a target of 200% renewable energy by 2040 and is eyeing possible clean export industries.
Victoria, on the other hand, gets about three-quarters of its electricity from the dirtiest coal power stations in the country. As these ageing plants close in the years ahead, it and other mainland states will need to be able to call on a range of flexible energy sources to “firm” variable renewable energy. Better connection between the states is considered a key part of this.
Guy Barnett, the Tasmanian energy minister, puts it simply. “We have what the rest of Australia wants and needs – affordable, reliable and clean electricity.”
With the existing 500 megawatt Basslink often running at full capacity, Barnett says Marinus Link is needed to deliver this vision. The state has three earmarked renewable energy zones for development. “There are rich pickings for wind developers and the opportunities are massive,” he says.
Government-owned agency TasNetworks says the project is expected to be delivered in two 750 megawatt halves, two years apart. Some appraisals have suggested it could be the first of many further cable links across the strait.
The proponents estimate the project would create 2,800 direct and indirect jobs during construction, pumping stimulus into the two states’ economies. But little of that stimulus would be immediate. An investment decision is not expected until 2023-24, and it would then take about four years from manufacturing to commissioning.
Among the unanswered questions are who will pay for it. Some Tasmanian analysts have expressed concern that the state will be picking up the tab for a project built to solve a problem across Bass Strait. Barnett says the Coag energy council commissioned an assessment of the fair distribution of costs, with a report expected in September.
Morrison’s priority listing is unlikely to bring forward the development, but Bess Clark, general manager of the project at TasNetworks, says it will make a difference. “Having a more streamlined process is very helpful because it helps to de-risk the project investment decision,” she says.
The renewable energy industry strongly backs the project. Kane Thornton, chief executive of the Clean Energy Council, says it will be critical to bring on more wind and solar projects in southern Australia and drive down power prices. “These are long-term projects that will provide steady, secure and value-adding employment in Australia.”
But views within Tasmanian environment groups are mixed. Among the strongest opponents are Tasmania’s best known conservationists and campaigners, the former Australians Greens leaders Bob Brown and Christine Milne.
Brown argues the project does not stand up economically without subsidies, and some of the proposed wind farms would turn pristine wilderness areas into an “industrial landscape” with little benefit for locals. He is particularly incensed by the 100km-long easement that would need to be cleared to connect the cable to the proposed $1.6bn Robbins Island wind farm in the state’s far north-west , fearing it would cut through Tarkine wilderness.
The hero of the Franklin Dam campaign says renewable energy is developing rapidly and would continue without Marinus Link. “The idea that Tasmania is somehow the saviour from fossil fuels is absurd,” Brown says.
Barnett accuses Brown of “appalling hypocrisy” and says all projects would be “subject to rigorous development and environmental approvals” and measures to minimise impacts on threatened species.
One of the most challenging questions about the project to answer is what the electricity market would look like in the latter part of the decade should it go ahead.
Sceptics point out that a draft feasibility study published in December suggested 7,000MW of coal-fired power – equivalent to five or six large plants on top of the Liddell power station, which is scheduled to close in 2023 – would need to exit the market for it to be economically viable.
While the federal government is a strong supporter of Marinus Link, it has previously indicated it wants coal generators to run as long as possible. No plan has been laid out for plants to shut at a certain timeframe to make room for new planned major investments such as those in Tasmania and the expansion of the Snowy Hydro.
Clark says the suggestion that 7,000MW of coal would need to be retired was as result of “trying to be simple” in explaining what a future grid might look like. In reality, she says, complex modelling suggests Marinus Link is an optimal part of a future grid under a range of scenarios.
Others think there are plenty of questions yet to be answered. Tennant Reed, an energy adviser at the Australian Industry Group, says Morrison’s announcement of a more rapid approval process does not hurt, but the main thing holding the Tasmanian plans back is uncertainty about when mainland power stations will shut.
“Unless that comes, you could approve the project tomorrow and it still wouldn’t commence til past 2030,” Reed says.
“Marinus and the battery of the nation sit among many options for grid flexibility as old coal retires. We don’t know which will be best, but getting the whole economy to net zero emissions by 2050 is going to require a lot of smart investments.”
