A distressed energy-trading company overstated its assets by more than $3 billion using “routine and pervasive” forgery, while its founder oversaw years of disastrous bets on oil derivatives, a report filed with a Singapore court said.
The study by interim judicial managers, or court-appointed independent administrators, offers the first detailed account of the implosion of Hin Leong Trading Pte. Ltd ., a closely held Singapore company that owes $3.5 billion—mostly to banks, including HSBC Holdings PLC.
The administrators, from PricewaterhouseCoopers Advisory Services Pte. Ltd., estimated Hin Leong’s true assets at just $257 million, or about 7% of liabilities, raising the prospect of steep losses for creditors. They recommended a merger with other companies owned by the controlling Lim family.
The two-month investigation found serious irregularities and convoluted accounting. It found the group overstated assets by an “astonishing amount,” pointing to a $2.23 billion shortfall in accounts receivables—payments due from customers—and inventory stockpiles apparently inflated by $812 million.
Shares of Inovio Pharmaceuticals Inc.  tumbled 10.8% in premarket trading on Tuesday after the company said its COVID-19 vaccine candidate was considered safe and well-tolerated in all 40 of the participants in a Phase 1 clinical trial. However, the company did not disclose data about the participants' antibody response, though it said 94% of 36 trial participants showed "overall immunological response rates based on preliminary data assessing humoral (binding and neutralizing) and T cell immune responses." (Three trial participants tested positive for COVID-19 and one left the study for non-clinical reasons.) There were some adverse events, though none were serious, that primarily consisted of redness on the skin where the experimental vaccine was administered. Inovio also said it has added older participants to the early-stage trial; the original 40 are between the ages of 18 and 50 years old. It also plans to start a Phase 2/3 study this summer. Inovio is one of a handful of companies in the U.S. studying whether their experimental vaccines can prevent infection with the coronavirus. Shares of Inovio have soared 860.3% year-to-date. The S&P 500  declined 5.5% since the start of the year.
