Sempra Energy executive Dennis Arriola, center, appears before the House Ways and Means Committee’s Trade Subcommittee about NAFTA reform in July 2017. Arriola is leaving Sempra to take over as CEO of Avangrid, an energy company based in Connecticut.
Another top lieutenant at San Diego’s Sempra Energy is moving on.
Dennis Arriola is stepping down as executive vice president, chief sustainability officer and group president and, effective July 20, will take over as CEO of Avangrid Inc. , an energy company based in Connecticut.
The 59-year-old Arriola’s departure is the third in the past seven months among Sempra’s top executives. Last December, chief operating officer Joseph Householder retired and on March 30, chief legal officer George Bilicic abruptly resigned and eventually returned to his previous employer , Lazard.
Arriola, whose 25-year tenure included holding top executive positions at Sempra subsidiaries San Diego Gas & Electric and Southern California Gas, will stay with the company until July 3.
“It’s been such a privilege to be a part of this company for most of my career and I’m confident Sempra has a great future ahead,” Arriola said in an internal announcement Sempra released Monday morning.
In the same memo, Sempra CEO Jeff Martin said Arriola “has been a beloved leader and I know he will be very missed by our employees and senior management team. We all wish him the best.”
Martin took over as CEO in 2018, replacing Debra Reed, who retired after spending 40 years at Sempra and its affiliated companies. Since then, Sempra’s upper executive ranks have gone through a shakeup, with Arriola’s departure marking the sixth change in the past two years.
Current SDG&E chairman and CEO Kevin Sagara has been promoted to group president of Sempra, taking over for Arriola, effective June 27. Sagara will oversee the infrastructure businesses at SDG&E and SoCalGas and serve as chairman for both companies, reporting to Martin.
Kevin Sagara, chairman and CEO of San Diego Gas & Electric, has been named group president of parent company Sempra Energy, replacing Dennis Arriola.
“Throughout his career with the Sempra Energy family of companies, Kevin’s leadership and creativity have been tremendous assets, delivering significant advances in safety, technology and innovation,” Martin said in the company’s internal announcement.
As for Arriola’s new job, he succeeds 67-year-old James P. Torgerson , who is retiring after five years as CEO of Avangrid, which has $35 billion in assets in 24 states, including the Tule Wind Project off Interstate 8 in East County that is operated by Avangrid Renewables.
“Dennis’ substantial experience in the energy sector, including utilities and renewables, as well as his deep strategic, financial and operating background make him a natural choice to lead Avangrid and execute our long-term strategy to become a leading sustainable energy company,” Avangrid’s chairman, Ignacio S. Galan, said in a company news release .
According to a Form 8-K filed June 11 with the Securities and Exchange Commission , Arriola’s base salary at Avangrid will be $1.1 million per year. He will receive payments of $1 million in January of 2021, 2022 and 2023, shares of Avangrid stock and is eligible for incentives of up to twice his base pay.
At Sempra, according to a proxy statement filed with the SEC , Arriola had a base salary in 2019 of $640,900. The base salary was part of a total executive compensation package of stock and option awards plus incentives of nearly $4.2 million for the year.
When Bilicic left Sempra after less than a year with the company, he received a severance package worth about $6 million .
9:36 AM, Jun. 16, 2020: This story has been updated to show what Arriola’s salary will be at Avangrid.
