Roger Penrose came up with an idea on how to extract energy from a black hole.
To see how this would work, imagine an advanced alien civilization had a black hole at their disposal. If this black hole was rotating, it would have a certain amount of rotational energy. The aliens could drop an object into the outer edges of the ergosphere , the outer layer of the black hole before the event horizon. This object would then be split in two. One half would whirl into the black hole while the other could escape. This escaping object would have lost negative energy. This means that the object has actually gained energy, stealing some of the energy of the black hole.
This is a very interesting concept, but it is far, far beyond the capabilities of us humans. So for 50 years, this remained a nice thought experiment, but with no way to experimentally test if it would work. Until now.
Two years after Penrose came up with his thought experiment, another scientist, Yakov Zel’dovich, suggested that this could be experimentally tested with light. Instead of a black hole, you could use a rotating cylinder. If the cylinder was rotating fast enough, you could shine what’s called a “twisted” light wave - one with angular momentum - onto its surface.
This “twisted” light wave that hit the cylinder would do something similar to the object that is recovered from the ergosphere of the black hole - it would steal some of the cylinder’s rotational energy. Unfortunately, the cylinder would have to be rotating fast, very fast, for this to work - a billion times a second .
But, there’s another way to run this experiment. Instead of using light, use sound.
This is what scientists at the University of Glasgow did . They made a ring of speakers that created a “twisted” sound wave. This sound wave then hit a rotating sound-absorbing disk.
To understand what happens next, let’s review an important concept - the Doppler shift. When you hear a police car approaching you, the pitch will rise as the sound waves are compressed in front of the police car. Then, after the car passes, the pitch will fall as the waves are stretched out.
In their experiment, the sound waves undergo a “rotational Doppler shift”. The twisted sound wave decreases in frequency (its pitch decreases) until it passes out of hearing. This is similar to what we would hear in our police car example.
But then something very surprising happens. Because the disk is rotating at just the right speed - the pitch once again increases - this time with a negative frequency.
Our ears can’t tell the difference between a negative and positive frequency, but there is something we can hear - by the end of the experiment - the sound wave (with negative frequency) is louder. Its amplitude has increased - it has gained energy.
This amazing result was published on June 22nd in Nature Physics . What we see here is the rotating disk actually giving some of its energy to the sound waves - just like an object being dropped into a black hole.
Professor Daniele Faccio, a co-author on the paper, says “It's strange to think that we've been able to confirm a half-century-old theory with cosmic origins here in our lab in the west of Scotland, but we think it will open up a lot of new avenues of scientific exploration.”
We’re most likely not going to be throwing objects into black holes soon, but understanding how waves can gain energy in this way could lead us down new avenues for the generation of energy and even a deeper understanding of the nature of energy itself.
Dr. Elizabeth Fernandez is the host of SparkDialog Podcasts (sparkdialog.com), which covers the intersection of science and society. She has a PhD in astrophysics from
Dr. Elizabeth Fernandez is the host of SparkDialog Podcasts (sparkdialog.com), which covers the intersection of science and society. She has a PhD in astrophysics from the University of Texas at Austin and has worked around the world in both astronomy and in science and society. She currently specializes in how science and technology are impacting our lives.
