It sounds like a privacy nightmare – but in reality it will make it far easier for customers to cross-shop financial products and get the best deal.
For example, you could theoretically direct your bank to share your transaction details with an open-source budgeting app to help you save. Previously, you'd have to rely on whatever product your bank could offer in-house.
Open banking will make it easier for customers to use products outside of their financial provider. (AAP)
As of today, the Federal Government has opened up 10,000 more spots for first home buyers looking to crack the Australian property market with a minimal deposit.
Known as the First Home Buyer Deposit Scheme, the benefit allows first-time buyers to put down just 5 per cent deposit for a property with the government acting as guarantor for the remaining 15 per cent.
Buyers still have to pay the remaining 15 per cent, as they are technically borrowing 95 percent of the property's valuation from a lender.
As of January 1 this year, 10,000 applications – for couples and singles alike – were made available, with a second 10,000 made available today for the 20/21 financial year.
As of today the Federal Government has opened up 10,000 more spots for first home buyers. (AAP)
To cover the COVID-19 period, the Australian Tax Office set up a "shortcut" method for calculating expenses for working from home.
Between March 1 and June 30, the ATO will allow taxpayers to deduct a flat rate of 80 cents per hour they've worked from home.
From tomorrow, you'll have to revert to the traditional "flat rate" of 52 cents per hour.
"Failing to claim working from home expenses on your tax is akin to flushing money down the toilet. It is your money. Claim it," Kate Browne, a personal finance expert at Finder, said.
The three golden rules for claiming a deduction. (Graphic: Tara Blancato)
To cover those hit financially by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Government allowed some people to access $10,000 of their super in the 19/20 FY and another $10,000 in the 20/21 FY.
From tomorrow, those who already took out $10,000 – and have another $10,000 in their account – may be eligible for a second dip.
"By withdrawing $10,000 now, you will be taking a far greater amount away from your future self," Ms Browne said.
Also from tomorrow, the age limit for spousal contributions will be raised from 69 to 74.
From tomorrow, the new minimum wage will be $753.80 a week.
From tomorrow, the new minimum wage will be $753.80 a week or $19.84 an hour, up $13 from $740.80 a week ($19.49 an hour).
ENERGY BILLS GO UP FOR SOME, DOWN FOR OTHERS
From tomorrow, many Australians can expect to see a rise in their annual energy bills.
New distribution tariffs approved for the 20/21 financial year will see:
Some customers will experience price hikes on their energy bills. (9News)
Ms Browne said the increase in prices is a good incentive for customers to cross-shop their current providers.
"Don't set it and forget it. Whether it is your health insurance, your energy provider or your super," Ms Browne said.
In NSW, those who hold a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card can apply for energy rebates to keep bills down.
While the government's free childcare program will continue tomorrow, its final days are near: the package is funded to July 12.
That means from July 13 childcare subsidies will return. A week later on July 20, JobKeeper payments for childcare workers will end.
The federal government's free childcare is ending next month. (9News)
Typically car registration and licence fees increase on the first day of each financial year – but due to coronavirus pressures the NSW Government has said there will be a reprieve from the annual increase.
That reprieve isn't national though – from tomorrow Queensland motorists will be slugged with a 1.8 per cent increase.
Fees in the ACT, Victoria, Tasmania and the NT are all frozen.
In South Australia drivers will receive approximately $200 off their registration and insurance premiums.
MORE IN 9NEWS.COM.AU's TAX SERIES:
