The 2020 Factbook showcases the impact of sustainable energy, including hydropower, natural gas, and energy efficiency initiatives over the last decade and highlights findings for 2019 that follow the macro trends of the 2010s:
Renewable energy became the cheapest new generation source in many US power markets. The US has over 2 times more renewable power generating capacity today than a decade ago. Solar capacity in 2019 was 80 times greater than what it was at the end of 2009.
Energy efficiency choices have proliferated, with federal programs helping high-efficiency appliances reach mass markets and state codes bolstering building efficiency. The economy grew every year in the past decade and energy use fell in five of the ten years. U.S. energy productivity (GDP/energy consumption) improved 18% between 2010 and 2019, benefiting businesses and households.
Natural gas became the primary source of US power generation and shifted the scales in the global market. Between 2010 and 2019 domestic natural gas production jumped 50%, and natural gas went from providing 24% of the nation’s electricity to 38%. The US increased its export capacity to exceed its import capacity, building stronger trade relationships around the world. In 2019, the US exported more gas than it imported.
“Technological innovation plus economies of scale are revolutionizing the energy world,” said Ethan Zindler, BloombergNEF’s head of Americas. “The idea that energy must be dirty to be cheap is simply a myth.”
“Emerging trends for sustainable energy are proliferating consumer choice and empowerment. Digitalization and the Internet of Things have made people more aware of their energy use, as the options for efficient products and services are also expanding,” Ms Jacobson added.
The fact that 18 regulated utilities offer a green tariff for customers to choose cleaner electricity and that nine states have taken actions to offer voluntary tariffs for renewable natural gas to homes and businesses, shows that customers are asking for cleaner options. Meanwhile, corporate renewables procurement has surged. Virtually non-existent a decade ago, US companies have signed contracts with wind and solar projects totalling 33.6GW as of year-end 2019.
The US energy transition is a key focus at DISTRIBUTECH 2021 in San Diego California.
Click here to register your attendance and find out how you can contribute to North America’s smart energy future.
