You have run out of free articles. You can support our newsroom by joining at our lowest rate!
Enjoy more articles from Billings' Most Trusted Information Source. Subscribers can log in for unlimited digital access
In this file photo, a representative from NorthWestern Energy presents the 2019 Electricity Supply Resource Procurement Plan to the Public Service Commission during a public hearing in Helena.
Northwestern Energy’s 20-year plan for powering its Montana customers received tepid support Monday form state regulators, who said it was of “marginal value or no value.”
Comments from Montana’s Public Service Commission identified the plan as deficient for among other things not adequately considering ways in which wind and solar energy could contribute more to the utility’s electricity needs. NorthWestern’s plan called for constructing several new natural gas plants at a cost of more than $800 million to meet the needs of its 379,000 Montana customers.
Customers worried about debt, and climate change dominated hearings around the state. Also absent from the 20-year plan was NorthWestern’s intention to buy a larger share of the Colstrip Power Plant. The utility announced its plan to buy more of the coal-fired generator after public comments were well underway. After the Colstrip purchase was made public, opposition to the plan intensified.
A draft copy of PSC comments questioned the plan's “veracity,” but that was a step too far for Commissioner Tony O’Donnell, a Republican from Billings.
“It implies that NorthWestern was untruthful in any of the things they purported on here, whereas the staff comments do not support any of that or incline toward any of that suggestion,” O’Donnell said. “But staff did point out accurately that there was some deficiencies, inaccuracies, places where more justification was called for.”
O’Donnell persuaded the majority of the commission to agree that there were substantial inaccuracies in NorthWestern’s report that raised questions about its value and adequacy.
“It appears to me that the two options before us are A: Characterize NorthWestern as a pack of liars, or B: Say that in good faith they have produced a procurement plan that is of marginal or no value,” Commissioner Brad Johnson said. “Given those two options, I would certainly opt for the latter rather than the former. I don’t think there was any indication they were willingly or intentionally providing misinformation, or untruthful, or inaccurate information.”
