This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Oil prices plunged on Thursday, dropping by the largest percentage since April as the broader market also tumbled.
Prices for the commodity and companies that produce it have run into two problems. After the spring’s huge run-up in stocks, investors are now turning away from assets seen as risky, a category that includes oil names. And some of the positive data that had buoyed oil markets is reversing.
Inventories of both oil and gasoline rose last week, with the amount of crude in storage hitting record levels, according to the Energy Information Administration. The gains come after oil had begun emptying out of storage, a sign that supply and demand were coming into balance.
Brent crude futures, the global benchmark, settled at $38.55, down 7.6% on the day. West Texas Intermediate crude futures fell 8.2% to $36.34.
A recent increase in demand has not sopped up all the excess supply. That has clearly made some investors nervous.
“The oil market’s views on demand have improved with equity markets and there have been tangible signs of a recovery in oil demand in many places,” said Peter McNally, global sector lead at the investment research firm Third Bridge in New York.
“But today, I think market participants are asking if that demand recovery has been enough. If you look at U.S. crude stockpiles, they have been on the rise, despite the demand recovery. Two of the past three weeks have seen material increases in U.S. oil inventory, but now that there are some questions about demand on the potential for a second wave of COVID cases, the oil market is selling off along with other financial markets.”
Stocks fell hard. Exxon Mobil (XOM) closed down 8.8% and Chevron (CVX) was off by 8.4% in late trading. Smaller names that have seen big gains in recent weeks were also tumbling. Oasis Petroleum (OAS) plunged 19%. But Chesapeake Energy (CHK), where a surge of interest from retail traders has defied expectations , was up 4.9%.
Oil prices plunged on Thursday, dropping by the largest percentage since April as the broader market also tumbled.
