Gasoline futures log lowest finish since Dec. 2008
Oil futures finished sharply lower Thursday, with global benchmark prices suffering a loss of more than 7%, after President Donald Trump imposed restrictions on travel from Europe to the U.S. in an effort to contain the coronavirus pandemic, feeding concerns over the global economy and energy demand.
Among energy futures, gasoline took the biggest percentage hit, with prices down over 19% and settling below $1 a gallon, at their lowest since 2008.
West Texas Intermediate crude for April delivery US:CLJ20 dropped $1.48, or 4.5%, to settle at $31.50 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, while May Brent UK:BRNK20 tumbled $2.57, or 7.2%, to $33.22 a barrel on ICE Futures Europe.
Trump spoke from the Oval Office Wednesday night, offering some government plans to address the spreading coronavirus outbreak. Most notably, Trump said travel between Europe and the U.S. will be suspended for 30 days for foreign nationals, beginning Friday.
“A number of factors are responsible for the renewed nose-dive: US President Trump for instance has imposed a 30-day U.S. entry ban for Europeans in response to the corona crisis,” said Carsten Fritsch, analyst at Commerzbank, in a note.
“This comes as another serious blow to international aviation and is likely to have a negative impact on kerosene demand. Oil demand thus remains under pressure,” he wrote.
Crude oil was previously under pressure, falling sharply Wednesday, as Saudi Arabia fired another salvo in its price war with Russia by moving to expand production capacity. The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and the International Energy Agency this week cut their forecasts for global oil demand.
“Oil is the only market that is more volatile than stocks right now, as futures traders continue to digest the implications of the new price war between the largest producers in the world,” said Tyler Richey, co-editor at Sevens Report Research. “In the U.S., the laws of economics rule the land, but the dynamics of overseas producers and their heavy dependence on oil to fund their national budgets result in a very different situation.”
“Because of that, and the still-familiar pain of the 2014-2015 oil bear market, there is still hope among some investors that OPEC+ could come to some sort of agreement,” he said in the latest newsletter. “But if it is not soon, this week’s lows in both WTI and Brent will be taken out ($27.34 for the former and $31.25 for the latter) as the threat of a massive surplus in the months and quarters to come will lead to a significant further price decline.”
Against that backdrop, prices for petroleum products also declined, with gasoline futures taking the biggest hit on the heels of expectations for a slowdown in travel.
April gasoline US:RBJ20 plunged 19.2% to 89.75 cents a gallon, while April heating oil US:HOJ20 dropped 6.3% to $1.1598 a gallon.
Gasoline futures settled at their lowest since Dec. 30, 2008 and, based on the most-active contracts, marked the biggest daily percentage decline since Sept. 2, 2003, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
“Equity and oil traders are worried about the prospects of what one might call an intense coronavirus-inspired consumer cocoon, particularly for gasoline,” Tom Kloza, global head of energy analysis at the Oil Price Information Service, said in a note to clients.
“Americans have always ‘cocooned’ after the holidays, particularly when winter delivers hostile temperatures and driving conditions,” he said. “But there is a sense that all previous records for month-to-month demand destruction, or year-on-year demand descents will be broken between now and the end of April.”
April natural gas US:NGJ20 fell 2% to $1.841 per million British thermal units.
The U.S. Energy Information Administration reported Thursday that domestic supplies of natural gas fell by 48 billion cubic feet for the week ended March 6. Analysts polled by S&P Global Platts forecast a decline of 55 billion cubic feet.
It is set to be a subdued start to the quarter on Wednesday, after U.S. stocks wrapped up their best quarter in decades.
