— have spent decades accumulating will remain in the ground or under the sea. Those potential “stranded assets” — assets these companies may never use and may even have to write off — have prompted Wall Street firms to mark down energy stocks’ valuations and urge clients to dump the shares.
That’s why the five-year bear market in energy stocks may turn out to be as permanent as the secular decline in newspaper publishers or department stores.
How big a hit could it be? An influential article published in 2015 in the scientific journal Nature estimated that to meet the 2°C Paris target there can be no more than 1.1 trillion gigatons of cumulative carbon emissions from 2011 to 2050; global fossil fuel reserves are three times that. “Globally, a third of oil reserves, half of gas reserves and over 80% of current coal reserves should remain unused from 2010 to 2050 in order to meet the target of 2°C,” the authors, Christophe McGlade and Paul Elkins, wrote.
By 2035, that would ”leave the fossil fuel industry with $28 trillion in lost revenues from stranded reserves,” wrote Jim Krane, a researcher at Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy. Citicorp estimated foregone fuel revenues at $100 trillion by 2050. That could force energy producers to write off half the value of their reserves , the Financial Times calculated.
An estimated two-thirds of potentially stranded assets come from coal, which has been, well, the canary in the coal mine. Despite President Trump’s false campaign promise to desperate coal miners to ”get ready because you’re going to be working your asses off ,” coal company “assets” is the only thing that have been working off.
Last October, Murray Energy, once the largest privately held coal miner, became the eighth coal company in a year to declare bankruptcy. More than 500 coal-fired power plants have been retired over the past decade, and coal will provide only 20% of electricity generation this year , according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Come 2021, the U.S. will likely get more power from renewable energy than from coal.
And this isn’t the fault of “liberals” or tree huggers; hard-nosed utility executives are making these bottom-line business decisions.
From its peak near 500 in April 2011, the Dow Jones U.S. Coal Index DJUSCL,
has plummeted to just under 14, losing essentially all of its value.
Don’t expect a decline of this magnitude for broad energy stocks; it will take a lot longer for the world to wean itself away from oil, and natural gas will be in demand for some time. But I would sell energy-related stocks and ETFs into any rallies. (That’s what I plan to do with the small stake in XLE I own in my retirement account.) As Bob Dylan once wrote, you don’t need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows.
Howard R. Gold is a MarketWatch columnist. Follow him on Twitter @Howardrgold .
