Many of these companies have a weighting toward natural gas. But that’s OK because a lot of natural gas production happens in parts of the world with geopolitical risk — like the Middle East. The Saudi strikes remind energy import giants like China, India and Japan of the vulnerability of their energy supplies. This will make them more interested in securing natural gas from a more politically stable place like the U.S. These factors — plus the relative cheapness of natural gas in the U.S. — will increase interest in U.S. liquid natural gas (LNG) exports.
The insider buying: Founder Harold Hamm has purchased $78 million worth of stock so far this year at $39 to $44. He and his family own about 75% of the stock.
This energy company enjoys a low-cost advantage because it was a pioneer in snapping up shale assets. Continental discovered the South Central Oklahoma Oil Province (SCOOP) energy field, and it played a key role in the development of the Bakken Shale in North Dakota.
Second-quarter production rose 17% compared to the year before. Oil production rose 23%. Around 60% of production is oil. Most of the rest is natural gas. Continental forecasts 12.5% annual production growth over the next five years.
Because of the low costs, Continental is a cash-flow machine. It is using a lot of that cash to buy back stock in a $1 billion buyback program. “We did not dilute shareholders over the last few years as many did,” CFO John Hart said in the second-quarter conference call. “So our buyback program is a buyback in the truest sense.”
The insider buying: Since early June a cluster of insiders including the CEO and CFO has put about $6 million into the stock at prices ranging from $43 to $50.
Like Continental, Occidental Petroleum was an early buyer of shale assets in the Bakken and SCOOP plays, where it now has large holdings. This gives the company a cost advantage.
But the stock has been weak because investors think Occidental overpaid for Anadarko, in a deal funded in part by Berkshire Hathaway BRK.B,
, which extracted favorable (and dilutive) warrants.
Insiders whole heartedly disagree. They argue that they can apply their superior extraction technology to Anadarko fields, and extract energy more efficiently. To date, this has “reduced costs by at least 30% in all of the areas that we’ve applied it,” CEO Vicki Hollub said in the second-quarter conference call. “And we expect to achieve similar results in Anadarko’s onshore and offshore developments.”
Occidental pays a large 7% yield. It vows to protect that yield via energy hedges, and it also promises to keep hiking the dividend, as it has for 17 years.
The insider buying: So far this year, founder Richard Kinder has put around $90 million into the stock at prices ranging from $18 to $19.90. Kinder and other top managers own 14% of the stock.
Originally built from pipelines Enron was scraping as it turned to other businesses like energy trading, Kinder Morgan now has over 70,000 miles of natural gas pipelines, which transport about 40% of natural gas in the U.S.
While many investors avoid natural gas plays because prices have fallen so much in North America, Kinder Morgan continues to invest heavily in natural gas infrastructure. That makes it a contrarian play. But it will likely work out.
“We are very bullish on the future of natural gas,” says Kinder, one of the nation’s top energy sector experts. “Natural gas is critical to our American economy, to satisfy the growing energy needs around the world, and very importantly, to reducing our greenhouse gas emissions in a cost-effective manner.”
The company thinks U.S. natural gas and oil production will grow more than 30% by 2030. One of the drivers will be LNG exports, as the U.S. turns into the world’s supplier. Kinder Morgan’s pipelines will move natural gas to Texas and Louisiana for processing and export.
Kinder has been selling assets, so it has a strong enough balance sheet to support dividend growth. The current dividend yield is 4.9%.
The insider buying: Last year, insiders including CEO Meg Gentle and founder Charif Souki put over $3.6 million into the stock at $6.75 to $7.40. Insiders own over 61% of the shares outstanding.
Founded by Souki, the architect behind successful LNG exporter Cheniere Energy LNG,
, Tellurian plans to become a major LNG exporter with help from an innovative business model. Instead of selling LNG outright, it is selling stakes in LNG export capacity. It also plans to keep some of the capacity for itself to become an LNG vendor.
So far, the big capacity deals that would light a fire under this stock have remained elusive. Spot LNG prices in foreign markets have plummeted, which has probably reduced the urgency among potential partners to sign deals.
The strike on Saudi energy assets, which took out a significant portion of the country’s natural gas production, may change that, by reminding potential buyers that security of supply is important. A lot of the world’s natural gas production is in the Middle East, where geopolitical risks will remain high.
An Indian state energy company is circling as a potential capacity buyer. India’s prime minister will be in Texas later this month, ahead of a trip to the United Nations. Will he use the visit to announce a deal? We will soon find out.
The insider buying: So far this year a cluster of insiders has put about $800,000 into the stock at $14 to $17.70.
Matador Resources owns solid energy assets in the Wolfcamp and Bone Spring plays in the Delaware Basin in Southeast New Mexico and West Texas. It also operates in the Eagle Ford shale play in South Texas and the Haynesville shale and Cotton Valley plays in Louisiana and East Texas. About 60% of production is oil and the rest is natural gas.
“The Matador wells almost always cost less than nearby wells and produce more,” says Mike Breard, a retired energy analyst who has followed the company for years, and still invests in the space. During the first half of this year, oil and gas production increased 27% and 19% compared to the year before. The company increased production and cash flow guidance in the second quarter earnings call.
Airlines burn a lot of fuel, so their stocks are weak today as oil prices spike. I expect this weakness to fade as energy markets calm down. Two airlines I favor because insiders were recently  bullish are American Airlines AAL,
