AOP > Explore > Orabank, a Key Player in Energy Finance
By Thomas Hedley, Field Editor on June 15, 2020
Luc Morio, CEO of Orabank Senegal, spoke to African Energy Series: Senegal 2020 about how
Orabank’s local branch in Senegal is looking to increase its operations in the energy sector,
especially in the power field where it already has extensive experience.
What are Orabank’s prospects for the evolution of the Senegalese economy by 2021? And
what are the opportunities on the Senegalese market in terms of economy and finance?
The first tremors from the nascent oil and gas industry are being felt. Many international
customers and local subcontractors consult us for their contract. The local ecosystem is
strengthening, and we anticipate good prospects for our activities. Orabank Senegal is a
member of Invest in Africa, which is the platform launched at the initiative of the main oil
and gas operators to boost local content. We believe that Senegal has the potential to
promote local content. It is more than a concept; it is a belief since there is already a
network of quality companies. This is the reason why at Orabank Senegal, we are
be dedicated to this type of clientele. We are also planning several developments in the
accelerate the development of the country’s energy sector?
Our priority is to meet all the needs of the public and private sectors. We regularly support
SENELEC, a public company, on important projects which require financing guarantee lines,
such as the Taiba N’diaye wind power plant developed by Lekela. We also support the entire
promoters in the energy sector. We have three levels of intervention: private companies
which are subcontractors, the public sector, which is the prime contractor, and finally the
In which sectors does Orabank plan to acquire new customers?
opportunities in the power sector. Individuals and businesses have high electricity needs.
This request is therefore immediate. Electricity projects have strong growth potential. In
The mining and petroleum sector are also promising sectors. Beyond the sources of income
innovation for the country’s economy.
destination in order to consider Orabank as a local partner who knows the market and can facilitate their operations?
Senegal is an attractive destination. The country’s economy is driven mainly by the Plan
Senegal Emergent (PSE) – aiming for economic emergence by 2035, agriculture and external
economic spinoffs in favor of neighboring countries. The Mauritania, Senegal, Gambia,
constitutes the pole of attractiveness. Indeed, it concentrates skills and as a local banking
player, we are there to support Business customers. The award we received last year is a
country. Over 12 months, we tripled our progress on international operations. Finally, we
operates with the largest banks internationally.
Interested in advertising in the upcoming Africa Energy Series: Senegal 2020 Report ?
Contact us to find out more:
