Plug Power Files to Sell 20 Million Shares, Aiming to Raise $75 Million
Shareholders should expect about 6% stock dilution from the offering.
I like things that go "boom." Sonic or otherwise, that means I tend to gravitate towards defense and aerospace stocks. But to tell the truth, over the course of a dozen years writing for The Motley Fool, I have covered -- and continue to cover -- everything from retailers to consumer goods stocks, and from tech to banks to insurers as well. Follow me on Twitter or Facebook for the most important developments in defense & aerospace news, and other great stories besides.
The company's most recent quarterly earnings report, which came out more than a month ago, showed Plug losing money ($0.06 per share adjusted and $0.07 per share GAAP ) and racking up sales at a slower pace than predicted , to boot. And although Plug Power ended the year with "positive adjusted" earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization ( EBITDA ), management was cautious not to predict any such profit in fiscal 2020.
To help weather this rough patch, therefore, the company has just announced in a filing with the SEC that it will be selling "19,633,507 new shares of our common stock" in an attempt to raise "up to" $75 million in new capital.
Plug Power announced the sale at an offering price of $3.82 per share, representing a 7%-plus discount to its closing price of $4.12 per share Monday. The news quickly sent the stock lower. As of 4:30 p.m. EDT, the shares are down 3.4% in after-hours trading, after rising nearly 8% during normal trading hours on the Nasdaq.
In its filing, Plug noted that it expects to end up with 337.4 million shares after making this new floatation, implying 5.8% dilution to the share count from this offering.
Founded in 1997, Plug Power stock has never earned a full-year profit, nor generated any operating cash flow from its business. The company burned through $63.7 million in negative free cash flow last year, according to data from S&P Global Market Intelligence .
