                  								06/30/2020 - 14:23pm | By: David Tisdale
Dr. Jason Azoulay, an assistant professor in the School of Polymer Science and Engineering,
                  50 from academia – to earn funding from the program for their research efforts. Now
                  in its 11th year, the goal of the Early Career Research Program is to bolster the
                  their career, when many are engaged in their most formative work.
                  at least $500,000 per year. The research grants are planned for five years and cover
                  salary and research expenses. To be eligible, a researcher must be an untenured, tenure-track
                  assistant or associate professor at a U.S. academic institution or a full-time employee
                  at a DOE national laboratory, who received a Ph.D. within the past 10 years.
                  on the world stage," said Under Secretary for Science Paul Dabbar. "By bolstering
                  our commitment to the scientific community, we invest into our nation's next generation
                  Office of Science's six major program offices: Advanced Scientific Computing Research,
                  Reactions of Unsaturated Substrates: Towards New Functional, Recyclable, and Upcycled
                  of Au catalyzed intermolecular processes.
                  backbone impart robust mechanical, chemical, and thermal properties.
                  of plastics, utilize unusable industrial and consumer waste, and which reduce environmental
                  intermolecular reactions to bifunctional monomers; (2) to gain fundamental mechanistic
                  insight into Au-catalyzed polymerizations; (3) the application of these reactions
                  plastics and post-consumer waste. These results will provide many of the first examples
                  of HGC in the field of polymer science, and provide the foundational knowledge needed
                  to design new chemical reactions, catalysts, processes, and materials. In turn, this
                  unusable, new de-polymerization approaches for circular processing, and chemical upcycling
After earning his Ph.D. in chemistry from the University of California, Santa Barbara
                  and photonic materials research. He joined the USM faculty in 2014, where his research
                  group focuses on homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis; electronic, photonic, and
                  objectives in materials development.
“Dr. Azoulay is an innovative scientist, and this prestigious DOE Early Career Award
                  on the development of gold catalyst systems,” said Dr. Derek Patton, director of the
                  School of Polymer Science and Engineering. “These catalytic systems are aimed at improving
                  for landfills or incinerators. His work aligns well with historical and ongoing efforts
                  in materials sustainability within the School of Polymer Science and Engineering.
“With development of appropriate catalytic processes, there are tremendous opportunities
                  building blocks for new materials, rather than more poorly managed waste streams.
                  I am excited to see the innovative developments from Dr. Azoulay and his research
For information about the School of Polymer Science and Engineering, visit https://www.usm.edu/polymer-science-engineering/index.php .
