That's where faith groups come in, says Chan.
Religious institutions are long-standing community anchors, he says, which makes them ideal partners for developers struggling to connect low income households with clean energy. In turn, they're being used as launching pads for some of the most "innovative models" on the community solar market, Chan adds.
According to Donnel Baird, the CEO of BlocPower, a Brooklyn based green-technology startup, a key way to expand clean energy is by exposing more — and more diverse — communities to solar.
"The only way to do that is through institutions they trust," Baird says. "At the top of the list for that are institutions of faith, which are located [in] and serve low income communities."
Faith groups have long espoused justice-driven values and mandates. But in step with rising concern over climate change, increasingly, religious missions not only entail addressing social and economic inequality, but also environmental injustice.
Interfaith Power & Light, a national coalition that fuses faith with environmental advocacy, puts its succinctly : "The very existence of life – life that religious people are called to protect – is jeopardized by our continued dependency on fossil fuels for energy. Every major religion has a mandate to care for Creation."
Pope Francis doubled down on the idea in 2015, when he wrote a landmark, 184-page letter calling for an "ecological conversion." He implored people of faith to hear "both the cry of the earth and the cry of the poor."
In many cases, churches, temples and mosques are taking an obvious first step: addressing their own emissions by subscribing to a nearby solar garden, or installing panels on their own roofs.
Nationwide, at least 770 houses of worship have installed solar panels to power their own buildings, according to Interfaith Power & Light.
In other cases, like at Shiloh, religious institutions are participating in projects that spread clean energy beyond their own grounds.
Bishop Richard Howell Jr., the head pastor of Shiloh, said the church has long been a hub of north Minneapolis, providing residents with support and resources during times of need.
"We're in a community where unemployment is very high, and there's a lot of health and educational disparities," Howell says.
Cooperative Energy Futures, the Minneapolis-based nonprofit that spearheaded the project, eliminated credit score requirements to ensure the garden was accessible to the immediate community. It also required the installation company, Innovative Power Systems, to hire a team that was at least 50% people of color.
To Dent, what distinguishes the Shiloh project is the solar garden's "cooperative approach." Under the model, subscribers aren't simply customers of the array — they're part-owners.
In turn, Dent says, "No matter what changes around you, you still own this — and no one can take that from you."
A slate of Washington, D.C. community solar projects, all set to go online by year's end, take a slightly different approach.
Groundswell, a D.C.-based nonprofit, in partnership with local faith groups, built four solar gardens that will provide more than 100 income-qualified households with assistance designed to slash their electricity bills in half.
Michelle Moore, the CEO of Groundswell, says those savings are made possible by creative financing strategies that cover the subscription fees customers pay under traditional community solar models.
Michelle Moore, CEO of Groundswell and Father Salvatore Sciurba at the Monastery of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel in Washington, D.C. Mhari Shaw/NPR hide caption
Michelle Moore, CEO of Groundswell and Father Salvatore Sciurba at the Monastery of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel in Washington, D.C.
Three of the gardens — one hosted by St. Luke Baptist Church and two sponsored by Dupont Park Seventh Day Adventist Church — are funded by the D.C. Department of Energy and Environment, which provides free solar to residents whose income sits at 85% or less of the local median income.
Moore says the idea behind the model is to "share power" among neighbors — some of whom can afford to pay a higher price for energy than others. But she also acknowledges that not all cities and states have equity-focused programs like D.C.
"It's wonderful, and very abundant for the district, but it's unusual," she says.
The fourth Groundswell project, located on the grounds of a D.C. monastery, will provide free subscriptions to a set number of households based on income; the rest will pay full price. It's a model that could be adopted elsewhere, Moore says, one that shows it's possible to "share savings with people who need savings the most."
She says religious institutions make for strong partners in this effort because unlike many business and homeowners, "they're in it for the long haul."
And just as families flock to places of worship when they don't have coats in the wintertime, or when they can't afford to feed their kids, now, "you go to church when you can't pay your energy bill."
