It might surprise you after years of spiralling price rises, but your electricity bill is set to fall.
There have been periods when generators have had to pay to generate electricity, due to solar power flooding into the national grid
"The private sector would not touch it with a barge pole," Victoria Energy Policy Centre director Bruce Mountain said of investing in new coal-fired power plants.
Contracts for energy futures — power that will be bought this year and in 2021 — are down between 13 and 17 per cent, according to the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO), and that decline will mean falling bills for consumers.
"During the next two years, retail prices will go down," Australian National University honorary associate professor Hugh Saddler told The Business.
"[There will be] a gradual decrease, a small but steady decrease, over the next couple of years in residential electricity prices."
Even though the heat and bushfires have trimmed the amount of power produced by hydro and coal-fired plants, the spot price for electricity fell almost 20 per cent in the last quarter of 2019, compared to a year earlier.
"The main reason is the sun is starting to displace coal-fired generation," Victoria Energy Policy Centre director Bruce Mountain said.
The boom in renewables has meant there is less reliance on coal-fired generation.
While coal-powered plants are slower to be able to respond to demand and must keep running, gas-powered plants are expensive to run but easier to turn on and off, and are being used to smooth out demand at the start and end of the day when the sun is not shining.
So much solar power is storming into the national grid in the middle of the day that states including South Australia are now experiencing periods of negative prices for power.
Hugh Saddler, from ANU's Crawford School of Public Policy, says some states have experienced periods of negative power prices.
"What that means is that the generators that are going through that period actually have to pay to generate electricity, which is not great for the economics of a coal-fired power station," Dr Saddler said.
However, slumping futures prices are not beneficial for the development of renewables either.
"When prices come down, the incentive to invest is weaker and so you expect to see less clamour for new investment," Dr Mountain said.
"The issue is not so much the price but the policy frameworks, governments chopping and changing, a lack of clarity means investors discount future prices."
