Australia's Clean Energy Finance Corporation has around $100 million still to deploy as part of its innovation fund as it looks to technologies that reduce emissions while also boosting grid stability.
"We have a challenge with grid stability, which is an area we are very interested in. [We're] finding technologies that can support that to ensure that renewables can continue coming online and being utilised to their maximum capacity," the innovation fund's executive director Ben Gust said.
Clean Energy Finance Corporation Innovation Fund executive director Ben Gust.
The stability of Australia's energy system has been a key focus of federal energy minister Angus Taylor, who championed reviewing the "energy mix" to ensure transition to renewables does not result in power interruptions.
"We’re obviously very keen to ensure that we continue to improve the grid stability so we can keep our solar farms and wind farms and so on flowing into the space," Mr Gust said.
The Clean Energy Finance Corporation is a $10 billion government-owned investment organisation which was established in 2012 by the Gillard government.
Its chief executive Ian Learmonth recently signalled the fund's focus on securing grid reliability. There was also speculation a sale of the corporation into private hands was a possibility.
The corporation's innovation fund has been in operation for two and a half years and has made 11 investments in early stage businesses working to solve energy efficiency, emissions and renewable energy challenges.
"We sort of overlay sectors of the economy which are large emissions producers and look for technologies in those areas," Mr Gust said.
The $200 million fund has invested $69 million in capital so far and given already committed funds around half of its funds are yet to be allocated.
Fund director Kristin Vaughan said there was lots of talent to choose from among the countless inbound leads the fund receives.
"There is a huge amount going on in Australia. We are seeing a lot of Aussie startups and they are addressing some of the energy problems Australia is facing, at least as early as some other countries across the world," Ms Vaughan said.
Investments so far include a $12 million stake in smart thermostat business Zen Ecosystems and a $8 million investment in lightweight wheel maker Carbon Revolution.
Mr Gust said the fund was now searching across universities and startup accelerators for new opportunities.
"We are looking for opportunities that are global or have global applications... we are proactively looking for deal flow," he said.
The innovation fund is one of the only clean tech-focused investment vehicles for early stage companies in Australia, though it is not the only government agency investing in renewables.
On Wednesday, the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) outlined its new investment priorities, signalling a focus on projects which integrated a higher proportion of renewables into the electricity system.
