New Delhi: Lending to coal-fired power plants in India slumped 90 per cent to Rs 6,081 crore in 2018 as against 2017 while the funding for renewable energy projects grew by Rs 1,529 crore to Rs 24,442 crore. Also, most coal-fired project loans came from majority state-owned financial institutions while majority private banks contributed three-quarters of all the finance towards renewable energy projects .
These are the findings of the latest report “Coal versus Renewables Finance Analysis” by the Centre for Financial Accountability , a Delhi-based think tank, published today. The analysis examines 52 project finance deals comprising a loan component across 54 coal fired power and renewable energy projects with a financial closure date between January and December 2018.
The 54 energy projects attracted total lending of Rs 30,524 crore, 80 per cent of which is attributed to renewable energy projects while the rest went to coal-fired power plants. In 2018, only 5 coal-fired power plants with a combined capacity of 3.8 Gigawatt (Gw) received finance totalling Rs 6,081 crore. By contrast, in 2017, 12 coal-fired projects with 17 Gw capacity received Rs 60,767 crore finance.
“In 2018, a total of 49 renewable energy projects with a combined capacity of 4.7 Gw obtained loans of Rs 24,442 crore. Solar PV attracted 60 per cent of this finance while the remaining 40 per cent went to wind energy projects,” the report states.
A few Indian states paved the way for the growth of the renewable energy generation capacity in 2018. Projects in Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat attracted half of the entire country’s project finance for renewables across 23 solar PV and wind projects. Meanwhile, Chhattisgarh and West Bengal together attracted finance for three coal-fired power projects but no renewables.
How did you hear about us?
Instead of treating CO2 as liability, we can make it raw material: Mukesh Ambani
The other participants in the conference included Prince Abdulaziiz bin Salman al-Saud, Minister of Energy, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and Patrick Pauyanne, CEO, Total and Tanya Beckett, as the moderator
Tripathi has over 16 years of experience in software design, architecture and development with expertise in e-mobility solutions
New Delhi: Green energy solutions provider, Magenta Power , on Wednesday said it has appointed Sanjeev Tripathi as the head of technology, which is a central part of the company’s strategy for achieving growth targets.
“I am excited to be a part of the budding Magenta Group. As a hands-on technologist, I see global opportunity in this new space of electric mobility tightly integrated into the power distribution systems and this requires a strong technology backbone,” said Sanjeev Tripathi, technology head, Magenta Power.
Tripathi has over 16 years of experience in software design, architecture and development with expertise in e-mobility solutions. He has a postgraduate degree in blockchain, science, and mathematics.
Maxson Lewis , director, Magenta Power and ChargeGrid said that Tripathi’s vision for the future of power and e-mobility would support the firm’s technology plans across their three areas of growth -- power, EV charging, and mobility.
Masdar, a developer and operator of utility-scale renewable energy projects, is eyeing new projects in Saudi Arabia, the United States as well as in eastern and central Europe and southeast Asia, said Mohamed Jameel al-Ramahi
DUBAI : Abu Dhabi Future Energy Company ( Masdar ) plans to boost its renewable energy capacity to 8 gigawatts (GW) before the end of this year, as it expands globally and bids for new projects, its chief executive told Reuters.
Masdar, a developer and operator of utility-scale renewable energy projects, is eyeing new projects in Saudi Arabia , the United States as well as in eastern and central Europe and southeast Asia , said Mohamed Jameel al-Ramahi.
Masdar is wholly-owned by Abu Dhabi's state fund Mubadala Investment Co. Abu Dhabi, like other Gulf oil producers, wants to reduce reliance on crude oil and diversify its energy mix.
"At the beginning of 2019, Masdar set a target of doubling its renewables capacity of 4GW within five years. We now expect to exceed that target before the end of 2020, so in less than two years," al-Ramahi said in a phone interview this week.
In January 2019, Masdar announced plans to double its renewables energy capacity from 4GW in five years with new projects in Asia and the Americas. Al-Ramahi did not give updated details on Masdar's existing renewable energy capacity.
The company has expanded its portfolio in the past years to the United States and had lately announced projects in Australia, Indonesia , Uzbekistan, Poland, Serbia, Montenegro and Greece.
Al-Ramahi said Masdar had bid for renewable projects in Saudi Arabia, which had launched a multi-billion-dollar renewables energy push. He declined to give further details.
New Delhi: Debt-laden wind power solutions provider Suzlon Energy has completed its debt restructuring process.
Under the restructuring plan, promoters and key shareholders have infused Rs 392 crore.
In a regulatory filing, the company said that the debt restructuring completed with unanimous approval of secured lenders.
Post the announcement, shares of the company on the BSE hit the 5 per cent upper circuit . Its shares are currently at Rs 5.36, higher by 4.89 per cent from its previous close.
Term debt of the company has been reduced substantially with interest of 9 per cent per annum repayable over 10 years starting Wednesday.
Further, the balance debt of secured consortium lenders has been replaced by 0.01 per cent optionally convertible debenture (OCD) of the company and 0.0001 per cent Compulsorily Convertible Preference Shares (CCPS) of its subsidiary redeemable or convertible in 20 years, it said.
In March, the Suzlon Energy said that its lenders-led by the State Bank of India have approved the resolution plan as per the Reserve Bank of India's June 7, 2019 circular (RBI).
Suzlon Group CEO J.P. Chalasani said: "We are pleased to have implemented our Debt Restructuring with unanimous approval from the consortium lenders and 99.9 per cent of our FCCB holders. Capital infusion of Rs 392 crores by promoters, key shareholders and various stakeholders demonstrates their commitment and confidence in Suzlon."
He added that the debt restructuring has resulted in a stronger balance sheet enabling the Company to focus on capturing the tremendous growth potential in the Indian wind energy sector.
Tulsi Tanti, Founder and CMD, Suzlon Group, was of the view that the restructuring has saved thousands of direct and indirect jobs, ensuring the survival of a large number of MSME vendors and protecting 13 GW of operating wind energy assets.
According to CFO Swapnil Jain the restructuring will ease the pressure on the group's cash flows significantly and give it headroom for ramping up business operations.
"We have reduced our fixed cost steeply and brought down the interest costs by more than 70 per cent. This has resulted in substantial reduction in the break-even point from pre-restructuring levels ensuring a long term sustainable business case," Jain said.
Solar mini-grids can support almost half of universal electricity access target: Report
New Delhi: Solar mini-grids can supply electricity to 111 million households -- almost half of the SDG7 target to achieve universal access -- in Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and small island nations by 2030 with the right policy support, according to a latest report.
It added that this would require capital investment of $128 billion between 2020 and 2030.
It, however, added that today the mini-grid market is nascent, despite it being the least-cost option for electricity access in many areas.
“In the fallout of COVID-19, countries have a unique opportunity to ‘Recover Better’ and reset their economies while accelerating energy access. Now, more than ever, we need a thriving mini-grids sector that can power critical infrastructure and give access to the 789 million people worldwide who lack electricity. We must improve regulatory frameworks, commit greater finance and scale innovative mini-grid business models,” said Damilola Ogunbiyi, CEO of Sustainable Energy for All.
According to the report, the costs of PV modules and lithium-ion batteries have continued to fall sharply by 86 per cent and 85 per cent, respectively, between 2010 and 2018.
It added that solar hybrid mini-grids that integrate PV and other decentralized energy resources such as diesel generators and energy storage can complement and compete with main grid extensions in terms of the cost of electricity and the speed of deployment.
“As the market matures, funding deployment must be quicker. This is linked to the policy and regulations of the countries where recipients of funding are located. Governments need to promote robust regulatory frameworks that support the development of mini-grids,” said Takehiro Kawahara, frontier power lead analyst at BloombergNEF.
The report identified 7,181 mini-grid projects in Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia and small island nations with some in Latin America, as of March 2020. As many as 5,544 mini-grids were operational, of which 63 per cent were solar or solar hybrid systems.
The report said that the levelized costs of electricity of different mini-grid types ranged from $0.49 to $0.68 per kWh for solar hybrid mini-grids operating in isolated areas and serving both households and productive-use customers in the six case study countries.
There are two big challenges that need to be overcome for mini-grids to scale up and realize their potential. First, rural customers in need of electricity access often have limited power demand and sometimes lack the ability to pay. Second, there is a general lack of policies and regulations to support mini-grids.
The report found that 14 funders belonging to the Mini-Grids Funders Group had approved a total of $2.1 billion by March 2020, of which only 13 per cent had been disbursed.
This means that there can be significant delays in getting funding, and therefore in projects moving forward. There is also a lack of pure commercial financing as the mini-grid market lacks scale and developers’ project track records are limited, according to the report.
The decision is subject to the approval of the Department of Revenue under the finance ministry, said RK Singh, minister of state for power and new and renewable energy
New Delhi: Chinese imports for public solar power projects will be exempted from the basic customs duty if the power purchase agreements were signed before the implementation of the duty, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy ( MNRE ) said on Tuesday.
The decision is subject to the approval of the Department of Revenue under the finance ministry, RK Singh, minister of state for power and new and renewable energy, told renewable energy companies at a meeting called by his ministry to convey the decision.
In case the finance ministry does not allow such a provision, Singh assured the companies that the MNRE will allow developers to claim reimbursements for imports from China, provided their PPAs are signed before August 1.
The latter route would mean that there is an understanding between the solar developers and the government that the projects cost more than the allocated budget at the time of closing the deal, and hence compensation will be provided to the developers via the distribution companies.
Last week, Singh had told media persons that the government planned to levy 15-20% duty that would rise to 40% in a year's time, to reduce dependence on China.
Called a “grandfather clause”, the move comes as a relief to local manufacturers who were surprised by the government's decision to impose such a duty. About 80% of solar imports come from China.
However, developers have complained about a previous “grandfather clause” not being honoured. “We have seen a similar clause for the pass-through of the safeguard duty, but have not seen any money from the state discoms yet,” said an industry executive present at the meeting.
Smaller solar companies have also requested an exemption for private PPAs. “The cost for private deals which are already signed will increase, leading to a lot of complications in the already negotiated deals,” said a developer, who did not wish to be identified.
Singh also said that the approved list of models and manufacturers (ALMM) is expected by September, which is expected to boost domestic manufacturing in India. All projects using solar components will only be allowed from manufacturers on this list, which will be implemented from October 1.
Coal reaching 'tipping point' vs renewables: analysis
The authors estimate that a third of the global coal fleet is already more costly to run than it is to build new renewable power solutions, including battery storage
Paris: Renewable energy such as wind and solar projects are already cheaper to build than it is to continue operating 40 percent of the world's existing coal fleet, according to analysis released Tuesday.
In a report outlining how the world can phase out the most polluting fuel while powering an economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic, a group of experts said coal had reached a financial "tipping point" making it uncompetitive in most markets.
The authors estimate that a third of the global coal fleet is already more costly to run than it is to build new renewable power solutions, including battery storage.
That figure is set to rise to 73 percent of the fleet by 2025, said the analysis, which also found that replacing the entire coal fleet with clean energy could be done at a net saving to the global economy as soon as 2022.
"A faster transition from coal to clean energy is within our grasp, and we show how to engineer that transition in ways that will save money for electricity customers around the world while aiding a just transition for workers and communities," said Paul Bodnar, managing director of the Rocky Mountain think tank which co-produced the research.
The 2015 Paris climate deal enjoins nations to limit global warming to well below two degrees Celsius (3.6 Farenheit) above pre-industrial temperatures through sweeping emissions cuts.
The accord strives for a safer heating cap of 1.5C.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change said that for the 1.5C goal to remain in reach, global coal use must decline by 80 percent below 2010 levels by 2030.
The analysis found that 81 percent of the European Union 's coal fleet was already uncompetitive today -- meaning that without state support the plants would cease to be going concerns.
In China that figure stands at 43 percent currently, rising to nearly 100 percent in five years.
The report did not take into account the environmental and health impacts of coal.
"Coal power is quickly facing economic obsolescence, independent of carbon pricing and air pollution policies," said Matt Gray, managing director and co-head of power and utilities at the Carbon Tracker Initiative.
"Closing coal capacity and replacing it with lower cost alternatives will not only save consumers and taxpayers money, but could also play a major role in the upcoming economic recovery."
Since April, the government has sought to prevent more than 40 wind and solar power plants from connecting to the CFE-owned grid, arguing that the coronavirus pandemic requires an uninterrupted power supply
MEXICO CITY: Mexican President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador on Tuesday ordered formal complaints to be drawn up alleging fraud by mostly renewable power companies, but he gave no evidence backing up the complaints.
Ramping up his repeated allegations of corruption in power generation contracts won by mostly wind and solar power companies, Lopez Obrador said that while he remains open to dialogue with the companies, he also wants his aides to prepare the legal complaints against them.
"We want to talk to the companies one by one. At the same time, I've given the order to begin drawing up formal complaints," Lopez Obrador told reporters at a regular government news conference.
Lopez Obrador, who has moved on several fronts to centralize more control over energy in state hands, alleged that after the private power firms won supply contracts at auction with state-run electricity company CFE that additional deals were inked that gave them preferential rates.
He provided no evidence to support the allegation.
Since April, the government has sought to prevent more than 40 wind and solar power plants from connecting to the CFE-owned grid, arguing that the coronavirus pandemic requires an uninterrupted power supply.
Critics have alleged that Lopez Obrador instead seeks to favor the CFE's mostly fossil fuel-derived power generation, and that he is generally suspicious of any private-sector participation in energy.
Earlier this month, the president singled out Spain 's Iberdrola for criticism, accusing the power generation company of mounting a media campaign against his government as well as unspecified acts of graft.
On Tuesday, Lopez Obrador did not mention any specific companies.
The power sector dispute directly affects more than $6 billion in partially or already built wind and solar power plants, which judges have allowed to proceed as planned despite the government push to stop them. (Additional reporting and writing by David Alire Garcia; Editing by Jonathan Oatis and Aurora Ellis)
In the latest SECI auction, Spain's Solarpack won 300 MW at Rs 2.36 per unit, while Italy's Enel Green Power won 300MW at Rs 2.37 per unit.
BENGALURU: Solar tariffs have fallen to a new record of Rs 2.36 per unit, in an auction of 2,000 MW where six foreign companies won projects, while Renew Power was the only local firm among the winners, according to sources close to the development.
The lowest tariff until now had been Rs 2.44 per unit, reached in a Solar Corporation of India ( SECI ) auction in May 2017 and again in July 2018. SECI is the nodal agency through which the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy conducts wind and solar power auctions. It declined to confirm the results of the auction.
In the latest SECI auction, Spain's Solarpack won 300 MW at Rs 2.36 per unit, while Italy's Enel Green Power won 300MW at Rs 2.37 per unit. Germany's IB Vogt won 300 MW at the same tariff. Canadian developer AMP Energy and New York based Eden Renewables won 100MW and 300MW at Rs 2.37 per unit.
CDC Group (UK’s development finance institution) backed Ayana Renewable Power won 300 MW at Rs 2.38 per unit. The only local company to win was Renew Power, which got 400 MW at Rs 2.38 per unit, though Renew too is largely backed by foreign investors. Projects can be located anywhere in India.
"Solar equipment costs have been falling very sharply in the last six months because of Covid related demand depression around the world," said Vinay Rustagi, Managing Director of renewable energy consultancy firm Bridge To India.
Developers are also anxious to win new projects because of the slowdown in power demand and the slow pace of auctions, he said.
"Vanilla solar tenders are becoming rare as there is greater push for more complex round-the-clock and peak power schemes," Rustagi said. SECI conducted the first-of-its-kind auction for round-the-clock power in May where the levelised winning tariff emerged at Rs 3.60 per unit. ET reported in May that the renewable energy ministry is likely to stop conducting auctions for plain vanilla solar and wind tenders.
This tender received an overwhelming response with bids for more than 5,000MW. "The sector is increasingly dominated by international capital. Barring the largest Indian corporate houses, Indian developers do not have the financing appetite to compete for these projects," Rustagi said.
One developer felt the fall in price reflected the industry’s desperation following the Covid 19 caused slowdown. "It is disappointing to see the industry acting in desperation. The same developers used to complain about risks (of aggressive bidding and consequent low tariffs) in the media and other forums,” said an industry executive, requesting anonymity. He noted that developers bagging contracts at low prices and later failing to deliver would face severe consequences. “The minister (of New and Renewable Energy) has made it very clear he would blacklist companies which renege on contracts," he said.
"I don't understand the reason for this aggression," said another solar developer, requesting anonymity.
Acme Solar, the developer which had won the contract at the then-lowest tariff of Rs 2.44 per unit in July 2018, has since informed the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission that it will not be able to execute the project. The matter is under litigation.
