Dublin, May  15, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- The "Global Renewable Energy Subscription" report from Wintergreen Research, Inc has been added to ResearchAndMarkets.com's offering.
This subscription allows access to all existing studies and new studies  for 18 months. Examining all aspects of renewable energy can be done  with customized power points that elucidate the moving market targets:  as the world moves to 100% renewables.
The study documents companies whose employees have made an effort to get  that company to 100% renewable or headed in that direction. This  provides a model for how the market could evolve. According to the  study, it will take $70 trillion to take the world to 100% renewable.
The tow gating factors that will enable broad adoption of renewable energy are:
Talk about disruptive technology, the renewable storage enables eliminating carbon emissions from coal, oil and gas plants. These industries will quickly tank and the nimble market participants will become major players in the utility-scale storage supply and distribution.
Vehicles become powered by battery, solar and wind farms are put in place in remote locations and the financial markets move to support electricity storage at utility-scale and energy distribution much as it happens now, across large distances.
Renewable energy systems at scale have become assets, they are bankable, the financial markets can support them, this represents a major market shift.
Batteries are changing in response to the implementation of wind and solar renewable energy systems. Lithium-Ion batteries represent the state of the art now. Solid-state batteries represent the next generation of power storage for vehicles. Nanotechnology permits units to be miniaturized, standalone, and portable. Utility-scale lithium flow batteries have been developed to offer utility-scale advantages. Advantages are evident in power and density: low-power draw and high-energy-density.
They have limitations that are still being addressed by vendors. But they are good enough to be installed and to be bankable. Projects using utility-scale storage can be financed.
