Gas stoves have long been popular, and gas heat has become more so as people shift away from oil. National Grid says over the past decade, it has observed an average of 12,400 oil-to-gas conversions a year.
A report released Monday by climate activists raises questions about the rationale for building new  natural gas infrastructure in a state that has mandated a dramatic reduction in fossil-fuel use over the next three decades.
findings of a study it released last month. That study projected
construction of a new pipeline as a top option.
Monday’s meeting is one in a series that, along with National Grid’s study, were required under a settlement the utility reached last fall with the Cuomo administration, which had threatened to suspend National Grid’s license over the utility’s self-imposed moratorium on new gas connections.
The utility has appealed that denial and the Cuomo administration will have to decide by this May whether to again reject the project, which the Trump administration has discussed subverting state environmental authority in order to facilitate, or accept the construction of multimillion-dollar fossil-fuel infrastructure that will last for decades beyond the legal deadline for New York to move to other fuel sources.
A state law passed last year requires 70 percent of New York’s electricity to come from renewable sources by 2030, rising to 100 percent by 2040, and imposes a mandate to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions 85 percent and adopt carbon-offsets for the remaining 15 percent of emissions so that the state is carbon neutral by the year 2050.
In its study , National Grid said gas usage during peak periods—the coldest days of the year—has been growing an average of 2.4 percent per year, straining the utility’s ability to provide consistent supplies.
growth, the utility still foresees “a supply vs. demand gap that
from gas to the electrical grid.
explicitly name a favored approach, it clearly indicates that large
getting New York to its clean-energy goals. “We are fully cognizant
of the changing role of utilities, and the desire to include
energy future,” its study reads.
The report released Monday was prepared by the consultancy Energy Futures Group for the climate-change advocacy organization 350.org and 350Brooklyn. It questions the premise from which National Grid starts: that there is or is likely to be a shortage of natural gas in the New York City region.
nationwide than National Grid estimates for the metro region: 1.6
percent over the next 10 years, as opposed to the 11 percent growth
over the decade that National Grid projects. “An adjustment based
energy needs by nearly 85 percent,” the report contends.
because the utility has said little about how it generated them. “It
final forecasted demand,” the report concludes.
Whatever the projection for gas demand,
electrification through cold climate air source heat pumps, and
percent of the forecasted needs. That would require National Grid to
reduce leaks in its system by 60 percent, convert80,000 customers to
Grid agree on the methods for reducing gas demand, but differ on
more of that new demand than the utility has estimated, it’s possible
with a decades-long lifespan can lead to stranded costs,
climate targets,” the report reads. “Ratepayers may end up
discourage investments in energy efficiency, peak demand reduction
NESE is not the only new natural gas infrastructure the utility is proposing. In its most recent application to state regulators for a rate hike, National Grid also discusses a new pipeline loop and compressed natural gas filing station on Staten Island, a new portable facility for liquid natural gas at its plant in Greenpoint, and the need for gas-injection infrastructure at two unspecified sites.
last month promised a ban on new pipelines. But it is unclear how the
The meeting on Monday is scheduled for 5-8 p.m. at the Hicksville Community Center, 28 W. Carl Street, in Hicksville, N.Y.  National Grid has other public meetings scheduled for later this week and month:
Advocates had criticized the planned meetings, which are being billed as “information sessions,” as emphasizing the utility’s message over the public’s feedback. But the state’s Public Service Commission clarified in a Friday letter that oral as well as written comments will be accepted at the meetings.
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
