Simply Wall St March 8, 2020
Shareholders in Amplify Energy Corp. ( NYSE:AMPY ) had a terrible week, as shares crashed 49% to US$2.13 in the week since its latest annual results. Revenues came in at US$276m, in line with estimates, while Amplify Energy reported a statutory loss of US$0.71 per share, well short of prior analyst forecasts for a profit. Analysts typically update their forecasts at each earnings report, and we can judge from their estimates whether their view of the company has changed or if there are any new concerns to be aware of. We’ve gathered the most recent statutory forecasts to see whether analysts have changed their earnings models, following these results.
NYSE:AMPY Past and Future Earnings, March 8th 2020
Following last week’s earnings report, Amplify Energy’s two analysts are forecasting 2020 revenues to be US$275.9m, approximately in line with the last 12 months. Per-share statutory losses are expected to explode, reaching US$0.12 per share. Before this earnings report, analysts had been forecasting revenues of US$312.9m and earnings per share (EPS) of US$0.66 in 2020. So we can see that the consensus has become notably more bearish on Amplify Energy’s outlook following these results, with a substantial drop in next year’s revenue estimates. Furthermore, they expect the business to be loss-making next year, compared to their previous forecasts of a profit.
The average analyst price target fell 18% to US$8.38, implicitly signalling that lower earnings per share are a leading indicator for Amplify Energy’s valuation.
It can also be useful to step back and take a broader view of how analyst forecasts compare to Amplify Energy’s performance in recent years. It’s also worth noting that the years of declining sales look to have come to an end, with the forecast for flat revenues next year. Historically, Amplify Energy’s sales have shrunk approximately 11% annually over the past five years. Compare this against analyst estimates for the wider market, which suggest that (in aggregate) market revenues are expected to grow 4.5% next year. So it’s pretty clear that, although revenues are improving, Amplify Energy is still expected to grow slower than the market.
The biggest low-light for us was that the forecasts for Amplify Energy dropped from profits to a loss next year. On the negative side, they also downgraded their revenue estimates, and forecasts imply revenues will perform worse than the wider market. The consensus price target fell measurably, with analysts seemingly not reassured by the latest results, leading to a lower estimate of Amplify Energy’s future valuation.
With that said, the long-term trajectory of the company’s earnings is a lot more important than next year. At least one analyst has provided forecasts out to 2021, which can be seen for free on our platform here.
You can also see whether Amplify Energy is carrying too much debt, and whether its balance sheet is healthy, for free on our platform here.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
