By Press release submission | Jun 30, 2020
Schiff Hardin LLP issued the following announcement on June 24.
Schiff Hardin LLP today announced that veteran energy finance and infrastructure attorney Philip Corsello has joined the firm’s Finance Group as counsel in New York. Corsello brings more than 25 years of experience in the project finance, energy, and infrastructure sectors, with a focus in the renewable energy and battery storage industries.
“We are pleased to have Phil join Schiff Hardin. His extraordinary breadth of experience providing counsel on project, infrastructure, and related financings is an ideal fit for the firm in these dynamic practice areas,” said Andrew Kling, the leader of Schiff Hardin’s Finance Practice Group.
Corsello, who joined Schiff Hardin from DLA Piper where he was a partner, advises clients on a variety of matters, including construction and mini-perm financings, financings of battery storage projects, term refinancings, tax-equity and back-leverage financings of renewable energy assets, and financings and dispositions of gas-fired power generation facilities, electricity transmission projects, and natural gas storage facilities
His clients include agents, arrangers, institutional investors, banks and other lenders, as well as sponsors, developers, and investors, who seek his guidance on project financings, tax-equity and back-leverage financings, project acquisitions and dispositions, holding companies and term loan B credit facilities, private placements (including under Section 4(a)(2) and Rule 144A), secured and unsecured working capital, and letter of credit facilities.
“This is a great time to be in the energy and infrastructure space at Schiff Hardin. As federal and state commitments to renewable energy and battery storage alternatives increase, we expect continued growth in the sector,” said Corsello. “I’m excited to bring my project finance capabilities to Schiff Hardin’s strong, multidisciplinary energy and infrastructure teams at a time when the firm is expanding even more in these industries.”
Corsello received his Bachelor of Arts degree from Columbia University in 1989, and his J.D. from Fordham University in 1992.
      we'll email you a link to the story. You may edit your settings or unsubscribe at any time.
