Seen as Energy Sector Bright Spot, Texas Firms Grow Renewables Teams
Bracewell hired Jones Day partner Danielle Varnell in Washington, D.C., while Locke Lord added Husch Blackwell associate Michael Malfettone in Austin.
By Brenda Sapino Jeffreys | June 30, 2020 at 09:21 AM
Your article was successfully shared with the contacts you provided.
Michael Malfettone, a partner Locke Lord in Austin, and Danielle Varnell, a partner at Bracewell in Washington, D.C. Courtesy photos
Texas firms Bracewell and Locke Lord both added a partner in the renewable energy area on Monday, as the firms foresee growing demand in that segment of the energy practice.
Become a Free ALM Digital Reader.
Benefits of a Digital Membership:
Senior reporter Brenda Sapino Jeffreys covers the business of law in Texas. Contact her at bjeffreys@alm.com On Twitter: @BrendaSJeffreys
A national surge in COVID-19 cases, recent protests over racial injustice, and the challenges of social distancing are prompting a growing number of state supreme courts to rethink plans to hold in-person bar exams in July and September.
They will partner with local organizations to take on issues such as the school-to-prison pipeline and disparate criminal sentences.
Prior to the riots in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the costliest U.S. civil disorder occurred between April 29 and May 4, 1992, after police officers involved in the brutal beating of Rodney King were acquitted. The five days of rioting caused $775 million in insured losses.
Law Offices of Mark E. Salomone
With this subscription you will receive unlimited access to high quality, online, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry. This is perfect for attorneys licensed in multiple jurisdictions or for attorneys that have fulfilled their CLE requirement but need to access resourceful information for their practice areas.
Our Team Account subscription service is for legal teams of four or more attorneys. Each attorney is granted unlimited access to high quality, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry along with administrative access to easily manage CLE for the entire team.
Gain access to some of the most knowledgeable and experienced attorneys with our 2 bundle options! Our Compliance bundles are curated by CLE Counselors and include current legal topics and challenges within the industry. Our second option allows you to build your bundle and strategically select the content that pertains to your needs. Both options are priced the same.
Dynamically explore and compare data on law firms, companies, individual lawyers, and industry trends.
Legal Compass includes access to our exclusive industry reports, combining the unmatched expertise of our analyst team with ALM’s deep bench of proprietary information to provide insights that can’t be found anywhere else.
Legal Compass delivers you the full scope of information, from the rankings of the Am Law 200 and NLJ 500 to intricate details and comparisons of firms’ financials, staffing, clients, news and events.
The Texas Lawyer honors attorneys and judges who have made a remarkable difference in the legal profession in Texas.
Annual conference bringing together the leaders of independent law firms from around the world, from 40+ jurisdictions.
ACE Leadership Forum & Expo is the annual conference for Senior Claims Executives in Insurance organizations.
Webcast Date:  July 29, 2020 | Join this webcast for best practices and lessons learned for investigations.
Webcast Date: Wednesday, July 22, 2020 | According to a recent Gallup study, 62% of U.S. employees worked from home this past April, reflecting a global migration to remote environments as the COVID-19 pandemic spread.
Webcast Date: Wednesday, July 22, 2020 | Privacy remains one of the top issues for in-house counsel and law firms, and those issues underscoring the need for data privacy have become even more pronounced with the onset of the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Fully integrated Nasdaq biopharmaceutical company in Metro Boston area seeks 6+ year attorney with major law firm corporate training for bro...
Senior Attorney - Long Island, New York
Mid-sized Long Island law firm seeking a full-time attorney with a minimum of five years litigation/trial experience in New York State and F...
High-end patent boutique in downtown DC has an active need for a patent associate with 1 to 7 years’ of law firm or USPTO examiner exp...
