Sell Exxon Stock Ahead of Earnings, Buy Chevron ConocoPhillips, Says Goldman
Goldman analyst Neil Mehta focuses on free cash flow. ConocoPhillips and Chevron “could see net debt broadly unchanged at quarter-end.” But Exxon could see “large debt builds.”
Goldman Sachs takes a look at the oil majors ahead of second-quarter earnings, and the firm’s advice is simple: Buy Chevron and ConocoPhillips stock, and sell Exxon Mobil . Why? It all comes down to cash.
Analyst Neil Mehta updated his estimates for Chevron (ticker: CVX), ConocoPhillips (COP), and Exxon (XOM) on Wednesday, ahead of the energy giants’ coming earnings reports, and warns that the results will reflect a challenging quarter. Companies are dealing with weaker pricing margins, and while lower production and cost-cutting efforts can offset that pressure to an extent, there could still be some pain evident in the numbers.
Yet perhaps the most important metric to watch is free cash flow—or the minimization of free cash burn—as this will be key to the companies’ debt profiles. “We expect ConocoPhillips and Chevron could see net debt broadly unchanged at quarter-end, thanks to capital discipline and boosted by asset sales closed during the second quarter, while Exxon could see large debt builds,” Mehta writes.
That fact informs part of his bullish calls on ConocoPhillips and Chevron. He reiterated Buy ratings on both (ConocoPhillips is also on his Conviction Buy List), with price targets of $56 and $112, respectively, and notes that both look well leveraged to an oil recovery, whenever that may be.
As for Exxon, Mehta has a Sell rating on the stock and lowered his price target by $2 to $42. He sees the “shares as expensive on valuation, relative to U.S. majors, as well as see free-cash-flow generation and dividend coverage as challenged,” and even with their year-to-date decline, he’s too concerned about the near-term risks to its recovery to recommend it to bargain hunters.
It isn’t hard to see why Mehta and others are focused on cash: Energy companies had been struggling with low commodity prices for years, well before the pandemic, and now the threat of dividend cuts amid capital crunches may be driving some of the longest-suffering investors away from the stocks. (Shareholders certainly aren’t there for big gains—Exxon stock today essentially trades where it did in early 2004.)
Oil prices have been making some strides recently , but investing in the energy sector has remained quite difficult. Yet while Exxon and ConocoPhillips are each off about 35% year to date, Chevron stock has only fallen 26%, helped in part by its strong balance sheet , although some warn that’s not enough to compensate for the industry’s woes .
Sell Exxon Stock Ahead of Earnings, Buy Chevron ConocoPhillips, Says Goldman
Goldman Sachs takes a look at the oil majors ahead of second-quarter earnings, and the firm’s advice is simple: Buy Chevron and ConocoPhillips stock, and sell Exxon Mobil.
