Sidley Expands Renewable Energy and Infrastructure Practice With Addition of Two Notable Partners in Houston, New York
NEW YORK--( BUSINESS WIRE )-- Sidley Austin LLP is pleased to welcome Jessica N. Adkins and Ron I. Erlichman as partners to its global Energy and Infrastructure practice. Ms. Adkins will be based in Sidley’s Houston office and Mr. Erlichman will be based in the New York office. They join from Bracewell LLP, where Ms. Adkins was chair of the Power Projects practice and Mr. Erlichman served as co-chair of the Project Finance practice. The pair’s arrival strengthens Sidley’s capabilities in the growing renewable energy and infrastructure industry.
“Adding Jessica and Ron will augment our ability to serve clients in the renewable energy space, a growing sector in which our clients are increasingly investing,” said Cliff Vrielink, global leader of Sidley’s Energy and Infrastructure practice. “Jessica and Ron are widely respected in the renewable energy and infrastructure space and our clients will greatly benefit from their knowledge and experience. A number of our energy partners have worked with Jessica and Ron over the years and highly value their dedication to client service, collaborative nature and entrepreneurial spirits, hallmarks of our talented team that make them a clear fit.”
A nationally recognized leader in the renewable energy finance and transactional space, Ms. Adkins represents power, renewable and other energy industry stakeholders to develop, finance and invest in energy projects and businesses. In addition to her project finance and M&A practice, she advises financial institutions, private equity funds, sponsors, and trading and marketing companies on hedges and other complex commodity transactions. As a trained engineer, Ms. Adkins combines her legal advice with a deep understanding of the energy markets and her clients’ businesses.
Mr. Erlichman advises and represents clients in all aspects of developing and financing energy and infrastructure projects, including renewable energy, thermal power generation facilities, chemical and petrochemical facilities, midstream assets, transmission facilities and terminals. He devotes a portion of his practice to non-energy infrastructure projects, such as hospitality, transportation, and sports and entertainment venues. Mr. Erlichman also provides counsel on tax equity investment matters in renewable energy projects. His clients include lenders, sponsors, developers, private investment funds, utilities, contractors and governmental authorities.
“Jessica and Ron have strong ties to the New York market, a key center for project finance,” said Sam Gandhi, managing partner of Sidley’s New York office and a member of the firm’s Executive Committee. “Their arrival, along with the arrival of New York energy partner Tara Higgins earlier this year, fortifies our offerings in the power and renewables space, and with our global project and energy practice, reinforces Sidley’s position as an energy and project finance leader.”
Ms. Adkins and Mr. Erlichman’s arrival follows that of partners Tara Higgins and Noreen Phelan, who joined the renewable energy practice in New York and Washington, D.C. in March.
With 2,000 lawyers in 20 offices around the globe, Sidley is a premier legal adviser for clients across the spectrum of industries. Follow Sidley on Twitter @SidleyLaw .
Attorney Advertising - Sidley Austin LLP, One South Dearborn, Chicago, IL 60603, +1 312 853 7000. Sidley and Sidley Austin refer to Sidley Austin LLP and affiliated partnerships as explained at www.sidley.com/disclaimer .
