Professional electrician mounting solar module on roof.
Some of rooftop solar’s troubles are due to social distancing measures that have closed off selling channels like door-to-door sales. But other headwinds could actually get worse even after shut-in measures are phased out.
The prospect of a deep recession has caused many consumers to reconsider big purchases like the $15,000 needed on average to install a rooftop system. And the worse the economy gets this year, the bigger the hit to orders, even as lower natural gas and electricity prices reduce potential cost savings. Any slowdown in homebuilding will also hurt, especially in California where installation in new housing is required.
It remains to be seen whether COVID-19 fallout will be the final blow to a business model that’s seen numerous failures despite robust adoption of solar in the US. Tesla Inc’s (TSLA) now wholly owned SolarCity affiliate once boasted its rooftop solar franchise would drive electric utilities into a death spiral of customer defections.
Now it’s basically a support division for Tesla’s electric vehicles. Bonds securitizing SolarCity’s residential solar contracts now trade at sharp discounts to par and distressed yields to maturity upwards of 10 percent.
But while the US rooftop business is floundering, history is not repeating with solar in general. Sales of residential solar in China, for example, saw a "V" shape sales recovery in March from February lows.
Bloomberg New Energy Finance expects Chinese government subsidies to play a big role driving installation to new highs this year. And earlier this month, JinkoSolar Holding (JKS) announced it will spend $2 billion to expand output, and build a research and development facility in Jiangxi province.
Subsidies, however, don’t tell the whole story. Jinko, for example, also has a major facility in Florida. That’s in part to get around erratic US trade policy. But it’s mainly to serve the needs of its cornerstone customer NextEra Energy (NEE
), the Sunshine State’s largest utility and America’s leading owner and developer of contracted solar generation.
NextEra’s stock in trade is large, utility scale facilities. And in stark contrast to sliding demand for rooftop systems, there’s no sign COVID-19 fallout is slowing down investment in these projects.
Utility scale projects are far cheaper per megawatt hour of power produced than residential systems. And the cost advantage is widening further as grid scale storage systems are deployed.
NextEra’s current expansion includes the 1.49-gigawatt capacity, two-year community solar program approved by Florida regulators last month, part of a plan to roll out 10 gigawatts of incremental solar capacity in south Florida by 2030. The company’s unregulated unit has 12 GW of wind, solar and related storage projects in development and under long-term contracts, primarily with regulated utilities across the US, with 5.8 GW added to backlog in 2019.
NextEra’s growth in the past has depended on regulatory mandates requiring utilities to sell set percentages of electricity generated by renewables. That’s no longer the case, as costs have fallen and demand for wind and solar from corporate customers has soared.
As a result, despite Trump Administration tariffs and regulatory rollbacks, support for renewable energy on the state level has if anything increased. This month, Virginia passed legislation supported by dominant utility Dominion Energy
(D) to generate 100 percent of the state’s electricity from "clean" sources by 2045. That launches a massive utility expansion of onshore and offshore wind as well as solar energy, including 3,000 megawatts to enter rate base by 2022.
Being able to include wind and solar investment in rate base is another massive advantage for utilities providing low cost solar, as the certitude of investment recovery reduces capital costs. And with the cost of components likely to fall further this year with the unfolding recession and as Chinese production capacity ramps up again, companies are taking advantage by accelerating their plans.
That’s exactly what Enel SpA (ENEL, ENLAY) and Iberdrola SA (IBE, IBDRY) announced along with guidance updates this month. Enel’s plans call for increasing the company’s global electricity production capacity to 60 percent renewable energy from 43 percent currently.
The company’s extensive digitization of operations allows it to manage all of these facilities remotely, minimizing risk of COVID-19 related interruptions. And management has proven itself adept at arranging low cost financing as well,, inking a EUR5 billion "green" credit line this spring.
This month, Iberdrola brought a giant 500-megawatt capacity Spanish solar facility onto the country’s grid. That’s part of plans to bring "at least half" of its 9,000 MW under construction on line by the end of 2020. And it includes hiring 5,000 new employees.
Bottom line: Investors shouldn’t confuse the latest round of troubles for US rooftop companies with the arrival of large-scale and rate-based solar as a major driver of utility earnings growth. In the era of COVID-19 fallout, that’s the difference between making and losing a fortune.
I’ve advised individual investors and financial institutions on income investing for 35 years, the last seven as editor and publisher of Conrad’s Utility Investor . CUI’s
I’ve advised individual investors and financial institutions on income investing for 35 years, the last seven as editor and publisher of Conrad’s Utility Investor . CUI’s coverage universe features my in-depth analysis of roughly 200 essential-services companies, primarily utilities and telecoms. I’m also an expert on energy midstream companies and master limited partnerships (MLPs), and the Canadian energy sector, which I cover for Energy & Income Advisor. I serve as an independent Trustee of Miller/Howard High Income Equity Fund and am the author of Power Hungry: Strategic Investing in Telecommunications, Utilities and Other Essential Services. Before forming my own publishing company in 2013, I founded and ran the Utility Forecaster and Canadian Edge newsletters, routinely ranked by Hulbert Financial Digest among the very best investment advisories. I spend a good deal of time in front of a Bloomberg terminal or reading 10-K and 10-Q reports, but I’m also an avid outdoorsman and baseball fan.
