VANCOUVER, British Columbia and KNOXVILLE, Tenn., June  05, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Solar Alliance Energy Inc. (‘Solar Alliance’ or the ‘Company’) (TSX-V: SOLR) announces that it has settled and extinguished $111,436.50 of the Company's outstanding debt (the "Debt") through the issuance of common shares of the Company ("Common Shares"). In accordance with settlement of Debt (the "Debt Settlement"), the Company issued 4,457,460 Common Shares at a deemed price of $0.025 per Common Share, pursuant to the temporary relief bulletin issued by the Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) on April 8, 2020, to five creditors of the Company.  The Debt Settlement involved the issuance of Common Shares to certain directors and officer and/or companies controlled and directed by such directors and officers (collectively, the "Related Parties"). The Debt Settlement was approved by the TSX Venture Exchange on May 27, 2020. The Common Shares issued pursuant to the Debt Settlement are subject to a four month hold period, which will expire on the date that is four months and one day from the date of issuance.
“The directors and officers participating in this shares for debt transaction believe in the long term growth prospects of Solar Alliance and are committed to preserving the company’s cash reserves by accepting shares for their outstanding fees,” said CEO Myke Clark. “As CEO, I believe all available cash should be used to fund our growth and increase shareholder value. Shareholders can be assured that directors and officers of Solar Alliance are fully aligned with them as we work to build our business and deliver value to our shareholders and customers.”
The Debt Settlement involving the Related Parties constitutes a "related party transaction" under Multilateral Instrument 61-101 – Protection of Minority Securityholders in Special Transactions ("MI 61-101"). The Company has relied on the exemptions from the valuation and the minority approval requirements of MI 61-101 provided for in subsections 5.5(a) and 5.7(a) of MI 61-101, respectively, as the fair market value of the subject of, and the consideration paid in the Debt Settlement, in relation to the interested parties, does not represent more than 25% of the Company's market capitalization, as determined in accordance with MI 61-101.
