Duke Energy customers in Indiana will see their rates tick up over the next two years, after the state authorized a rate increase for the utility. It is unclear at this time exactly how much of an increase ratepayers will see on their bills.
Still, it will likely be 6% increase or more for residential customers, according to Kerwin Olson, executive director of consumer advocacy group Citizens Action Coalition.
On Monday, the state's utility regulatory agency approved a $146 million increase in annual revenue for Duke Energy. That increase, however, is a "significant reduction" from the utility's original request of nearly $400 million and its later revised request of $362 million, according to a release from the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission.
The IURC's approved increase is actually 60% less than what Duke had asked for.
Duke's original request in July 2019 — one of the largest in Indiana history — could have raised rates for customers by as much as $23 per month.
Duke Energy Indiana President Stan Pinegar said the company is currently reviewing the order.
The rate request "reflects important investments to serve a growing customer base and provide reliable and environmentally cleaner power," he said.
Worst water polluter: IPL's Petersburg plant is the worst water polluter in state, violates permit 120 times
Both environmental and consumer advocates have called into question such justifications. When Duke submitted its rate request last year, the company also filed its integrated resource plan, or its 20-year outlook, that it must produce each three years.
In that plan, most of Duke's coal plants — as much as 90% of its power comes from coal — will continue operating through the late 2020s or later. And the new investments in renewables doesn't come until 2023.
"As Indiana’s largest electric utility, Duke should be leading the transition away from expensive dirty energy that pollutes our communities and climate, instead of refusing to move rapidly toward the clean, affordable energy that customers deserve and demand,” Sierra Club's Beyond Coal campaign in Indiana said in a statement.
The Office of Utility Consumer Counselor, the state's consumer advocate agency, actually recommended in November 2019 that the IURC not only deny Duke's rate increase request, but also lower the utility's current rates by more than $100 million.
OUCC spokesman Anthony Swinger said the agency is still reviewing the commission's order and does not have a comment at this time.
The approved increase will be implemented in two phases, according to the commission: one in 2020 and the remainder in 2021. In its decision, according to the release, the commission also implemented various rate "mitigation measures" to reduce the impact on Duke customers. Those include reducing Duke's return on equity — or the return it earns on capital investments — and also changes the methodology for recovering those investments.
Olson said the IURC order is bittersweet.
He applauds the Commission for reducing Duke's overall ask so significantly and gives them a "big time shout-out" for also reducing its return on equity.
"That displays the commission is finally listening to the public a bit more and recognizing their duty to balance the interest of both the public and utilities," Olson said, adding it will keep bills lower for customers.
The risk to utilities and their shareholders have been greatly reduced over the years, according to Olson, and the IURC's decision shows they shouldn't be earning as much money on that risk.
That said, Sierra Club and CAC are also "very displeased" with the commission's decision to transition payment for the Edwardsport gasification plant in the base rate.
Duke's controversial coal-to-gas plant in Knox County, the Edwardsport project, was nearly $2 billion over budget and has under-performed since it first opened in 2013, having repeated outages and costly repairs.
The average Duke Energy customer currently pays about $14 per month for the Edwardsport plant in their monthly bill through a "tracker," or add-ons to the bill. While not a new charge, it is now a permanent part of the rate case that will not be reevaluated once each year.
"They’ve condemned the ratepayers to pay for this thing for years to come with no end in sight, and under guise of fuel diversity," Olson said. "They are not playing their role to regulate this boondoggle."
The rate increase will not take effect immediately. Duke will take the commission's order and apply it to determine what the new rates will be before filing for implementation of rates. It will take about a month for that to be compiled and reviewed by state utility regulators.
Duke is the largest utility in Indiana, serving approximately 840,000 customers across the state. It has not had an increase to its base rates in more than 15 years — though the utility's rates have still risen significantly over the years through different "trackers" or add-ons to the bill.
The utility said they know it is "a challenging time for customers" in light of the economic struggles brought on by the pandemic. Duke said it has taken "a number of steps as a company to help customers financially during this pandemic," including the voluntarily suspension of service disconnections for nonpayment as well as a variety of customer charges.
"We wanted customers to have peace of mind that their electric service would remain on at the height of the pandemic," Pinegar said in a statement to the IndyStar. "We remain committed to working with customers who may be struggling financially."
Still, Duke and several of the state's other investor owned utilities filed a request to be able to recover pandemic-related costs, including the cost of electricity they did not sell. The IURC in a separate order Monday denied the utilities' request for cost recovery, and also authorized an extension of the statewide moratorium on disconnections, which was set to expire on July 1 .
Call IndyStar reporter Sarah Bowman at 317-444-6129 or email at sarah.bowman@indystar.com . Follow her on Twitter and Facebook : @IndyStarSarah. Connect with IndyStar’s environmental reporters: Join The Scrub on Facebook .
IndyStar's environmental reporting project is made possible through the generous support of the nonprofit Nina Mason Pulliam Charitable Trust.
