Sleek white wind turbines, 25 stories tall, rise from the plains of West Texas in Big Spring. Texas is one of the windiest states in the nation and the Panhandle and West Texas are the state's windiest regions.
Ask a non-Texan to think of Texas and, chances are, the opening credits to the old TV show “Dallas” — featuring cattle, cowboys and oil derricks pumping away — will flash before his or her eyes.
Those are still staples of the Lone Star State, but the public imagination better make room for glittering solar panels and the spinning blades of wind energy turbines — which are becoming ever more prominent across our landscape.
Soon, they’ll be Texas icons in their own right. Indeed, in TNT’s 2012 remake of “Dallas,” a subplot develops as the next generation of Ewings feud as Bobby’s son Christopher embraces alternative energies while J.R.’s son John Ross is intent on fracking everything that doesn’t move.
It should be news to no one that Texas, in a proud legacy of Gov. Rick Perry, is leading the way in wind energy . Texas tops the nation in production and has more installed wind power capacity than most countries in the world. Solar is slowly catching up, with the state hitting a new record last month in solar energy generation, a high that will be surpassed later this year as the summer months bring longer days.
There’s still a long way to go before we wean ourselves off fossil fuels, but we should celebrate and support our growth in renewable energy — as well as protect it from overzealous oil and gas loyalists in the Texas Legislature.
The idea that solar and wind threaten the Texas narrative as an energy king is as outdated as Sue Ellen’s overzealous mascara application.
Renewable energy across the country is growing. In April, for the first time ever, sources such as hydro, biomass, wind, solar and geothermal generated more electricity than coal-fired power plants, according to a report by the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis. While this is temporary, as more demand for power over summer and winter necessitate increased coal plant use, it’s a milestone in the elimination of coal as a mass energy source.
While that’s bad for the coal industry and its workers, it’s good news for our health and the environment. Air pollution from coal-fired power plants is linked to a host of ailments, including asthma and cancer, along with a steady contribution to climate change.
During the first quarter of 2019, Texas wind and solar energy generation was larger than coal’s, according to data from the Electric Reliability Council Of Texas, the grid manager that supplies 90 percent of the state’s electric load. Temporary for now, it’s a harbinger of change, said Dennis Wamsted, an analyst with the IEEFA, who compares early growth of renewables with that of natural gas, which now dominates the market.
“A few years ago, in the United States, natural gas had never out-generated coal, in any month. Four years ago, natural gas out-generated coal during the spring,” he said. “I think it’s the same kind of transition with renewable energy that is under way.”
Unfortunately, some lawmakers are trying to slow down that changeover.
Attempts to leave renewable energy providers out of property tax abatements granted under chapters 312 and 313 of the state tax code have so far stalled in the Legislature, but there is still Senate Bill 2232. The measure would require ERCOT to study the effects that federal subsidies for renewable energy have on pricing, with the goal of finding ways to negate government support. The bill passed the Senate and is pending in a House committee.
Even if oil and gas interests are feeling threatened, it’s hypocritical to start pointing fingers when it comes to subsidies. Fossil fuels have collected almost $400 billion in federal benefits since 1950 . During that time, renewables can claim $84 billion in federal tax advantages. Texas itself still provides plenty of tax breaks and incentives for an oil and gas industry that’s thriving.
Natural gas is a cleaner source than coal and it is important to the state, but it’s still a nonrenewable fossil fuel. We should continue to enjoy its benefits but use it as a bridge between coal and renewable energy sources. Subsidies for clean energy are a wise investment and lawmakers should be looking for ways to improve and speed up development rather than hindering progress.
Let’s not pit fossil fuels and renewable energy against each other like feuding Ewings. Texas is big enough to lead in both. We just need to be smart enough, too. As J.R. might say: “Where there’s a way, there’s a will.”
The Editorial Board is made up of opinion journalists with wide-ranging expertise whose consensus opinions and endorsements represent the voice of the institution – defined as the board members, their editor and the publisher. The board is separate from the newsroom and other sections of the paper.
Past Articles from this Author:
