A 2017 law offering wealthy investors a chance to reduce their capital gains taxes in return for financing real estate and clean energy projects in poor neighborhoods is struggling to take flight in Minnesota.
Opportunity zones, part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, allow investors to place their capital gains in legally established funds for projects in economically distressed areas defined by the federal government. More than 8,700 designated zones exist in the United States, 128 of them in Minnesota.
A secondary attribute, appealing to clean energy developers, is that opportunity zone funds can be used for solar, microgrids, electric vehicle charging stations, and energy storage. Clean Energy Economy Minnesota held a luncheon Oct. 24 at Avisen Legal PA in Minneapolis that drew a capacity crowd of more than 50 people, among them several solar developers.
An apartment developer and an opportunity zone fund manager who were not at the event told Finance & Commerce they have opportunity zone projects in different stages of planning that include rooftop solar energy. They are likely to be among the first opportunity zone projects built in Minnesota.
Avisen has participated in at least one opportunity zone deal on the East Coast and boasts a strong roster of attorneys with backgrounds in clean energy. CEO Todd Taylor has worked on a project in Trenton, New Jersey, that has built a plant in an opportunity zone that turns trash into biogas . Having it located in a zone helped the project gain additional funding, he said.
A statewide effort has emerged to promote opportunity zones to cities and investors. Lynne Osterman is executive director of St. Paul-based Community Exchange Minnesota , which helps communities become investment-ready. A former state legislator, Osterman also works with the MN Opportunity Collaborative , an initiative backed by the Duluth-based community development organization Northspan and sponsored by a variety of funders.
The MN Opportunity Collaborative provides a directory of 55 sites that could benefit from opportunity zones investment. Minneapolis has 19 zones and St. Paul has 18. St. Paul seems more interested in appealing to investors, with a page of its website devoted to opportunity zones and a map of their locations. (The city says the zones cover more than 20 percent of St. Paul.) The suburbs add 13 more zones to the region. Greater Minnesota has 78 zones.
For communities and projects to benefit, an entity must first create a “Qualified Opportunity Fund” that focuses on one of two kinds of projects. A single-asset fund serves just one project focused on real estate or business, Osterman said. The other, a multi-asset fund, aggregates pools of capital to invest in multiple projects.
Opportunity zones hold advantages for investors. Capital gains can be reduced by 10 to 15 percent depending on how long the opportunity zone investment is held. Investors will not be taxed on any capital gains they incur from a project if they keep their investments in a project for a decade.
Investors tend to be banks, institutional investors, corporations, insurance companies, partnerships, social impact investors and, of course, high net worth individuals, Osterman said.
Opportunity zone investments have no impact on other money flowing into projects. Tax credits for solar, wind and biogas projects are unaffected, she added. Nor does having an opportunity zone preclude a project from receiving state money from the Department of Employment and Economic Development, among them specific funds for military veterans, Native Americans, emerging entrepreneurs and angel investors, she said.
Minnesotans have a “wait and see” attitude that has led to few projects so far. There is at least one firm that has emerged to offer services, the St. Paul based Minnesota Opportunity Zone Advisors . Osterman also has heard of at least two funds that may be announced soon.
The impact of the zones so far has been mixed, with more than a few luxury apartments and hotels being built instead of affordable housing, businesses or clean energy. The New York Times has run one expose on how wealthy investors are benefiting from the break by participating in projects being built in trendy neighborhoods that somehow ended up on the list of distressed areas.
Minneapolis-based Schafer Richardson is planning to build a 99-unit mixed-use apartment building in St. Paul’s Payne-Phalen neighborhood. Rents will be income restricted in the $23.7 million project, dubbed “Nova SP,” and the rooftop will carry a 130 kilowatt solar array.
Another apartment building, the $32.5 million “Bessemer at Seward” near the Franklin Street Blue Line Station, has 128 workforce housing units topped by a solar-ready rooftop, said Maureen Michalski, Schafer Richardson’s vice president of development.
The company has spoken to local and national funds about putting money into one or both projects she said. The zones have been especially attractive to non-real estate investors who have never had a vehicle to defer capital gains, she said.
Real estate investors have options to defer capital gains on projects, Michalski said, an option unavailable on other investments. The rule that allows investors to avoid capital gains taxes if they keep their investment in a project for 10 years is a real advantage. “A 10-year hold for a lot of people is a long time,” she said. “But our locations are appealing because there will be growth in those neighborhoods.”
Having the projects in opportunity zones is important because it could solidify financing for them. Solar was added to Nova SP to take advantage of the tax credits and add equity to the buildings. “It’s a nice thing, but it won’t make someone invest or not invest,” Michalski said. “It’s a benefit, but I wouldn’t overstate it.”
Minnesota Opportunity Zone Advisors was selected by the Duluth Housing and Redevelopment Authority to propose a project for a 1913 single-occupancy hotel in the Lincoln Park neighborhood. The organization seeks to raise $100 million for “Minnesota DREAM Fund” to finance community-driven projects with a big social impact, said investor relations head Jamie Stolpestad.
The 38,000-square-foot former hotel would become a mixed-use project filled with conventional apartments, he said. Working with a solar development, Stolpestad determined the building could hold a 100-kilowatt array that could help offset energy use. “Solar is an eligible investment in opportunity zones,” he said. “It opens up another tax-enhanced structure for renewable energy.”
Adam Bernstein, managing director for Minneapolis-based North Sky Capital, warned that the presence of an opportunity zone “doesn’t turn a bad deal into a good deal.” In general, an opportunity zone fund likely works best for projects in the $10 million to $50 million range, he said.
Solar and solar plus storage are likely to attract attention because they already attract capital and the technology is simple to understand, Bernstein said. Biogas projects of the kind Taylor works on in New Jersey are tremendously complex and unlikely to attract a lot of opportunity zone funding, he said.
Funds have yet to embrace opportunity zone renewable energy projects, according to an April 2019 article in Greentech Media. The report cites a National Council of State Housing Agencies database showing just 11 opportunity zone funds nationally associated with renewable energy. Chicago’s Decennial Group announced an opportunity fund to make $1 billion of investments that would include a clean energy. And Boston-based Arctaris Impact Investors plans to raise $750 million on its opportunity zone fund, devoting 30 percent to renewable energy, real estate and telecommunications.
Minnesota may see its own locally owned opportunity zone fund come onboard soon, Osterman said, and rooftop solar could be part of more projects. Even though a fund could support renewable energy projects, that isn’t about to happen. “We don’t have one I know of which is focused on renewable energy,” she said.
Like this article? Gain access to all of our great content with a month-to-month subscription. Start your subscription here .
