CALGARY, Alberta, June  22, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- News Release – TC Energy Corporation (TSX: TRP ) (NYSE: TRP ) (TC Energy) announced today that 401,590 of its 8,533,405 fixed rate Cumulative Redeemable First Preferred Shares, Series 3 (Series 3 Shares) have been elected for conversion on June 30, 2020, on a one-for-one basis, into floating rate Cumulative Redeemable First Preferred Shares, Series 4 (Series 4 Shares); and 1,865,362 of its 5,466,595 Series 4 Shares have been elected for conversion, on a one-for-one basis, into Series 3 Shares. As a result of the conversions, TC Energy will have 9,997,177 Series 3 Shares and 4,002,823 Series 4 Shares issued and outstanding.  The Series 3 Shares and Series 4 Shares will continue to be listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) under the symbols TRP.PR.B and TRP.PR.H, respectively.
The Series 3 Shares will pay on a quarterly basis for the five-year period beginning on June 30, 2020, as and when declared by the Board of Directors of TC Energy, a fixed dividend at an annualized rate of 1.694%.
The Series 4 Shares will pay a floating rate quarterly dividend for the five-year period beginning on June 30, 2020, as and when declared by the Board of Directors of TC Energy. The dividend rate for the Series 4 Shares for the first quarterly floating rate period commencing June 30, 2020 to but excluding September 30, 2020 is 1.535% and will be reset every quarter.
Holders of Series 3 Shares and Series 4 Shares will have the opportunity to convert their shares again on June 30, 2025 and every five years thereafter as long as the shares remain outstanding. For more information on the terms of, and risks associated with an investment in the Series 3 Shares and the Series 4 Shares, please see the prospectus supplement dated March 4, 2010 which is available on sedar.com or on our website .
We are a vital part of everyday life – delivering the energy millions of people rely on to power their lives in a sustainable way. Thanks to a safe, reliable network of natural gas and crude oil pipelines, along with power generation and storage facilities, wherever life happens – we’re there. Guided by our core values of safety, responsibility, collaboration and integrity, our more than 7,300 people make a positive difference in the communities where we operate across Canada, the U.S. and Mexico.
TC Energy’s common shares trade on the Toronto (TSX) and New York (NYSE) stock exchanges under the symbol TRP. To learn more, visit us at TCEnergy.com .
This release contains certain information that is forward-looking and is subject to important risks and uncertainties (such statements are usually accompanied by words such as "anticipate", "expect", "believe", "may", "will", "should", "estimate", "intend" or other similar words). Forward-looking statements in this document are intended to provide TC Energy security holders and potential investors with information regarding TC Energy and its subsidiaries, including management's assessment of TC Energy's and its subsidiaries' future plans and financial outlook. All forward-looking statements reflect TC Energy's beliefs and assumptions based on information available at the time the statements were made and as such are not guarantees of future performance. As actual results could vary significantly from the forward-looking information, you should not put undue reliance on forward-looking information and should not use future-oriented information or financial outlooks for anything other than their intended purpose. We do not update our forward-looking information due to new information or future events, unless we are required to by law. For additional information on the assumptions made, and the risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results to differ from the anticipated results, refer to the Quarterly Report to Shareholders dated April 30, 2020 and the 2019 Annual Report filed under TC Energy's profile on SEDAR at www.sedar.com and with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission at www.sec.gov .
