Shares In Chesapeake Energy Set For Delisting, As Historic Bankruptcy Is Finally Official
Tesla’s long-term strategy for Autobidder should involve applying the platform to homes and businesses equipped with Tesla Powerpacks. The platform also has the potential to play a role in the dynamic integration of EVs into grid systems.
However, EVs and residential-scale DER are much smaller than the 100 MW Hornsdale project. To reach a scale that can make a meaningful contribution to wholesale markets, dozens or hundreds of DER across many households and businesses can be grouped together and managed as virtual power plants (VPPs).
VPPs require granular visibility into the performance and characteristics of all of the group’s assets. Technologies such as blockchain, which can be used to create registers of devices and provide a foundation for automating their activities, can enable transactive energy platforms to manage this information while keeping costs low.
Energy companies including Enbala and AutoGrid are following the same path as Tesla and experimenting with different combinations of technologies to maximize the potential of VPPs and transactive energy. Battery storage and vehicle manufacturers such as Tesla have a leg up in this race, as they have access to an existing base of customers and assets. The ability to pair hardware with new revenue streams from grid services will drive more customers to invest in storage, EVs, and behind-the-meter generation; sonnen has already pioneered such a model with its sonnenFlat offering in Australia.
Tesla and Autobidder are just one example of a new kind of utility taking advantage of a new kind of technology. As the transactive energy model expands and proves value to customers, there will be renewed pressure to liberalize electricity markets to allow these companies to bring their products and services to market. Incumbent utilities must consider how they can take advantage of similar technologies directly or through strategic partnerships, or they must prepare to cede the road.
