Tesla also has been dogged by reports of poor service in its solar business, an issue analysts pointed to as another challenge as it attempts to ramp up sales in solar and energy storage. "You do hear horror stories of the quality of customer experience. Solar has been pretty bad for the customer," Osha said.
Karp said many customers may feel that they have a higher chance of disappointing service with Tesla because of changes made after its acquisition of SolarCity, which limited customer support. Sunrun has a stronger customer service infrastructure because solar is its main business.
Tesla's 43 MW of solar installations in the third quarter of 2019 was an improvement on the 29 MW of solar in the second quarter, but it still remains considerably lower than the 93 MW in sales in Q3 2018 and nowhere near the more than 200 MW installed by its solar division (formerly SolarCity) in a single quarter at its height.
Tesla said in Q3 that solar deployments rose by almost 50% over last quarter, and energy storage deployments, which include Powerwalls and Powerpacks, grew by 15% to an all-time high of 477 MWh.
The company refers to a "relaunch" of its solar business this year, with a simplified process and goal of fast order-to-install timelines, including a less cumbersome permitting process across 350 cities.
Tesla Energy supplies power to homes, businesses and utilities by selling solar panels, solar roofing and battery storage packs called the Powerwall, Powerpack and Megapack. In 2018, Tesla installed more than 1 GWh of storage capacity around the world. This year the company aims to double that capacity to 2 GWh.
"I think there is generally a lack of understanding or appreciation for the growth of Tesla Energy," Musk said on the recent earnings call. "In the long term I expect Tesla Energy to be of the same or roughly the same size as Tesla's automotive sector or business."
Gene Munster, founder and managing partner at Loup Ventures, said investors should view Tesla Energy more as an optionality to the auto story. "Energy is currently 10% of the revenue, and most investors believe the energy business will remain 10% of revenue" for the foreseeable future, he said.
Even longer term, Munster argued energy would remain 20% to 25% of Tesla's overall business, considerably "below Musk's 50% target."
If Tesla wants energy to be a larger component of its business mix, they need to sharpen their focus on tech innovation and improve affordability, said Vivek Wadhwa, a distinguished fellow and professor at Carnegie Mellon University Engineering. "The fact is that Tesla's foray into solar panels and storage has been a disaster so far," he said. "They have not met the expectations they set, and the costs of their technologies have been too high."
Both in terms of pricing and technology, Wadhwa expects Tesla's energy business to follow an evolutionary curve similar to that of the auto story. Tesla has had to overcome many technological failures and pricing hurdles to be where it is today with EVs. "When they fixed things, they disrupted the entire industry," said Wadhwa.
Craig Irwin, an analyst with Roth Capital Partners, which has a sell rating on Tesla, expressed similar concerns around battery pricing, which he said would have a large bearing on the size of the energy business. "Tesla's battery cost today at the cell level is about $200/kWh, and when they build their energy projects, it's a little bit higher than that," he said.
Irwin said energy storage affiliates of global conglomerates provide stiff competition and, so far, are ahead of Tesla in terms of total energy installation numbers. These include Fluence Energy, which is owned by Siemens and AES ; NEC Energy Solutions, which is controlled by Japanese parent company NEC; China's BYD — which includes Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway among its longtime shareholders — and GE 's energy storage business.
AES and NEC have been doing utility-scale batteries longer than Tesla has been in existence. These firms, focused on the large-scale utility project market, don't compete much with Tesla today, but that could change in the future. AES has said that as much as 50% of current project requests in the U.S. market include the requirement of energy storage. A little under 25% of project awards it recently announced included energy storage.
Tesla is building massive "gigafactories" to produce lithium-ion batteries for electric vehicles and Tesla Energy's storage solutions business, including its newest Gigafactory 3 in Shanghai, China. GM just announced a multibillion-dollar investment in a lithium-ion battery plant in Ohio.
At the same time, there are battery start-ups receiving investment from some of the world's richest individuals , including Bill Gates and Jeff Bezos.
Falling battery prices could create a tailwind for leading global energy storage companies, including Tesla. Over the past decade, battery prices have fallen roughly 87%, from $1,100/kWh in 2010 to $156/kWh in 2019, according to research firm BloombergNEF . It predicts average prices to fall further, to $100/kWh by 2023.
Tesla's energy would take a few more years before it really got going. "I'd say it'd take two to three more years, but Tesla will get its solar capture and storage technologies to where we expected them to be a year ago," Wadhwa said.
Tesla has enormous volume and can divert some to Powerwall should they choose to do so, but then they are starving the car business, which is the higher-return business.
Tesla was, in Elon Musk's words , "cell-starved for vehicle production," which forced the company to switch its Powerwall production lines to vehicle battery lines.
Osha said that's an ongoing problem. "Tesla has enormous volume and can divert some to Powerwall should they choose to do so, but then they are starving the car business, which is the higher-return business," Osha said. "Look at Sunrun. They are losing money on Brightbox," he said, referring to its energy storage product, though he added these companies are working on ways to monetize these assets over time.
Tesla has an advantage on the energy storage side of the market if its effort to build huge battery gigafactories leads to major efficiencies in cost of production, which would allow it to generate higher margins than competitors like Sunrun, which need to source battery cells from partners like LG Chem. But Tesla already has had to divert battery production to the cars rather than storage products like Powerwall.
"The margins are really a thing, and the battery for an electric car is a higher-margin product compared to rooftop solar with storage," Karp said.
"A more mature company does not have to make these trade-offs," Morningstar's Whiston said.
Whiston said Tesla will remain primarily an auto manufacturer with vehicles representing "a much bigger revenue piece than energy" for the next few years. "The lower base for energy may mean larger percent deltas for energy, but that doesn't make Tesla a solar company over a high-tech car company," the Morningstar analyst said.
Tesla's drive for vehicle automation represents a better opportunity than energy for investors looking to ride the second Tesla wave, said Munster. "The second wave will be full-self driving (FSD), and the third opportunity is energy," he said.
"I am a big fan of what Tesla has accomplished, but we need to be sober and look at things [with regard to Tesla Energy] from the lens of realism," Irwin said.
Musk has spoken about the lack of focus on the solar business: "For about 18 months, almost two years, we had to divert a tremendous amount of resources. We had to basically take resources from everywhere else in the company and apply them to the Model 3 production, fixing the Model 3 production ramp and simplifying the design of the Model 3."
"For about a year and a half, we unfortunately stripped Tesla Energy of engineering and other resources and even took the cell production lines that were meant for Powerwall and Powerpack and redirected them to the car because we didn't have enough cells," Musk explained on the recent earnings conference call.
But on the third-quarter call, he said the company has "restored resources" to Tesla Solar and storage.
"If we didn't solve Model 3, Tesla wouldn't survive. So, unfortunately, that shorted pretty much the other parts of the company," Musk said. "But it would be difficult for me to overstate the degree to which I think Tesla Energy is going to be a major part of Tesla's activity in the future."
Elon Musk reveals prototypes of the Tesla Solar Roof on October 28, 2016
He said that in addition to vehicle production numbers, the company will publish data on how much sustainable energy Tesla produces, or Tesla customers produce with its products, though he did not provide a specific date for that metric's introduction.
"I think you'll see that we're producing about the same or comparable amounts of sustainable energy as are consumed in the car," he said.
That belief refers to a key criticism of the current electric car reliance on many utility sources of power that remain fueled by coal and natural gas. "For the longest time the rebuttal against electric cars is, like, don't they use dirty power from coal?" Musk said. "Tesla's overarching strategy here is effectively to become a giant distributor global utility," he said.
"We will eventually arrive at the point of these virtual power plants competing with traditional utilities," Karp said about where the energy storage market is headed, but she pointed out that a requirement is having density of energy assets in a particular area. That's one reason there has been a lot of focus on California. "You need an organized energy market for that to work. You can't do it in North Carolina."
California will also become the first state to mandate all new homes be built with solar starting next year, which plays into Tesla's effort to grow the solar roof business .
She said companies like Tesla will try to go after some of the traditional utility investment — Tesla already has a small utility-scale energy storage business — but the uptake will be slow because of the need for critical mass in one area.
