a–c, A mixed-ion cloud (containing Th2+ and Th3+ ions) is trapped in a segmented RFQ magnet (blue area). The cloud/bunch (white) is released and injected into the QMS (red area), which serves as an ion guide. The difference in kinetic energy (Th3+ ions are faster than Th2+ ions) leads to a temporal separation of the two charge states. The ion bunches are then neutralized in graphene and continue their flight as atoms (black). The atoms are counted with an MCP detector (MCP II). A time-of-flight spectrum is shown in b (the corresponding measurement is presented in Extended Data Fig. 4b ). The neutralization also triggers the internal conversion decay of the 229mTh nuclear isomer. When 229mTh decays inside the collection region of the electron spectrometer, the internal conversion (IC) electron is guided towards MCP I and generates a signal. The time-resolved signal, as well as the time windows that are used to count the internal conversion electrons, are shown in c (a measurement is shown in Extended Data Fig. 4a ). cts, number of counts. Dimensions are not to scale.
Extended Data Fig. 4 Internal conversion electron signal.
a, b, Internal conversion electron signal measured with MCP I at two different retarding voltages (a). Th3+ (Th2+) ions generate a signal at t ≈ 80 μs (t ≈ 97 μs) from the release of the ion bunch. 105 bunches were recorded for each retarding voltage. The number of counts from neutralized atoms measured with MCP II are shown in b (for 2.25 × 106 bunches recorded). We note that the ratio of the Th2+ and Th3+ peaks from a is not reflected in b. This can be explained as follows: in the Th2+ charged state, 229Th and 233U are extracted from the buffer-gas stopping cell at approximately equal rates, whereas the extraction rate in the Th3+ charged state is dominated by 229Th (see ref. 34 ). In our setup, thorium cannot be separated from uranium by the time-of-flight method; therefore, it can be expected that only ∼50% of the Th2+ peak in b results from neutralized 229Th2+ ions. By contrast, the internal conversion electron signal results solely from neutralized 229mTh ions.
Comparative measurement of 230Th and 229(m)Th at a blocking voltage of 0 V. For the 229(m)Th (230Th) measurement, 5,000 (>800,000) bunches were recorded. To compare 230Th with 229(m)Th, the number of counts was normalized to the number of extracted atoms measured with MCP II (see Extended Data Fig. 3 ). Constant background has been subtracted in the 230Th measurement.
Measured (integrated) calibration spectra (red) and their derivatives, shown together with a fitting function (black). For better visualization, data and derivatives are normalized to their respective maxima. The energy scale has been corrected for surface potentials. Measurements were obtained as detailed in ref. 31 . a, Typical argon calibration spectrum used in the measurements (electron kinetic energies of 5.46 eV and 5.28 eV). b, Neon calibration spectrum, showing a clear separation of the two lines (electron kinetic energies of 1.52 eV and 1.43 eV). arb., arbitrary units.
Extended Data Fig. 7 Monitoring of the applied blocking voltages.
a, Time-resolved behaviour of the applied retarding voltages. Retarding voltages between −0.5 V and −3.5 V are applied in steps of −0.1 V. Each retarding voltage is held for 1,000 bunches (about 100 s). Before incrementing the voltage, it is set to 0 V to make the measurement independent from the order in which the voltages are applied. b, Distribution of an exemplary retarding voltage over three days of measurement. The stability is better than 10 mV and limited by temperature fluctuations.
Extended Data Fig. 8 Single-electron orbital energies for thorium.
Single-electron (Kohn–Sham) orbital energies for a thorium atom as a function of the distance from the topmost carbon layer, located at z = 0 Å. Screening of the core by the target’s electrons leads to distance-dependent shifts of the orbital energies. The 6s and 6p states (asymptotic energies of about −40 eV and −20 eV, respectively) remain atomic in graphene, whereas higher orbitals (7s, 6d, 5f) become resonant with the graphene valence bands (overlapping red and green shaded areas, indicating the region of high electron density in the target) at different distances. In the target, a prevalence of states with f characteristic (purple symbols) is observed. EF denotes the Fermi energy.
Extended Data Fig. 9 Summary of internal conversion electron rates.
Bottom, possible values for IP − Ei + Ef, given by the internal conversion selection rules for even (blue) and odd (red) initial electronic states of Th. Initial states are numbered according to their state index (given in Extended Data Table 1 ). The ionization potential of the Th atom is shown by the black dashed line. The size of the symbols indicates the transition rate from an initial state to a final state. Top, projection of the data shown in the lower panel onto the horizontal axis (energy bin, 0.1 eV).
