By Felixe Denson . Published on Jun 10, 2020 1:30pm
Suncor's St. Clair Ethanol Plant near Sarnia, Ontario on Thursday, March 13th, 2008. The facility takes corn from the surrounding area and processes it on site, turning it into ethanol fuel. Photo by Craig Glover for The Toronto Star
Norway’s sovereign wealth fund has made an error in its decision to blacklist major Canadian energy producers, according to Suncor Energy Inc., which states that the fund’s ruling was not based on the current characteristics of the country’s oil and gas sector.
“There was no acknowledgment that Canada, with the oil sands, is the first jurisdiction and the only jurisdiction that I know of on the surface of the earth that’s extracting carbon from the barrel and putting it back into the ground before it ever becomes an emission,” Mark Little, the CEO of Suncor said in an interview yesterday with BNN Bloomberg.
The same technology is being used by Canadian Natural Resources Ltd. and Imperial Oil Ltd., two other major Canadian oil producers who were removed from the Norges Bank’s fund. Cenovus Energy Inc. is another company that has been excluded from the fund as well.
During the interview, Little also mentioned that Suncor will be installing low-carbon power cogeneration units at its Oil Sands Base Plant, an investment that has cost the company $1.4 billion and will see an annually reduction in GHG emissions by 2.5 megatonnes.
A series of oil tankers is in the process of leaving Venezuelan waters following a threat by the U.S. government to blacklist vessels carrying oil from the South American country. There is also discussion from oil companies in China around no longer chartering vessels that have been to Venezuela in the past year, according to shipping sources, Reuters reported.
Oil exports from Venezuela dropped by 452,000 barrels per day last month, and blacklisting more oil tankers puts the country’s state-owned oil company, PDVSA, at risk of not being able to export to refineries.
In other news, contrary to previous forecasts that believed that crude levels would drop, crude stocks in the U.S. have risen by 8.4 million barrels, according to findings from the American Petroleum Institute. More data on the country’s stockpiles will be released from Energy Information Administration later today, writes Reuters.
This morning at 10:31am EDT, West Texas Intermediate was trading at US$38.34 and Brent Crude was going for US$40.81.
Environmental assessment measures for Northern Pulp’s effluent treatment facility have been put on pause as of yesterday. The company also took measures to file an appeal with Nova Scotia’s Supreme Court on Monday. The appeal stated that a decision by Environment Minister Gordon Wilson on May 14 to prohibit any wastewater from exiting the Boat Harbour Effluent Treatment Facility was in violation of multiple clauses in agreements that the province had signed in the past.
The appeal also noted that the mill is owned by the provincial government and that Northern is therefore not responsible for the wastewater being produced.
“We remain concerned that the environmental assessment, based on the current terms of reference, is ambiguous and would not result in a clear outcome. Instead, it could lead to more uncertainty, division, and disappointment among stakeholders,” Graham Kissack, an official with Paper Excellence Canada, the parent company of Northern Pulp, said in a press release, reported The Chronicle Herald.
