The $30 Trillion Trend That's Bigger Than The Entire U.S. Stock Market
By Nick Marsh - Jun 22, 2020, 2:00 PM CDT
It's no longer about dogma, ideology, or even politics. Big money goes where it has the best chance of multiplying, and from here on out, that includes pure—and profitable—sustainability.
So, when a new start-up like Canada's Facedrive ( FD , FDVRF ) emerges in the explosive ride-sharing space and says it plans to challenge giant Uber for market share, it's worth listening. Especially if that start-up is challenging a giant with a sustainable investment theme.
Facedrive plans to challenge Uber in exactly the way the big money today is anticipating: By transforming ride-sharing from one of the worst polluters into a more carbon-neutral endeavor that offers riders a choice of EVs and hybrids and plants trees along the way to offset emissions for those riders who don't make that choice.
Its goal is to do what Uber has done, only better--by putting the "people and planet first". And if we translate this into today's big money language: It's about mitigating risk and avoiding all the problems that have plagued Uber from day one.
Big capital is paying attention right now. It's on the hunt for innovative new companies that have latched on to the $30-trillion-plus mega trend of ESG investing, otherwise known as environmental, social and governance investing.
That $30 trillion mark was already reached at the beginning of 2019, and the global COVID-19 pandemic may be hastening sustainable investing's ascent to the throne of thrones.
According to the Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (GSIA), sustainable, or impact investing, grew 34% from 2016 to 2019.
To put that in perspective, the entire U.S. stock market was only worth $23.8 trillion as of March 12, 2020 .
But now, it should see its biggest boost yet. That's been made clear by the fact that greener investments have wildly outperformed the overall market as stocks fell into a dismal downward spiral this year.
Morningstar puts this into clear focus for us, noting that in March, 62% of ESG-focused large-cap equity funds outperformed the S&P 500 Index. Bloomberg Intelligence shows similar numbers. And Analysts are lining up behind this theme.
Nigel Green, CEO of the deVere Group, an independent financial advisory firm, predicts a "skyward surge" in sustainable investing over the next year, triggered by the coronavirus pandemic and its economic fallout. And it's already becoming clear as funds with sustainable assets have fallen only half as much as the S&P 500 Index amid the pandemic.
The world court is now in session, and, as Green notes, "increasingly companies will only survive and thrive if they operate with a nod from the wider court of public approval. It has underscored the complexity and interconnectedness of our world in terms of demand and supply, in trade and commerce – and how these can be under threat if not sustainable."
As far back as 2016, the masterminds of Facedrive ( FD , FDVRF ) were plotting ride-sharing 2.0, the version that correctly predicted that the world would not just want more, they would want higher quality. When they launched in 2019 in Canada, it was precisely at the time that sustainable investing was a solid mega-trend.
And now, amid a global pandemic, they are expanding--and, again, the timing couldn't be better. The current market reality has shown us exactly how deeply interconnected our basic systems of survival are, whether it's to battle a virus or fight climate change.
Mitigating risk means making more money. That's why this isn't about big money suddenly growing a conscience. Instead, it's about people--with Millennials in the lead--finally realizing that climate change is a very real threat to our lives and livelihoods. And big money follows the consumers because that's where the profit is.
In the ride-sharing space, this is where Uber got it wrong, even though it paved the way for ride-sharing to become a massive mainstream market.
For Uber, it's been a bumpy ride, at best. The company quickly became a poster-child for a toxic work environment, leading to the #deleteUber campaign. But more egregiously, Uber, failed to take into account our drastically changing times from a climate perspective. And it failed to do this and still isn't turning a profit.
A recent study by the Union of Concerned Scientists estimates that the average (U.S.) ride-hailing trip results in 69% more pollution than whatever transportation option it displaced.
That's a huge number, that scientists estimate is actually higher in densely populated areas. In this age of green investing, this is a data-point that green-conscious customers everywhere are finding hard to swallow. But now, they don't have to. With Facedrive, they can contribute to planting a tree every time they take a ride. It gives consumers a choice they have never had before.
That means working with local authorities, as Facedrive does, to ensure that the ride-sharing business is benefiting everyone, from its shareholders and the communities it serves to its riders, who demand increasingly higher quality and a chance to reduce their environmental footprint, and the drivers, who are partners, not cheap labor.
Facedrive ( FD , FDVRF ) has announced global expansion to Europe and the United States, acquired an innovative carpooling platform called HiRide that is storming the Canadian long-distance ride-share segment.
Facedrive isn’t just challenging Uber for the ride-sharing throne. It's planning on challenging it for the food delivery throne, as well.
Kicking off its aggressive expansion drive in the food delivery segment, Facedrive entered into a binding term sheet to acquire the assets of Foodora Canada, a subsidiary of the $20-billion multinational food delivery service Delivery Hero, which operates in over 40 countries and services more than 500,000 restaurants.
The acquisition will give Facedrive a revenue boost, and plans on threatening struggling competitors such as Uber Eats and Skip The Dishes.
Not only will Facedrive gain instant access to hundreds of thousands of Foodora Canada’s customers, but it will also have deals with Foodora’s 5,500 restaurant partners to add to its already growing Facedrive Foods business.
Overnight, Facedrive ( FD , FDVRF ) is set to leap into the top echelon of Canadian food delivery services. Then comes planned global expansion.
And while this deal hit the scene as a surprise, another Facedrive deal this week grabbed even more attention amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Facedrive is already on the front lines of the COVID-19 battle, providing discounted rides for healthcare workers , developing the new TraceSCAN app to help keep communities and families safe by detecting instances of infection, and organizing a medical delivery service that keeps high-risk groups from unnecessary exposure.
The Labourers’ International Union of North America (LiUNA) announced it would adopt Facedrive’s TraceSCAN digital COVID-19 contract-tracing app to protect the health and safety of its 130,000 members and their families in Canada.
That’s a huge boost for a brand new, high-tech app developed in a joint initiative by Facedrive Health and the University of Waterloo.
The TraceSCAN app and wearables provide contact tracing to help mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 virus.
Using Bluetooth technology, TraceSCAN alerts users with a notification if they have come in contact with an individual who has tested positive for the COVID-19 virus.
The next logical step here for Facedrive is to market to other unions and councils—and possibly even the Canadian government—to jump on the TraceSCAN bandwagon.
Facedrive ( FD , FDVRF )isn't just a ride-sharing platform, it's a high-tech innovator spawned from the brightest minds of Canada's 'Silicon Valley'. And it's using that tech to position itself on the front line of the COVID-19 pandemic battle, and further to position itself on the frontline of sustainable investing.
When the dust settles on this global pandemic, social responsibility, sustainability, good governance and impact will be remembered most.
Other companies looking to catch the $30 trillion ESG trend:
Even Big Oil supermajors have been dipping their toes into the sector to diversify their portfolios and hedge their bets in the rapidly changing investment environment. Total (TOT), for example, maintains a 'big picture' outlook across all of its endeavors. It is not only aware of the needs that are not being met by a significant portion of the world's growing population, it is also hyper-aware of the looming climate crisis if changes are not made. In its push to create a better world for all, it has committed to contributing to each of the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals.
This same trend is while renewable energy giants have done so well in recent years. Take NextEra (NEE), for instance. It is the world's leading producer of wind and solar energy, so it's no surprise that it has received some love from the 'millennial dollar.'
In 2018, the company was the number one capital investor in green energy infrastructure, and fifth largest capital investor across all sectors. No other company has been more active in reducing carbon emissions. And they're just getting started.
By 2025, the company aims to reduce their own emissions by 67 percent while doubling their electricity production from a 2005 benchmark.  To put this into perspective, if all of America's utilities were able to achieve NextEra Energy's projected 2025 emissions rate, absolute CO2 emissions for the power sector would be approximately 75% lower than they were in 2005.
While not exactly renewable energy companies themselves, the biggest names in tech have taken a surprising leadership role in this movement, and as such, have been among the least affected by the market downturn.
Google's parent company Alphabet (GOOGL) is a shining star in Big Tech's renewable push. Despite being one of the largest companies on the planet, in many ways it has lived up to its original "Don't Be Evil" slogan. Though it has had its controversies in the realm of data collection and advertising, Google has led a revolution in the tech world on multiple fronts.
First, and foremost, it has officially powered its data centers with 100% renewable energy over the last two years. A massive feat considering exactly how much data Google actually processes.  Not only is Google powering its data centers with renewable energy, it is also on the cutting edge of innovation in the industry, investing in new technology and green solutions to build a more sustainable tomorrow.
It's bid to reduce its carbon footprint has been well received by both younger and older investors. And as the need to slow down climate change becomes increasingly dire, it's easy to see why.
Social media giant Facebook (FB) is certainly doing its part, as well. Not only have they made dramatic progress towards their goal to run on 100% renewable energy by the end of 2020, they're working to build more water-efficient data centers. In fact, their data centers use 80 percent less water than typical data centers, a massive feat considering exactly how big in number and size their data centers actually are.
And then there's Microsoft. Microsoft (MSFT) is one of the most innovative and well-known companies within the tech sector, but its Windows platform is the most widely used operating system on the planet. First launched in 1985, Windows has shaped what is expected from a personal home computer.
But Microsoft is appealing to investors for more just its Windows platform. It is diving head first into an entirely new market. With key partnerships utilizing and implementing blockchain technology, the company's upside could have huge potential as the tech takes off.
Not only has it always been on the cutting edge of innovation, it's taking a serious stance on the climate crisis. In fact, it's pushing so hard that it is aiming to be carbon NEGATIVE by 2030. That's a huge pledge. And if anyone can do it, it's Microsoft.
**IMPORTANT! BY READING OUR CONTENT YOU EXPLICITLY AGREE TO THE FOLLOWING. PLEASE READ CAREFULLY**
This publication contains forward-looking information which is subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual events or results to differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Forward looking statements in this publication include that ESG stocks should outperform other stocks in general; the demand for ride sharing services will grow; that the demand for environmentally conscientious ride sharing services companies in particular will grow; that Facedrive can achieve its environmental goals without sacrificing profit; that Facedrive plans to move to over 15 cities over the next 24 months; that Facedrive will be able to fund its capital requirements in the near term and long term; and that Facedrive will be able to carry out its business plan. These forward-looking statements are subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual events or results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking information. Risks that could change or prevent these statements from coming to fruition include market perception or acceptance of particular ESG stocks; changing governmental laws and policies; the company's ability to obtain and retain necessary licensing in each geographical area in which it operates; the success of the company's expansion activities; the ability of the company to attract a sufficient number of drivers to meet the demands of customer riders; the ability of the company to attract drivers who have electric vehicles and hybrid cars; the ability of the company to keep operating costs and customer charges competitive with other ride-hailing companies; and the company's ability to continue agreements on affordable terms with existing or new tree planting enterprises in order to retain profits. The forward-looking information contained herein is given as of the date hereof and we assume no responsibility to update or revise such information to reflect new events or circumstances, except as required by law.
ADVERTISEMENT. This communication is not a recommendation to buy or sell securities. An affiliated company of Oilprice.com, Advanced Media Solutions Ltd, and their owners, managers, employees, and assigns (collectively "the Company") has signed an agreement to be paid in shares to provide services to expand ridership and attract drivers in certain jurisdictions outside Canada and the United States. In addition, the owner of Oilprice.com has acquired additional shares of FaceDrive (FD.V) for personal investment. This compensation and share acquisition resulting in the beneficial owner of the Company having a major share position in FD.V is a major conflict with our ability to be unbiased, more specifically:
This communication is for entertainment purposes only. Never invest purely based on our communication. Therefore, this communication should be viewed as a commercial advertisement only. We have not investigated the background of the featured company. Frequently companies profiled in our alerts experience a large increase in volume and share price during the course of investor awareness marketing, which often end as soon as the investor awareness marketing ceases. The information in our communications and on our website has not been independently verified and is not guaranteed to be correct.
SHARE OWNERSHIP. The owner of Oilprice.com owns shares of this featured company and therefore has a substantial incentive to see the featured company's stock perform well. The owner of Oilprice.com will not notify the market when it decides to buy more or sell shares of this issuer in the market. The owner of Oilprice.com will be buying and selling shares of this issuer for its own profit. This is why we stress that you conduct extensive due diligence as well as seek the advice of your financial advisor or a registered broker-dealer before investing in any securities.
NOT AN INVESTMENT ADVISOR. The Company is not registered or licensed by any governing body in any jurisdiction to give investing advice or provide investment recommendation. ALWAYS DO YOUR OWN RESEARCH and consult with a licensed investment professional before making an investment. This communication should not be used as a basis for making any investment.
RISK OF INVESTING. Investing is inherently risky. Don't trade with money you can't afford to lose. This is neither a solicitation nor an offer to Buy/Sell securities. No representation is being made that any stock acquisition will or is likely to achieve profits.
DISCLAIMER: OilPrice.com is Source of all content listed above. FN Media Group, LLC (FNM), is a third party publisher and news dissemination service provider, which disseminates electronic information through multiple online media channels. FNM is NOT affiliated in any manner with OilPrice.com or any company mentioned herein. The commentary, views and opinions expressed in this release by OilPrice.com are solely those of OilPrice.com and are not shared by and do not reflect in any manner the views or opinions of FNM. FNM is not liable for any investment decisions by its readers or subscribers. FNM and its affiliated companies are a news dissemination and financial marketing solutions provider and are NOT a registered broker/dealer/analyst/adviser, holds no investment licenses and may NOT sell, offer to sell or offer to buy any security. FNM was not compensated by any public company mentioned herein to disseminate this press release.
