Shares In Chesapeake Energy Set For Delisting, As Historic Bankruptcy Is Finally Official
Johanson made those remarks before this week’s twin shocks of a Saudi-led oil price war and a coronavirus-driven stock market rout , which have caused oil prices to tank. But if prices remain low for an extended period, there is reason to believe that renewable energy will upend the markets even more quickly. Low oil prices lead to low power (or electricity) prices, driving aging coal plants that require high prices to recoup operating costs “out of the money” and reinforcing the cost advantage that wind and solar projects have only recently begun to assert against their fossil fuel-fired rivals. (Low gas prices, of course, could well stave off a renewables surge by lowering the operating costs of gas-fired power stations. Only time will tell.)
“In 20-30 years the industry will be turned upside down,” said Jesper Johanson, CEO of ... [+] InCommodities, which has plans to expand in both the US and Europe. “It will create conditions in which a company like ours can provide a lot of value.”
Don’t be fooled. This is not a story of tree-hugging Europeans coming to clean up dirty American energy markets. If the newcomers have an advantage, it has less to do with renewable energy per se than with their expertise inside the digital infrastructure that is all but certain to emerge as renewables capture a larger and larger share of America’s grid.
Consider the differences between a market where the vast majority of power is generated by coal, gas, or nuclear power plants — as they have for the last century — and one where wind and solar dominate. The former is broadly predictable. Operators of nuclear power stations signal the start-up and shutdown of reactors months in advance, while coal or gas plant operators will often alter their power output during the day but almost always in ways that traders can anticipate well in advance. In contrast, a market where wind and solar account for a large share of generation is often wildly unpredictable. No one dictates when the wind will blow or the clouds will part, so the supply of electricity on the grid in any given hour or minute of the day is almost impossible to anticipate.
As renewable energy sources took off in Europe over the last two decades, thanks to favorable government policies, it quickly became clear that its power markets needed to adapt.
“All of a sudden it was hard to say how much power we will have tomorrow or the next day,” said Antti Belt, who is in charge of Boston Consulting Group’s digital commodity trading services. “So you need a balancing mechanism [to constantly adjust supply], you need one hour or 15-minute trading blocks...So now you’ll have four contracts trading every hour, all the time, and that becomes impossible for a human to execute.”
Johanson, the InCommodities chief, agreed. “What happens when you introduce renewables is that it creates instability,” said Johanson, whose firm makes almost 10,000 trades every day. “Having a market design that gives accurate price signals in that kind of market is key.”
It is no coincidence that the first big country to really develop its renewable energy market to a point of critical mass — Germany — was also the first to develop a highly sophisticated power trading market. Its main power exchange first allowed algorithms, rather than humans, to execute trades more than a decade ago. Today a number of European exchanges allow algorithms to execute trades. In the US, exchanges still often don’t allow algorithms to execute trades, but the practice is spreading.
Rapid uptake of wind and solar energy hasn’t been the only driver of Europe’s data-abundant energy markets. While wind and solar were flooding the grid, new sources of data were separately flourishing. In the old days, big power companies used to dispatch people to measure the snow pack in the mountains to know how much power they could expect to generate from hydropower dams in the spring. Now, you can pay a couple thousand euros to get that data via satellite link. In the old days, gas plant operators had to make phone calls to find out how much natural gas was available for storage. Now, that data is updated in real-time online.
For the European power companies’ bet to pay off, American markets have to evolve toward roughly what Europe looks like now: renewables uptake has to grow, and data has to become more abundant and more transparent.
“Is there an advantage for these European firms in the US? Yes,” says Belt. “But it requires that the US market goes in the same direction.”
I cover the energy industry, with a focus on fossil fuels. Formerly I covered oil markets in Africa, the Mediterranean and the Mideast Gulf for commodities publication
I cover the energy industry, with a focus on fossil fuels. Formerly I covered oil markets in Africa, the Mediterranean and the Mideast Gulf for commodities publication Argus Media in London. I graduated from the London School of Economics with a masters degree in 2017. Contact me at scott.carpenter.freelance@gmail.com .
