This Insider Has Just Sold Shares In Renewable Energy Group, Inc. (NASDAQ:REGI)
Simply Wall St June 2, 2020
We wouldn’t blame Renewable Energy Group, Inc. ( NASDAQ:REGI ) shareholders if they were a little worried about the fact that Jeffrey Stroburg, the Independent Chairman of the Board recently netted about US$729k selling shares at an average price of US$29.14. That’s a big dump, and it decreased their holding size by 11%, which is notable but not too bad.
In fact, the recent sale by Jeffrey Stroburg was the biggest sale of Renewable Energy Group shares made by an insider individual in the last twelve months, according to our records. That means that an insider was selling shares at around the current price of US$28.02. While we don’t usually like to see insider selling, it’s more concerning if the sales take place at a lower price. We note that this sale took place at around the current price, so it isn’t a major concern, though it’s hardly a good sign.
Happily, we note that in the last year insiders paid US$569k for 27.00k shares. On the other hand they divested 35000 shares, for US$980k. In total, Renewable Energy Group insiders sold more than they bought over the last year. They sold for an average price of about US$28.01. It’s not too encouraging to see that insiders have sold at below the current price. Of course, the sales could be motivated for a multitude of reasons, so we shouldn’t jump to conclusions. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. By clicking on the graph below, you can see the precise details of each insider transaction!
If you are like me, then you will not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
Another way to test the alignment between the leaders of a company and other shareholders is to look at how many shares they own. A high insider ownership often makes company leadership more mindful of shareholder interests. Renewable Energy Group insiders own about US$26m worth of shares. That equates to 2.4% of the company. While this is a strong but not outstanding level of insider ownership, it’s enough to indicate some alignment between management and smaller shareholders.
So What Do The Renewable Energy Group Insider Transactions Indicate?
The stark truth for Renewable Energy Group is that there has been more insider selling than insider buying in the last three months. And our longer term analysis of insider transactions didn’t bring confidence, either. But it is good to see that Renewable Energy Group is growing earnings. Insiders own shares, but we’re still pretty cautious, given the history of sales. So we’d only buy after careful consideration. In addition to knowing about insider transactions going on, it’s beneficial to identify the risks facing Renewable Energy Group. Our analysis shows 5 warning signs for Renewable Energy Group (2 are concerning!) and we strongly recommend you look at them before investing.
Of course Renewable Energy Group may not be the best stock to buy. So you may wish to see this free collection of high quality companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
