This Energy Company Has Raised Its Dividend Twice This Year. Why It’s a Buy.
It is rare for an energy company to increase its dividend in the current environment. It’s even rarer for a company to have done it twice in the past six months, even in the face of the largest economic shock since the Great Depression.
Cheniere Energy Partners (ticker: CQP) has bucked the larger trends in energy this year, repeatedly raising its payout even as the broader industry buckles. Its stock is down more than 30% from its 2019 highs, and now yields 7.7%. That opens up an opportunity for yield-hungry investors.
Cheniere Energy Partners is “well insulated over the short to medium term,” wrote UBS analyst Shneur Gershuni early in the Covid-19 crisis as he upgraded his rating on the stock to Buy, with a $41.50 price target. With the shares trading at $33 in recent days, they could return more than 25% in a year.
Companies linked to energy have been a tough sell of late.
“The problem we have today is we have the word ‘energy’ in our name,” Chief Financial Officer Michael Wortley tells Barron’s. “But we’re really an infrastructure company.”
Based in Houston, Cheniere Energy Partners is a master limited partnership that is a subsidiary of a larger energy company called Cheniere Energy (LNG). Both companies process and ship natural gas around the world, signing long-term contracts that have remained in force even as demand for energy has slid amid the pandemic.
The parent company has strong prospects, too, but it doesn’t pay a dividend—a negative during a time of uncertainty about the industry’s near-term growth prospects.
Cheniere Energy Partners was a pioneer in the natural-gas industry, opening the first large-scale U.S. plant to turn gas into a liquid form that could be exported around the world. In 2012, Cheniere Energy Partners started construction of a liquefied natural gas, or LNG, export terminal in Louisiana on a waterway that is less than four miles from the Gulf of Mexico. It also owns a major intrastate pipeline that keeps the supply of gas flowing to the terminal.
Because of the shale revolution, U.S. now produces so much natural gas that the country has become a net exporter after previously having to import it. About 8% of U.S. gas is sent to other countries in liquid form, about twice as much as just a year ago, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
Covid-19 has certainly reduced demand for natural gas, as businesses, schools, and offices around the world shut down and need less electricity and gas for heating than they did before the pandemic.
But natural gas demand has fallen much less than demand for energy products like jet fuel. And Cheniere Energy Partners signs contracts with customers that are long term—generally 20 years—and are not price-dependent.
“They’re as close to certainty as we’ve seen in the midstream space,” says Danilo Juvane, an analyst with BMO Capital Markets. “Their increasing the dividend is indicative of the high visibility of the cash-flow stream that they have going forward, and that underscores why we think the dividend is going to be safe.”
Cheniere raised its quarterly dividend by a penny in April, to 64 cents, its second one-cent increase this year.
By contrast, nearly half of midstream companies cut their dividends in the first quarter, according to Alerian, which tracks the industry through a series of indexes.
Cheniere Energy Partners also doesn’t face price risks in its contracts, an important factor as natural gas prices remain near multiyear lows. The company passes price changes along to its customers. Its contracts tend to have take-or-pay terms, meaning that the buyer pays a fee whether or not it takes delivery of the product. So even if a power plant or major energy company doesn’t want the natural gas, it will still have to pay Cheniere.
The company’s clients include integrated energy companies like Total (TOT) and Royal Dutch Shell (RDS.A), as well as major gas importers like Korea Gas (036460.South Korea), a key link in South Korea’s electricity supply chain.
“We started early in the export game, which means we got the best customers,” says Wortley, the CFO. “We were the only guys out there signing them up.”
Although liquefied natural gas is a growth industry in the U.S., Cheniere Energy Partners isn’t really a growth stock. It is completing a sixth “train”—a liquefaction and purification facility—at its Sabine Pass terminal in Louisiana set to be operational in 2023. But otherwise, its expansion prospects are limited, analysts say.
“There will be no other incremental cash flow that the company will be able to generate other than those contracted cash flows,” Juvane says.
It is also likely that Cheniere Energy Partners will eventually merge with its parent company, an event that might trigger a tax payment for the MLP’s shareholders. Juvane expects them to receive Cheniere shares in the deal. It isn’t clear if they would receive a large premium for their shares. The timing of any sale is likely to depend on talks between Cheniere Energy Partners and the company’s largest outside shareholder, Blackstone Group (BX). Gershuni of UBS expects a deal in 2022, 10 years after Blackstone’s initial investment.
“It’s just a matter of getting the exchange ratio right,” Wortley said. “We haven’t seen an opportunity to get that done, but it probably makes sense to be one entity someday.”
This Energy Company Has Raised Its Dividend Twice This Year. Why It’s a Buy.
It is rare for an energy company to increase its dividend in the current environment.
