Simply Wall St June 7, 2020
We wouldn’t blame Contact Energy Limited ( NZSE:CEN ) shareholders if they were a little worried about the fact that Dennis Barnes, a company insider, recently netted about NZ$808k selling shares at an average price of NZ$6.21. That’s a big dump, and it decreased their holding size by 14%, which is notable but not too bad.
In fact, the recent sale by insider Dennis Barnes was not their only sale of Contact Energy shares this year. Earlier in the year, they fetched NZ$8.40 per share in a -NZ$3.6m sale. We generally don’t like to see insider selling, but the lower the sale price, the more it concerns us. The good news is that this large sale was at well above current price of NZ$6.36. So it is hard to draw any strong conclusion from it.
Over the last year, we can see that insiders have bought 12.60k shares worth NZ$104k. On the other hand they divested 802908 shares, for NZ$6.1m. In total, Contact Energy insiders sold more than they bought over the last year. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
If you are like me, then you will not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. We usually like to see fairly high levels of insider ownership. Our data suggests Contact Energy insiders own 0.2% of the company, worth about NZ$7.2m. We consider this fairly low insider ownership.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Contact Energy Insiders?
Insiders sold stock recently, but they haven’t been buying. Zooming out, the longer term picture doesn’t give us much comfort. When you combine this with the relatively low insider ownership, we are very cautious about the stock. As the saying goes, only fools rush in. So these insider transactions can help us build a thesis about the stock, but it’s also worthwhile knowing the risks facing this company. When we did our research, we found 2 warning signs for Contact Energy (1 is a bit unpleasant!) that we believe deserve your full attention.
Of course Contact Energy may not be the best stock to buy. So you may wish to see this free collection of high quality companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
