Because it is a more advanced market, the pros and cons of physical futures can be more exaggerated.
If you’re skilled and strategic in making predictions, you can do well with physical futures.
Physical futures can be quite easy to buy and sell.
You can get higher returns from physical futures.
Physical futures can be quite unpredictable, so there is a good deal of risk involved.
There are several factors that you cannot control that can alter the price of your physical future.
To break it down even further, we’ll take a look at the different types of physical futures.
Energy futures: An energy future is a standardized financial contract with a value based on a specific energy product. The energy products are often oil , natural gas or electricity. When you enter an energy futures contract, you are entering a contract for the delivery of one of these products in the future. These physical futures contracts tend to be in high demand. Energy prices can be extremely unpredictable, and it affects industries and nations alike.
Oil: Crude oil supplies energy for 40% of the world. This product is used to make gas, diesel, jet fuels and others. It is deliverable all year.
Heating oil futures are a popular future among businesses that are trying to regulate their energy costs. A heating oil contract is deliverable for 18 consecutive months.
Gas: Unleaded gas accounts for half of the U.S. oil consumption. The price can be affected by both the demand for gas and by government laws. It is deliverable year-round.
Natural gas accounts for about 25% of the total energy consumption in the U.S. This is divided between the industry and by both commercial and residential users. Natural gas is deliverable year-round.
Metals market: You’ve probably heard about the price of gold at one point. It is often considered by individuals who are wondering whether it is a good time to trade in their jewelry for cash. Gold is just one part of the metals market. The metals market can be broken down into 3 sections.
Base metals: Base metals include copper, nickel, aluminum, zinc, lead, tin, iron and steel. These metals are used most often in commercial production and industrial businesses. For example, copper is often used for plumbing. Aluminum is used in production facilities to make the cans for canned goods. Steel is often used by auto manufacturers. The price for base metals tends to be lower than the other areas of the metals market because they are fairly common. However, prices for base metals change depending on changes in the demand for products that use these base metals.
Precious metals: Precious metals are typically more scarce, and therefore more valuable. These metals include silver, gold, platinum and palladium. The product you probably think of when it comes to these metals is jewelry. However, precious metals are also used for coins, medical devices, dental work, art and electronics. Precious metals may also be used for investment and holding purposes.
Rare-earth metals: These are the materials that are used in the electronics industry and in advanced technology items. Think cell phones, cameras and night vision goggles. Despite the name, rare-earth metals aren’t really all that rare. Their value comes from the fact that they are in high demand because it is difficult to extract and process them.
Agricultural products: These products are influenced by seasonal patterns and diseases more than the other types of physical futures. The most common agricultural products are grains and livestock. Some of the less common agricultural products are sugar, cocoa, coffee, cotton and lumber.
After reading through all of that, we can probably agree that the futures market is complicated, right? Luckily, there are futures brokers who specialize in the futures market. When choosing a futures broker , there are a few things you might want to look for:
