VSun Solar obtains the most important bankability ranking for PV manufacturers.
The Tier 1 top ranking accounts for bankability and financial stability of the solar modules manufacturers and proves the sufficient non-recourse bank debt financing ability for solar projects.
VSun Solar was ranked Tier 1 among hundreds of other solar module manufacturers which have been divided into three different categories, according to their bankability and projects size. In addition to its strong R&D base, remarkable manufacturing, engineering development, and Japanese know-how technology, VSun Solar has once again proved to be a reliable “no-debt” financial partner.
This not only means that VSun Solar’s global brand is more credible and competitive, but it is also a strong recognition of VSun Solar’s Japanese quality and Vietnamese manufacturing in the global PV market. In addition, the company is expanding its manufacturing capacity to 1.5GW in order to meet all global sales requests and ensure further cost reduction.
“VSun Solar getting listed on TIER 1 ranking is already expected, we are encouraged, and do not dare to slow down our vigilance. We always remind ourselves to guard against arrogance, modesty, and prudence and use our services and quality to maintain and cherish customers, so that we live up to the customer’s expectations of VSun. We will continue to promote the advantages of renewable energy and green technology, lower down LCOE of PV, offer our high-efficiency PERC mono and polycrystalline modules and provide support for EPC projects,”  said Mr. Lewis Cai, CEO of VSun Solar.
pv magazine Global offers daily updates of the latest photovoltaics news. We also offer comprehensive global coverage of the most important solar markets worldwide. Select one or more editions for targeted, up to date information delivered straight to your inbox.
Hold Ctrl or Cmd to select multiple editions.
We send newsletters with the approximate frequency outlined for each edition above, with occasional additional notifications about events and webinars. We measure how often our emails are opened, and which links our readers click. To provide a secure and reliable service, we send our email with MailChimp, which means we store email addresses and analytical data on their servers. You can opt out of our newsletters at any time by clicking the unsubscribe link in the footer of every mail. For more information please see our Data Protection Policy .
