Michael Cohen is Chief U.S. Economist and Head of Oil Analysis in BP’s Group Economics team. In this role, he is responsible for oil, transportation, and U.S.energy policy related analysis in BP’s Statistical Review of World Energy and Energy Outlook. The Economics team helps inform decision making for BP’s board and executive team as well as for the Upstream, Downstream, Government Affairs, Trading, and Fuels/Marketing businesses.
Prior to joining BP in May 2019, Michael was Barclays’ Global Head of Commodities Research and was responsible for preparing and delivering differentiated research on commodities markets to Barclays’ global corporate and institutional investor client base. He worked for a decade in the public sector as an Economist with the U.S.Energy Information Administration, the Department of Energy’s Office of Policy and International Affairs, as well as two years in Paris as a senior member of the Oil Markets Division at the International Energy Agency. Prior to government service, Michael worked on electricity market design for LECG (now Navigant) and as a trading desk analyst for American Electric Power. He graduated with a BSBA in Business Economics and a BA in Political Science from The Ohio State University and a Masters in International Economics from Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.
Edward “Eddie” R. Allen is a co-founder and Senior Partner of Eagle Global Advisors, an investment advisory firm based in Houston, Texas. He serves on the management committee and all investment committees of the firm. In addition to serving as a co-manager of the Eagle MLP Strategy Fund, he is a portfolio manager for a variety of institutional and high net worth clients. Eddie is a co-creator of many of the portfolio strategies and proprietary investment management tools of the firm.Eddie received a Ph.D. in Economics from the University of Chicago and his B.S.E. in Engineering from Princeton University.
Eddie holds the Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) designation and is also a member the CFA Society of Houston. Before entering the investment advisory business, Eddie served as an Assistant Professor of Economics at the University of Houston.Eddie currently serves as Chairman of the Asia Society Texas Center and is on the board of the Asia Society Global organization. He also currently serves on the boards of The Menil Collection and The Chinquapin School. He is a past board member of St. John’s School and past Chair and President of the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston.
Asia Society hosts today's leading voices, providing commentary on events in news, society, and culture. Opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect Asia Society views.
Asia Society Texas Center Business & Policy Programs, Endowed by
Business and Policy programs at Asia Society Texas Center are presented by Bank of America, Muffet Blake, ConocoPhillips, ExxonMobil, United Airlines, and Wells Fargo. Major support comes from Nancy C. Allen, Chinhui Juhn and Eddie Allen, Nancy Pollok Guinee, and Mary Lawrence Porter, as well as The Brown Foundation, Inc. and Houston Endowment. Additional funding is provided by the Friends of Asia Society Texas Center, a dedicated group of individuals and organizations committed to bringing the best in public programming.
Though Asia Society is temporarily closed, we are dedicated to continuing our mission of building cross-cultural understanding and uplifting human connectivity. Using digital tools, we bring you content for all ages and conversations that matter, in order to spark curiosity about Asia and to foster empathy.
With 13 locations throughout the world, Asia Society is the leading educational organization promoting mutual understanding and strengthening partnerships among the peoples, leaders, and institutions of Asia and West. Asia Society Texas Center executes the global mission with a local focus, enriching and engaging the vast diversity of Houston through innovative, relevant programs in arts and culture, business and policy, education, and community outreach.
Around the World: Short Documentary of Los Angeles' Little Tokyo, Excerpt of 'Crazy Rich Asians' Author Kevin Kwan's New Novel, and More
In this weekly digest of Performing Arts and Culture, join a discussion on a century of science fiction from the Islamic world, get a preview of Kevin Kwan's new novel 'Sex and Vanity,' and more.
Around the World: World Bank Perspectives on the Impact of COVID-19 on Asia, Reflecting on the Korean War on Its 70th Anniversary, and More
In this weekly digest of Business and Policy topics, hear from the authors of 'Superpower Showdown,' explore what Asia is doing to avoid a potential food crisis as the world population grows, and more.
