Ken Hall | March 30, 2020 11:25am | More on: AGL IFT MCY ORG TLT ASX 200
ASX renewables shares have had a mixed performance in March. The S&P/ASX 200 Index (ASX: XJO) has fallen 24.82% lower this month which inevitably presents some buying opportunities. Here’s why now could be the perfect time to invest in the renewables sector on the ASX.
Concerns about the coronavirus pandemic have hit global markets hard. No one knows how long this will drag on for and what the final economic and human toll will be from it. That’s sent ASX 200 share prices tumbling, including the Energy sector.
AGL Energy Limited (ASX: AGL) and Origin Energy Ltd (ASX: ORG) shares have slumped lower in March. They’re two of the largest energy players in the market, alongside the unlisted EnergyAustralia.
Both ASX energy shares have been hammered but neither has pure renewables exposure. However, I think their market position puts them in the conversation as ASX renewables shares. If there is a consistent government policy for long-term investment, I’d expect both AGL and Origin to act on that quickly.
But neither of these groups are the ASX renewables shares that I’ve got my eye on at the moment.
I’ve got my eye on a few shares including Mercury NZ Ltd (ASX: MCY) , Infratil Energy Ltd (ASX: IFN) and Tilt Renewables Ltd (ASX: TLT) .
Tilt is majority-owned by Infratil and a little bit harder to buy. However, Mercury and Infratil shares could be good value today. Infratil reported underlying EBITDAF of $289.4 million in its half-year earnings and continues to spend big on future projects.
Mercury boasts a $5.65 billion market cap but isn’t particularly liquid. However, if you’re a buy and hold investor, that may not be the biggest worry given the potential upside.
I view the COVID-19 correction as a once in a lifetime buying opportunity . That’s true for many shares but particularly the ASX renewables shares.
Share prices have been smashed as we’ve entered a bear market in March. But the big bonus here is that we can re-evaluate our investments and deploy cash where we see trends for the coming decades.
That could mean buying ASX renewables shares now with the hope of further gains in the coming years. Once COVID-19 passes, these current market prices could seem cheap as chips.
We hear it over and over from investors, "I wish I had bought Altium or Afterpay when they were first recommended by The Motley Fool. I'd be sitting on a gold mine!" And it's true.
And while Altium and Afterpay have had a good run, we think these 5 other stocks are screaming buys. And you can buy them now for less than $5 a share!
Motley Fool contributor Ken Hall has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool Australia has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy . This article contains general investment advice only (under AFSL 400691). Authorised by Scott Phillips.
When our resident dividend expert Edward Vesely has a stock tip, it can pay to listen.
After all, he’s the investing genius that runs Motley Fool Dividend Investor, the newsletter service that has picked huge winners like SDI Limited (+53%) and National Storage (+35%)
Sign up now for instant access to your copy of this free report.
By clicking this button, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . We will use your email address only to keep you informed about updates to our website and about other products and services we think might interest you. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Please refer to our Financial Services Guide (FSG) for more information. Returns quoted are as of 7/4/2020
Discover The Motley Fool’s #1 bank stock for now and beyond.
After years of scorning shares of the big four banks, we’ve finally found one share we love – not only paying a fat, fully franked dividend but offering the potential for steady gains to boot!
Simply enter your email address below to gain access to this comprehensive FREE investment report.
By clicking this button, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . We will use your email address only to keep you informed about updates to our website and about other products and services we think might interest you. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Please refer to our Financial Services Guide (FSG) for more information.
