Mr Carter said renewable energy coming from wind farms was still less than two per cent of the total energy produced in the world.
"Wind farms are going nowhere, people will look back on this wind farm side show in thirty years time and say that the people went quite mad."
Mr Carter, who has called for a Royal Commission into wind farms, believed wind turbines could also impact on the ability to battle bushfires.
"If we have a fire breakout here, there's no way aerial support can be given to firefighters because of the turbines being there."
Landholders can receive annual payments from wind farm companies for having turbines on their properties, potentially totalling thousands of dollars.
Sheep grazier at Crookwell Charlie Prell has 11 turbines on his property.
"They've changed my life, we're getting a passive income from them allowing us to improve production levels on our farm," he said.
Mr Prell is urging the state government to develop a renewable energy plan to encourage more rural communities to embrace wind power.
"There has to be a rational debate about it, particularly in NSW because there's virtually no renewable energy infrastructure in this state."
The Gullen Range Wind Farm near Crookwell, NSW, which has become a popular visitor attraction.
In September, the Independent Planning Commission rejected plans for a multi-million dollar coal mine to be built in the Bylong Valley, due to concerns over the environmental, agricultural and heritage impacts.
South Korean company Kepco was behind the project and said it would inject more than $300 million into the state economy.
The NSW Government was critical of the decision to reject the mine , and is putting together legislation to prevent global greenhouse gas emissions from coal exports to be used as a reason for rejecting a proposed coal mine.
The Australian Renewable Energy Agency said at the end of 2018 there were 94 wind farms in Australia, generating enough electricity to meet seven per cent of the country's electricity demand.
The Federal Government has given $1 billion to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation to invest in technologies that help to maintain Australia's electricity grid.
An energy analyst believes a move towards more renewable energy could see power prices halve in NSW in the next decade.
International energy analyst Tim Buckley said despite the ruling against the wind farm in Crookwell, the NSW government is accepting more renewable energy into the electricity grid.
"There are more than $20 billion of renewable energy investment projects in the planning scheme," said Mr Buckley.
Mr Buckley said other states and territories were working towards 100 per cent renewable targets at a faster rate than NSW.
"If NSW speeds up the transition into renewable energy with solar, wind and hydro, it could halve electricity prices within five years.
"Rural communities are the ones that get left high and dry when coal mines shut, all of the focus should be on providing clean renewable energy for these towns."
