Get the Latest Investment Ideas Delivered Straight to Your Inbox.
Shares of sustainable electric vehicles maker Workhorse Group reached a new 52-week high after company's shares were added to the Russell 3000® Index beginning June 29, 2020.
Workhorse Group Inc. (WKHS:NASDAQ) today announced that "its shares were added to the broad-market Russell 3000® Index at the conclusion of the annual reconstitution of the Russell indexes, effective after the U.S. market opens today, June 29, according to the FTSE Russell website."
The firm stated that "annual Russell indexes reconstitution captures the 4,000 largest U.S. stocks as of May 8, ranking them by total market capitalization. Membership in the U.S. all-cap Russell 3000® Index, which remains in place for one year, means automatic inclusion in the large-cap Russell 1000® Index or small-cap Russell 2000® Index as well as the appropriate growth and value style indexes."
The company's CEO Duane Hughes commented, "Our inclusion into the Russell 3000 Index represents another milestone for Workhorse as a public company in a year where we expect to make additional landmark achievements in the electric vehicle industry...The Russell Indexes are a widely known and well-respected benchmarking standard. We appreciate being a part of this select group and will look to leverage this platform to generate further interest and awareness in our business within the investment community and beyond."
The firm noted that Russell indexes are widely and frequently used by investment managers and institutional investors and that around $9 trillion in assets are benchmarked against Russell's U.S. indexes.
Workhorse Group Inc. is a technology company based in Cincinnati, Ohio, that provides electric vehicles to the last-mile delivery sector. The firm is an original equipment manufacturer (OEM) that designs and builds high performance, battery-electric vehicles including vans, trucks, drones and aircraft. The company advised that "it also develops cloud-based, real-time telematics performance monitoring systems that are fully integrated with our vehicles and enable fleet operators to optimize energy and route efficiency."
The firm stated that the FTSE Russell indexes cover 98% of the investable markets serving institutional and retail investors globally and that about $16 trillion is currently benchmarked to various FTSE Russell indexes.
Workhorse Group started off the day with a market capitalization of around $699.2 million with approximately 70.63 million shares outstanding and a short interest of about 14.1%. WKHS shares opened 23% higher today at $12.20 (+$2.30, +23.23%) over Friday's $9.90 closing price and reached a new 52-week high price this morning of $15.41. The stock has traded today between $11.00 to $15.41 per share and is currently trading at $14.04 (+$4.14, +41.79%).
Want to be the first to know about interesting Special Situations, Technology, Alternative - Cleantech and Alternative Energy investment ideas?  Sign up to receive the FREE Streetwise Reports' newsletter.
1) Stephen Hytha compiled this article for Streetwise Reports LLC and provides services to Streetwise Reports as an independent contractor. He or members of his household own securities of the following companies mentioned in the article: None. He or members of his household are paid by the following companies mentioned in this article: None.
2) The following companies mentioned in this article are billboard sponsors of Streetwise Reports: None. Click here for important disclosures about sponsor fees.
3) Comments and opinions expressed are those of the specific experts and not of Streetwise Reports or its officers. The information provided above is for informational purposes only and is not a recommendation to buy or sell any security.
4) The article does not constitute investment advice. Each reader is encouraged to consult with his or her individual financial professional and any action a reader takes as a result of information presented here is his or her own responsibility. By opening this page, each reader accepts and agrees to Streetwise Reports' terms of use and full legal disclaimer . This article is not a solicitation for investment. Streetwise Reports does not render general or specific investment advice and the information on Streetwise Reports should not be considered a recommendation to buy or sell any security. Streetwise Reports does not endorse or recommend the business, products, services or securities of any company mentioned on Streetwise Reports.
5) From time to time, Streetwise Reports LLC and its directors, officers, employees or members of their families, as well as persons interviewed for articles and interviews on the site, may have a long or short position in securities mentioned. Directors, officers, employees or members of their immediate families are prohibited from making purchases and/or sales of those securities in the open market or otherwise from the time of the interview or the decision to write an article until three business days after the publication of the interview or article. The foregoing prohibition does not apply to articles that in substance only restate previously published company releases.
Shares of green hydrogen solutions provider Plug Power established a new 52-week high after the company reported it completed two acquisitions and raised 2024 Revenue and EBITDA targets.
The Alkaline Water Co. shares traded 20% higher after the company reported that it posted a 51% growth in year-over-year revenue in Q4/20.
Exro Technologies reported it will be collaborating with Zero Motorcycles to develop advanced coil drive powertrains for the electric motorcycle market.
CloudMD reported that it has signed a binding agreement to acquire a British Columbia medical clinic with 12 on-staff physicians in a cash and stock deal valued at CA$700,000.
Genius Brands International shares traded higher after the company reported that on Monday, June 15, it will be launching the new "Kartoon Channel!", which will be available in over 100 million U.S. television households and on 200 million mobile devices.
Patriot One Technologies reported that it is teaming up with Los Angeles F.C. and Banc of California Stadium to form "The Stadium & Event Safety Strategic Alliance."
Want to be the first to know about interesting Special Situations, Technology, Alternative - Cleantech and Alternative Energy investment ideas?  Sign up to receive the FREE Streetwise Reports' newsletter.
Want to read more about Special Situations, Technology, Alternative - Cleantech and Alternative Energy investment ideas?
Get Our Streetwise Reports Newsletter Free and be the first to know!
Streetwise Reports is registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Shares of green hydrogen solutions provider Plug Power established a new 52-week high after the company reported it completed two acquisitions and raised 2024 Revenue and EBITDA targets.Shares of green hydrogen solutions provider Plug Power established a new 52-week high after the company reported it completed two acquisitions and raised 2024 Revenue and EBITDA targets.Shares of green hydrogen solutions provider Plug Power established a new 52-week high after the company reported it completed two acquisitions and raised 2024 Revenue and EBITDA targets.This milestone affords FansUnite Entertainment new offerings and market opportunities.This milestone affords FansUnite Entertainment new offerings and market opportunities.This milestone affords FansUnite Entertainment new offerings and market opportunities.TraceSafe's technology will help the large construction company both reopen and operate safely.TraceSafe's technology will help the large construction company both reopen and operate safely.TraceSafe's technology will help the large construction company both reopen and operate safely.The Alkaline Water Co. shares traded 20% higher after the company reported that it posted a 51% growth in year-over-year revenue in Q4/20.The Alkaline Water Co. shares traded 20% higher after the company reported that it posted a 51% growth in year-over-year revenue in Q4/20.The Alkaline Water Co. shares traded 20% higher after the company reported that it posted a 51% growth in year-over-year revenue in Q4/20.Exro Technologies reported it will be collaborating with Zero Motorcycles to develop advanced coil drive powertrains for the electric motorcycle market.Exro Technologies reported it will be collaborating with Zero Motorcycles to develop advanced coil drive powertrains for the electric motorcycle market.Exro Technologies reported it will be collaborating with Zero Motorcycles to develop advanced coil drive powertrains for the electric motorcycle market.CloudMD reported that it has signed a binding agreement to acquire a British Columbia medical clinic with 12 on-staff physicians in a cash and stock deal valued at CA$700,000.CloudMD reported that it has signed a binding agreement to acquire a British Columbia medical clinic with 12 on-staff physicians in a cash and stock deal valued at CA$700,000.CloudMD reported that it has signed a binding agreement to acquire a British Columbia medical clinic with 12 on-staff physicians in a cash and stock deal valued at CA$700,000.Genius Brands International shares traded higher after the company reported that on Monday, June 15, it will be launching the new 'Kartoon Channel!', which will be available in over 100 million U.S. television households and on 200 million mobile devices.Genius Brands International shares traded higher after the company reported that on Monday, June 15, it will be launching the new 'Kartoon Channel!', which will be available in over 100 million U.S. television households and on 200 million mobile devices.Genius Brands International shares traded higher after the company reported that on Monday, June 15, it will be launching the new 'Kartoon Channel!', which will be available in over 100 million U.S. television households and on 200 million mobile devices.Technical analyst Clive Maund notes Adcore's chart looks 'very positive.'Technical analyst Clive Maund notes Adcore's chart looks 'very positive.'Technical analyst Clive Maund notes Adcore's chart looks 'very positive.'Blockchain Holdings Ltd. reported it is changing the name of the company to TraceSafe Inc.Blockchain Holdings Ltd. reported it is changing the name of the company to TraceSafe Inc.Blockchain Holdings Ltd. reported it is changing the name of the company to TraceSafe Inc.Patriot One Technologies reported that it is teaming up with Los Angeles F.C. and Banc of California Stadium to form 'The Stadium & Event Safety Strategic Alliance.'Patriot One Technologies reported that it is teaming up with Los Angeles F.C. and Banc of California Stadium to form 'The Stadium & Event Safety Strategic Alliance.'Patriot One Technologies reported that it is teaming up with Los Angeles F.C. and Banc of California Stadium to form 'The Stadium & Event Safety Strategic Alliance.'Shares of green hydrogen solutions provider Plug Power established a new 52-week high after the company reported it completed two acquisitions and raised 2024 Revenue and EBITDA targets.Shares of green hydrogen solutions provider Plug Power established a new 52-week high after the company reported it completed two acquisitions and raised 2024 Revenue and EBITDA targets.Shares of green hydrogen solutions provider Plug Power established a new 52-week high after the company reported it completed two acquisitions and raised 2024 Revenue and EBITDA targets.This milestone affords FansUnite Entertainment new offerings and market opportunities.This milestone affords FansUnite Entertainment new offerings and market opportunities.This milestone affords FansUnite Entertainment new offerings and market opportunities.TraceSafe's technology will help the large construction company both reopen and operate safely.TraceSafe's technology will help the large construction company both reopen and operate safely.TraceSafe's technology will help the large construction company both reopen and operate safely.The Alkaline Water Co. shares traded 20% higher after the company reported that it posted a 51% growth in year-over-year revenue in Q4/20.The Alkaline Water Co. shares traded 20% higher after the company reported that it posted a 51% growth in year-over-year revenue in Q4/20.The Alkaline Water Co. shares traded 20% higher after the company reported that it posted a 51% growth in year-over-year revenue in Q4/20.Exro Technologies reported it will be collaborating with Zero Motorcycles to develop advanced coil drive powertrains for the electric motorcycle market.Exro Technologies reported it will be collaborating with Zero Motorcycles to develop advanced coil drive powertrains for the electric motorcycle market.Exro Technologies reported it will be collaborating with Zero Motorcycles to develop advanced coil drive powertrains for the electric motorcycle market.CloudMD reported that it has signed a binding agreement to acquire a British Columbia medical clinic with 12 on-staff physicians in a cash and stock deal valued at CA$700,000.CloudMD reported that it has signed a binding agreement to acquire a British Columbia medical clinic with 12 on-staff physicians in a cash and stock deal valued at CA$700,000.CloudMD reported that it has signed a binding agreement to acquire a British Columbia medical clinic with 12 on-staff physicians in a cash and stock deal valued at CA$700,000.Genius Brands International shares traded higher after the company reported that on Monday, June 15, it will be launching the new 'Kartoon Channel!', which will be available in over 100 million U.S. television households and on 200 million mobile devices.Genius Brands International shares traded higher after the company reported that on Monday, June 15, it will be launching the new 'Kartoon Channel!', which will be available in over 100 million U.S. television households and on 200 million mobile devices.Genius Brands International shares traded higher after the company reported that on Monday, June 15, it will be launching the new 'Kartoon Channel!', which will be available in over 100 million U.S. television households and on 200 million mobile devices.Technical analyst Clive Maund notes Adcore's chart looks 'very positive.'Technical analyst Clive Maund notes Adcore's chart looks 'very positive.'Technical analyst Clive Maund notes Adcore's chart looks 'very positive.'Blockchain Holdings Ltd. reported it is changing the name of the company to TraceSafe Inc.Blockchain Holdings Ltd. reported it is changing the name of the company to TraceSafe Inc.Blockchain Holdings Ltd. reported it is changing the name of the company to TraceSafe Inc.Patriot One Technologies reported that it is teaming up with Los Angeles F.C. and Banc of California Stadium to form 'The Stadium & Event Safety Strategic Alliance.'Patriot One Technologies reported that it is teaming up with Los Angeles F.C. and Banc of California Stadium to form 'The Stadium & Event Safety Strategic Alliance.'Patriot One Technologies reported that it is teaming up with Los Angeles F.C. and Banc of California Stadium to form 'The Stadium & Event Safety Strategic Alliance.'
