The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) released a report assessing the opportunities for energy-related growth in the Appalachian region.
The report — titled “Appalachian Energy and Petrochemical Renaissance: An Assessment of Economic Progress and Opportunities” – indicates the potential for an economic renaissance in the Appalachian region built on the foundation of its energy resources, workforce, business environment, and geography.
“The energy-rich Appalachian region is now the single largest natural gas producing region of the country and increasingly is becoming a major producer of natural gas liquids, including ethane, propane, and butane,” Secretary of Energy Dan Brouillette said. “These resources can serve as feedstocks for new opportunities in low-cost power generation, petrochemicals, and the manufacturing industry. Harnessing these opportunities will decrease our reliance on foreign-sourced supply-chains, as showcased by the COVID-19 pandemic, and bring back U.S. jobs to this important region of the country.”
Under Secretary of Energy Mark Menezes said new market opportunities are emerging for coal outside of its traditional use for power generation.
“These opportunities rely on coal’s unique composition and include using coal to manufacture infrastructure products, conductive printing inks, carbon fiber, and as a source for rare earth elements and critical minerals that contribute to our national security,” Menezes said. “This is just the beginning of a new role for coal, new possibilities for Appalachia, and incredible opportunities to boost the United States economy.”
The assessment drew input primarily from Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia.
U.S. Sen. Joe Manchin (D-WV), ranking member of the Energy and Natural Resources Committee, agreed with the assessment.
“Investing in innovation in areas like coal-to-products and natural gas liquids will ensure we are unlocking the region’s full economic potential while building the skilled workforce needed to make this happen,” Manchin said. “At the same time, we must use these resources in the most responsible way possible, ensuring we reduce greenhouse gas emissions and identifying ways to implement carbon capture, utilization, and storage technologies to do so. I look forward to continue working with DOE, other federal agencies, and industry stakeholders to attract new investment, leverage opportunities, create jobs, and secure a prosperous economic future for the region.”
