In order to create a level-playing field among gas consumers located in far and remote areas, the existing zonal tariff structure is currently being reviewed to make it rational and competitive, Pradhan said
Union Minister Dharmendra Pradhan  |  Photo Credit: PTI
New Delhi: Union Minister Devendra Pradhan, on Wednesday, said that India will emerge as one of the primary drivers of growth in gas demand in Asia, despite the pressing Covid-19 challenges, owing to government initiatives, as well as fast-developing pipeline infrastructure.
“Efforts are underway to rationalise gas pipeline tariff structure for improving the affordability of gas across the country and for attracting investments into the gas infrastructure. The present zonal tariff structure for the gas pipelines results into additive tariffs for usage of multiple pipelines to transport natural gas from the distant gas supply sources. It causes a wide disparity in pipeline tariffs particularly for the buyers located distant from the gas sources and thus it hinders the development of new gas markets in far-flung and remote areas,” he added.
In order to create a level-playing field among gas consumers located in far and remote areas, the existing zonal tariff structure is currently being reviewed to make it rational and competitive. The new tariff structure would facilitate in creating a single gas market by attracting investment to complete Gas Grid as well as ensuring equitable access to natural gas across the country.
Gas-based industries would benefit, with new tariff structure which would improve gas affordability across the country. Further, a simplified tariff structure would also encourage gas industries to utilise the opportunity of procuring their gas requirement through Gas Trade Exchange platform based on the market mechanism. A level playing field among industries would promote in minimizing their input cost and improve competitiveness in the global production chain. Apart of industries, new rationalised tariff structure would also give a boost for expeditious development of CGD projects and PNG, CNG services to the citizens, he explained.
He said that in order to give a fillip to the gas-based economy, the focus is being given to enhancing domestic gas production, expeditious development of gas infrastructure as well as the development of the gas market by providing open access to infrastructure.
