Vancouver, British Columbia - June 30, 2020 (Newsfile Corp.) (Investorideas.com Newswire) LOOPShare Ltd. (TSXV: LOOP) (OTCQB: LPPPF) (FSE: 3KZ) ("LOOPShare" or the "Company") announces that it has completed delivery of a fleet of 110 scooters that have been sold to a California based developer of large residential communities. This transaction was originally announced in a press release from September 14, 2017.
The Company also announces that further to its press release of April 28, 2020 and May 29, 2020, as a result of delays due to COVID-19, it is continuing to rely on the exemption provided in BCI 51-515 (and similar exemptions provided by other Canadian Securities Regulators) to delay the filing of the following continuous disclosure documents (collectively the "Documents"):
The Company's Interim Financial Statements for the three months ended March 31, 2020.
The Company's Management Discussion & Analysis for the three months ended March 31, 2020.
The Company expects that it will be able to file its interim financial statement documents no later than July 16, 2020. Members of the Company's management and other insiders are subject to a trading black-out policy that reflects the principles in section 9 of National Policy 11-207. An update on material business developments has been provided in this press release and the Company's annual audited financial statements and MD&A for the year ended December 31, 2019 which are available on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.
Neither the TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in the policies of the TSX Venture Exchange) has reviewed or accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release.
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
