Benelux’s largest firm, Loyens & Loeff, has set itself a target of achieving a 30 per cent female partnership by 2025, requiring it to almost double its numbers in just five years. Loyens is one of just 43 European 100 firms to have added female partners in 2019, but its female partnership proportion was still […]
Students with disabilities who are set to take the Bar Professional Training Course (BPTC) exams online this summer have expressed their dismay after providers emailed them at short notice, leaving only 24 hours for them to decide whether to agree to take the exams in a testing centre, with no guarantee their special requirements would […]
Burness Paull has completed a multimillion-pound fundraising round, in which the firm’s top equity partners were asked to double their capital stakes to £300,000. The firm voted through the cash call in April, as partners opted to inject cash into the business rather than raise bank borrowings. Burness Paull has also reduced monthly drawings by […]
The Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman (FSPO) for the Republic of Ireland is recruiting a head of legal. The role, based in the FSPO’s HQ in Dublin, will oversee the organisation’s legal functions. They will lead a small team responsible for carrying out legal research and analysis and the preparation of legal advice and determinations, […]
DWF has hired a three-strong real estate team from Baker McKenzie to boost its Warsaw office, days after the listed firm made considerable cuts across its international network. The team is led by partner Joanna Wojnarowska, who brings along senior associates Weronika Roesler and Ewa Lewandowska. As part of the move, the partner will become […]
A criminal barrister’s fight against her own chambers and Stonewall took an unexpected turn today, as Allison Bailey criticised a crowdfunding platform for removing her page without warning. Bailey, who has so far raised over £60,000 to fund her Employment Tribunal claim against Garden Court Chambers and the charity, published a comprehensive Twitter post on […]
