Equinor executive vice president for marketing, midstream and processing Irene Rummelhoff said: “With private and public investment and supportive UK policy, the H2H Saltend project will demonstrate the potential of these technologies. Together we can make the Humber and the UK a world-leading example that others can learn from.”
The PX Group operates and owns the Saltend park. CEO Geoff Holmes said: “The group is delighted to be supporting H2H Saltend, a landmark project for UK energy transition. We are fully committed to helping industry reach net zero and both CCS and hydrogen will play a huge part in that.”
Equinor executive vice president and UK manager Al Cook said: “As the UK’s leading supplier of energy, we’re proud of the role our natural gas and offshore wind has played in reducing carbon emissions in power. Now we want to go further by bringing hydrogen to the Humber region. With our partners, we plan to transform the UK’s largest industrial cluster into its greenest cluster.”
The UK Government pledged funds for CCS development in its annual budget announcement in March. Chancellor Rishi Sunak announced $995m (£800m) to support carbon capture schemes across the country, namechecking the Humberside project.
In the UK House of Commons today, Prime Minister Boris Johnson was asked if he would commit to running new buses on hydrogen. He did not directly address the issue but did reinforce his support for hydrogen power.
The EU has given significant backing to hydrogen technology in its green recovery stimulus. The funding will ensure hydrogen technology and research expands. Germany currently has public transport and goods vehicles running on hydrogen fuel cells and China has many in production.
Critics have said many countries do not currently have facilities to transport or use hydrogen, and that the plan denies funding to several other renewable energy sources. Equinor was among more than 30 industry groups calling for the funding to be “technology-neutral”, meaning it would not favour one solution over another. However, the funding has increased interest in the already growing industry .
