The publication next month of the European Union procurement plan for achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050 will send shockwaves through the global natural gas industry.
The European Union's decision to exclude gas-fired power from its criteria for sustainable investment is a blow to the natural gas industry at a time when it wants to be seen as the preferred supplier of fuel for the transition to a lower carbon future.
The move by the EU's Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance to rule out natural gas for sustainable electricity generation comes as EU member countries take an increasingly aggressive stance against fossil fuels.
“The success of this transition goes through our European commitment, our capacity to defend at the European level the need to achieve a carbon price,” Macron said in May last year.
Chief executive of the Climate Bond Initiative Sean Kidney says the EU taxonomy for sustainable finance is a huge leap forward.
Two months ago Sweden's central bank, the Riksbank, said it had sold bonds issued by the Queensland and West Australian governments because it felt that greenhouse gas emissions in the two states were too high.
The EU stance against natural gas is included in the final version of the EU taxonomy being published next month, according to Sean Kidney, a member of the EU Technical Expert Group that has worked on the taxonomy for the past 18 months.
The taxonomy is a list of economic activities with performance criteria for their contribution to six environmental objectives. Taxonomies are used in the investment industry to help drive capital towards sustainability objectives.
The EU ruling on natural gas has implications beyond the borders of the EU because it will be used by institutional investors and asset managers issuing and buying "green" investment products.
Kidney is an expert in green financing thanks to his role as chief executive of the London-based Climate Bond Initiative. Green bonds have been one of the fastest-growing forms of debt financing over the past few years.
In 2019, $US250 billion in green bonds were issued taking the total amount of green bonds outstanding to more than $US1 trillion. One of the big trends for 2019 was the surge in sovereign green bonds issued by governments to finance specific climate change-related projects.
"What you are going to get is the EU saying to Australia unless you have solid policies for reducing carbon emissions we are going to punish you," he says.
The EU has imposed an overarching, technology-agnostic emissions threshold of 100 grams of CO2 emissions per KWh for electricity generation. This threshold will be reduced every five years in line with a trajectory to net-zero CO2 emissions in 2050.
Kidney says that after 18 months of work and two rounds of consultation the technical experts decided unabated natural gas-fired power generation did not meet the required CO2 reduction threshold. He says gas-fired power with carbon capture and sequestration may qualify.
Kidney says the taxonomy is effectively "an EU procurement plan for the Paris Agreement". "This lays out the regulations for getting to zero net carbon emissions by 2050," he says.
Three months ago The Australian Petroleum Production & Exploration Association said natural gas actually provided the means for significantly reducing carbon emissions in Asia.
APPEA said liquefied natural gas exports from Australia had the potential to save global emissions equal to over a quarter of Australia's total annual domestic greenhouse gas emissions.
"Clearly there are emissions associated with producing natural gas, but there are real emissions reductions in using natural gas," the lobby group said in a statement.
It said the federally funded National Greenhouse Gas Inventory showed LNG exports lowered the emissions in importing countries by around 152 million tonnes of carbon dioxide through the actual and potential displacement of coal consumption in those countries.
The figure represents about 27 per cent of Australia’s total annual emissions.
Last year, Rick Wilkinson, the chief technical officer of APPEA, said total crude oil and natural gas fugitive emissions, which includes the entire industry and so is much broader than just CSG, represented 2.7 per cent of total Australian emissions.
Santos chief executive Kevin Gallagher told his company's annual meeting last year that Santos had made commitments "to reduce our own production emissions and commenced a 10-year program to measure and monitor fugitive emissions across our onshore operations, a program being undertaken by the CSIRO".
A Woodside spokesperson said:  "We currently do not have any sustainable linked financing so the EU taxonomy does not presently impact Woodside.
The EU taxonomy is a powerful contribution to the conversation about carbon reduction because of its rigour in measuring CO2 production.
For example, it is not widely known that the United Kingdom's commitment to reach net zero carbon emissions by 2050 did not include carbon generated during extraction and before certain energy fuels arrived in the UK.
The EU taxonomy's examination of electricity generation from natural gas took a holistic view which included the risk of fugitive emissions across the gas supply chain.
emissions on an on-going basis. "This assessment should include actual physical measurements of methane leakage measurements across gas extraction, transport and storage systems," the draft taxonomy says.
In the short term the EU's actions will do nothing to upset Australia's position as the world's largest exporter of LNG.
Analysis by Australian independent consultancy EnergyQuest, published this week, said the record 77.5Mt of LNG exported by Australia in calendar 2019 was more than Qatar and double the level of exports by the United States.
While there is no immediate threat to the annual LNG export revenue of $49 billion there are likely to be longer-term implications for Australian trade relations with EU member states.
Australian governments, companies and institutions reliant on foreign funding could struggle to meet environmental, social and governance standards set by European financial institutions and funds management companies using the EU taxonomy to guide their decision-making.
Also, if France succeeds in convincing the EU to impose a carbon tax on the EU borders, Australia's exports to Europe could suffer.
Either way, green bonds will absorb a growing amount of the world's savings and become an increasingly important part of sustainable investment strategies.
Tony Boyd is the Chanticleer columnist. He has more than 35 years' experience as a finance journalist. Connect with Tony on Twitter . Email Tony at tony.boyd@afr.com
