From left, Atlantic Council Global Energy Center Founding Chairman Ambassador Richard Morningstar, ADNOC LNG Chief Executive Officer Fatima Al Nuaimi, SNAM Chief Executive Officer Marco Alvera, Atlantic Council Global Energy Center Distinguished Fellow Adnan Amin, and Venture Global LNG Chief Commercial Officer Tom Earl speak at the Atlantic Council Global Energy Forum in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates on January 12, 2020.
the role this crucial energy source will play in the future energy mix, as the
the global energy mix,” Ambassador Richard Morningstar, founding chairman of
the Atlantic Council’s Global Energy Center, said at the introduction of a panel
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates on January 12, 2020. At the other end of the
integrated part of the future energy mix.” At the same time, she conceded, “there
renewable energy to achieve the optimal energy mix for the future.
Marco Alverà, chief executive officer of Snam S.p.A., argued
of coal, the most dangerous fossil fuel for CO2 emissions. “Switching today’s
coal [use] into gas would save 6 billion tons of CO2,” he explained, making it
that continue to use coal, such as Asia. “The effort has to be to compress the
producing countries like the United States,” Alverà said.
terminals they are [also] building,” he explained. He added that significant
progress has also been made in southeast Asia and Brazil, and India has made
several initial steps towards increasing its ability to import gas. Earl agreed
who are still consuming coal, Adnan Amin, a distinguished fellow in the
Atlantic Council’s Global Energy Center, argued that gas’s importance in the future
could be overstated. “There is an inevitability about bridges; sooner or later
you get to the end of the bridge,” he said, pointing out that renewable energy
we are going to decarbonize, we need to address how all hydrocarbon sources can
play. “There is going to be a mix,” he said, and “we need to ensure that that
storage remains a key challenge for renewables to overcome, Alverà added, as “what you can achieve in California
resources will continue to rely on gas, according to Alvera, as countries
has been made on both the storage and transportation questions, especially in China
renewable production, such as rural Africa, where solar panels can provide electricity,
essence free storage” for the green hydrogen, which would be perhaps ten times
cheaper to store than green electricity.
solution for every country’s energy mix. Renewables and gas will likely have to
factors in determining the future of gas, either as a key bedrock of the future
energy mix, or a bridge to increased reliance on renewable energies.
David A. Wemer is associate director, editorial at the Atlantic Council. Follow him on Twitter @DavidAWemer.
