The government allocated Rs 22,000 crore to power and renewable energy sector.
“Increase in National Gas Grid from 16,200 km to 27,000 km augurs well for companies like Petronet LNG and other city gas distribution companies like IGL and MGL,” said Rusmik Oza.
Gas stocks jumped after the Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman in her Budget speech on Saturday proposed to extend gas grid to 27,000 km from 16,200 km.
The government allocated Rs 22,000 crore to power and renewable energy sector.
“Increase in National Gas Grid from 16,200 km to 27,000 km augurs well for companies like Petronet LNG and other city gas distribution companies like IGL and MGL,” said Rusmik Oza of Kotak Securities.
Shares of Castrol India (up 4.07 per cent), GAIL (India) (up 2.2 per cent), Gujarat State Petronet (up 1.44 per cent), HPCL (up 1.2 per cent), Petronet LNG (up 0.49 per cent), Bharat Petroleum Corporation (up 0.44 per cent) and Indraprastha Gas (up 0.1 per cent) were among the top gainers.
While Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (down 1.7 per cent), Indian Oil Corporation (down 0.48 per cent) and Reliance Industries (down 0.05 per cent) were the top losers in the index.
Naveen Aggarwal, Partner-tax, KPMG in India, said the move will help increase dependence on cheaper gas as compared to crude oil. This is also environmentally friendly as compared to oil, he added.
The S&P BSE Oil & Gas index was trading 0.24 per cent up at 13,957.75 around 12:12 pm.
Benchmark NSE Nifty50 index was down 27.55 points at 11,934.55, while the BSE Sensex was down 91 points at 40,632.49.
Among the 50 stocks in the Nifty index, 18 were trading in the green, while 32 were in the red.
Shares of Vodafone Idea, YES Bank, Tata Motors, SBI, Union Bank India, Rail Vikas Nigam, ONGC, BEL, NCC and Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation were among the most traded shares on the NSE.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
