Have Insiders Been Selling Natural Gas Services Group, Inc. (NYSE:NGS) Shares?
Simply Wall St December 24, 2019
We’ve lost count of how many times insiders have accumulated shares in a company that goes on to improve markedly. On the other hand, we’d be remiss not to mention that insider sales have been known to precede tough periods for a business. So before you buy or sell Natural Gas Services Group, Inc. ( NYSE:NGS ), you may well want to know whether insiders have been buying or selling.
It’s quite normal to see company insiders, such as board members, trading in company stock, from time to time. However, rules govern insider transactions, and certain disclosures are required.
We don’t think shareholders should simply follow insider transactions. But logic dictates you should pay some attention to whether insiders are buying or selling shares. As Peter Lynch said, ‘insiders might sell their shares for any number of reasons, but they buy them for only one: they think the price will rise.
In the last twelve months, the biggest single sale by an insider was when the insider, G. Lawrence, sold US$74k worth of shares at a price of US$18.42 per share. While we don’t usually like to see insider selling, it’s more concerning if the sales take place at a lower price. The good news is that this large sale was at well above current price of US$11.92. So it may not shed much light on insider confidence at current levels.
In the last year Natural Gas Services Group insiders didn’t buy any company stock. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
I will like Natural Gas Services Group better if I see some big insider buys. While we wait, check out this free list of growing companies with considerable, recent, insider buying.
Does Natural Gas Services Group Boast High Insider Ownership?
I like to look at how many shares insiders own in a company, to help inform my view of how aligned they are with insiders. A high insider ownership often makes company leadership more mindful of shareholder interests. Our data indicates that Natural Gas Services Group insiders own about US$9.9m worth of shares (which is 6.1% of the company). We do generally prefer see higher levels of insider ownership.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Natural Gas Services Group Insiders?
There haven’t been any insider transactions in the last three months — that doesn’t mean much. The insider transactions at Natural Gas Services Group are not inspiring us to buy. We also note that, as far as we can see, insider ownership is fairly low, compared to other companies. Of course, the future is what matters most. So if you are interested in Natural Gas Services Group, you should check out this free report on analyst forecasts for the company .
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
