Pump jacks are seen at dawn in an oil field over the Monterey Shale formation where gas and oil extraction using hydraulic fracturing, or fracking.
California needs to prioritize protecting working families from the dangers and risks that gas-fired power plants represent, if our state is to honor its commitment to build a healthy and sustainable economy that works for all.
As the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) launches a rulemaking process to manage the state’s transition away from gas , communities that live on the front lines of climate change impacts are calling on Gov. Gavin Newsom, other state leaders, and utilities to ensure that any transition plan prioritizes the health and safety of environmental justice communities and vulnerable workers.
Gas plants are dangerous and volatile, and also pose a serious financial risk to our future. The long-term financial prospects of gas plants are bleak, as the gas industry will become obsolete just like coal. Renewables, energy efficiency, and energy storage are becoming cheaper than gas and will continue to get cheaper — representing a far better alternative. As such, our governor and state agencies ought to ensure that fossil-fuel-industry workers have the financial and educational support they need to successfully transition to alternative, professionally fulfilling employment.
Despite a vast effort to “greenwash” how the public perceives gas as an energy source, very little about gas has to do with it being natural, clean or reliable. Gas is a processed fossil fuel with many serious short-term and long-term dangers to public health, safety, and the climate. To add insult to injury, too many of California’s polluting gas-fired power plants are near working families and communities of color. The Inland Empire, for example, has some of the dirtiest gas plants that also sit in areas that are deemed the most economically disadvantaged in the state — the Century Station is the fourth dirtiest, the Drews Sub Station the seventh dirtiest, and Agua Mesa is the third worst — in addition to having the worst air pollution in the nation.
Dirty gas also contributes to wildfires, smog and the release of toxic chemicals into the air. The San Bruno explosion of 2010, which killed  eight people and injured dozens more, is a tragic reminder of the dangers of gas. The Aliso Canyon gas leak disaster near Los Angeles unleashed 111,000 pounds of methane every hour, pumping cancer-causing benzene into the air. It was the largest recorded gas leak in state history, and one of the worst environmental and health disasters in U.S. history — comparable to the infamous 2010 British Petroleum Deepwater Horizon spill and the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill.
California does not need gas plants to meet the state’s energy needs and at least one-quarter of the current plants could be retired immediately. Currently, California could still reliably meet its energy needs if 28 gas plants in the region were taken offline. A  2019 study from the Rocky Mountain Institute found that by 2035, it will be more expensive to run 90% of gas plants being proposed in the U.S. than it will be to build new wind and solar farms equipped with storage systems. The combination of renewable energy plus storage could supply the same amount of electricity and keep the grid stable.
When it comes to California’s progress to meet its climate goal, gas stands in the way. Alternatives to gas plants represent better opportunities for communities to access high-paying jobs in industries that are flourishing. We need to stop wasting money on gas plants and end the poisoning of our communities’ livelihoods. California must prioritize an equitable transition to protect our public health and invest in a sustainable clean-energy economy that supports job growth.
Allen Hernandez is executive director of the Center for Community Action and Environmental Justice — a member organization of the “Regenerate California” campaign.
