During my time as a young engineer at an electric utility,  the standing joke we shared internally about the gas "competition" was go  modern, go gas, go boom. That is  certainly the legacy that plagued hydrogen (H) gas for decades following the  Hindenburg disaster in 1937. But  gradually and quietly, the situation surrounding H, the other "natural"  gas, has changed. It is more broadly  believed now than ever before that utilities will be involved with H gas  used for power generation, energy storage, and transportation as our society continues  to search for ways to reduce its use of fossil fuels.
Many utilities were introduced to H through fuel  cells (FCs) in the early 1990s. Advances in FC technology related to the space program made FCs an  option for cogeneration. A stationary FC  manufactured by UTC Power at that time produced 400 kW of electricity and 1.7 million Btu/hour of heat from the H  contained in natural gas. More recently,  some energy storage devices used by  utilities are FCs, including Redox flow batteries and molten carbonate FCs. In general, however, the problem related to H- based electricity applications has been poor cost competitiveness relative to  other technologies and fuels. On a dollar per megawatt hour basis, studies within the last several years indicate FCs are more expensive  than essentially all other generation options, including wind, solar, and  hydroelectric power.
So why are we seeing such interest and positive energy (small  pun) regarding H? Some H advocates believe  the sweet spot for H-based FCs may be in the transportation sector. In fact, there are already multiple commercially available fuel cell vehicles (FCVs) . The benefits for commercial vehicles  are the same as those that make H FC forklift and other warehouse equipment  attractive: zero harmful emissions and  rapid refueling. However, the cost of transportation  focused FCVs is still above electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrids; plus, there are limited areas  where H fuel infrastructure for storage and refueling is in place. However, a public private partnership, H2USA, was launched by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) in 2013 to increase  infrastructure availability. The remaining issue for auto and FC makers,  in addition to cost, is FCV durability. Auto industry specialists believe the  durability of FCVs must be increased from the current 75,000 miles to at least  150,000 miles, to match that of gasoline vehicles.
While there are some caveats  regarding the future of H, progress is obviously occurring as evidenced by some  commercial FCVs — more than 15 million passenger trips on FC-powered buses, commercial truck use of FCs, and even a H-fueled train commissioned by Alstom in Germany last year. For an upbeat view on developments and the  potential of H, see a presentation from the DOE's Fuel Technologies Office here . There is also a growing  belief that H FCs should be paired with increasingly cost-competitive renewable  energy technologies. Since they  generate power without emitting greenhouse gases (GHGs), H FCs can substitute for fossil fuel  generation in baseload or backup service to address the intermittency issues of  some renewable resources. As an added benefit, advocates argue low cost  renewable energy could be used to make the electrolysis cycle more economic for  producing "green hydrogen" fuel. Presently, most H used for fuel is synthesized  from methane gas using steam reforming, which is not a "green" process.
Not everyone believes the fabled H-based  economy of the future is at hand. The opposing  view is that H-fueled vehicles may be far from commercial viability for the  masses, because of inefficiencies in producing, transporting, and storing H, and the flammability of the gas. Some  sources suggest that ample renewable energy will not resolve this conundrum  because H production from water is an energy consuming process, that is, it takes  more energy to free H from H2O molecules than is generated when the freed H is used to  produce energy. However, several  companies, including Siemens AG and Air Liquide, are working on systems to  improve the highly energy intensive electrolysis process. Further, a Japanese consortium is building the  Fukushima Hydrogen Energy Research Field intended to demonstrate green H  production and storage in conjunction with H-based electricity generation and  power grid coordination. Other  organizations are working on the production of H gas from bio-sludge from  sewage plants, catalysts to reduce the energy required to produce H, and new methods for H storage that reduce  space, temperature, and pressure requirements.
Government agencies, environmental organizations, and manufacturers around  the globe hold high hope for a green H-based economy. They argue that looking beyond the production  process, H's specific energy content  (energy to weight ratio) is higher than that of other fuels. The specific energy content  of H is also greater than that of lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries, indicating that FCs used for  transportation should provide greater range and exhibit lower space  requirements than the leading batteries used today. FCs, photovoltaic (PV) panels, and other energy-related  technologies we rely on today came from the space program. It is quite possible that continued advancements and economic  breakthroughs will ultimately lead us to a H-based future.
This site requires you to login or register to post a comment.
No comments have been added yet. Want to start the conversation?
