Analysts at Kotak institutional equities have cut EPS estimates for this fiscal by 8% after factoring in lower volumes amid likely slower recovery in volumes due to rising Covid-19 cases in Delhi and higher unit margins amid benign domestic gas/LNG prices. The brokerage firm has a SELL rating on the scrip with a fair value of Rs 380 per share. A similar outlook is being forecasted by ICICI Securities assuming a decline in CNG volumes by 20% on-year basis and industrial and commercial volumes by 25%. “Steep volume estimate cut has meant 27% cut in FY21E EPS. We estimate EPS for financial year 2022 to be up 26% on-year driven by 25% higher volumes. We assume a gradual fall in EBITDA margin from Rs6.45/scm in this fiscal to Rs5.71/scm in FY24E,” the brokerage said in a research report. ICICI Securities has a SELL rating with a target price of Rs 340.
While even those with a BUY rating on the stock do expect lower volumes during the coronavirus period but those are expected to be partially offset by the continuous slide in input costs. “Given IGL is opening 40 new CNG stations per year amid low penetration, it would log healthy growth in existing geographies,” said Edelweiss Securities in a research report. The new geographies added by IGL are expected to help the company boost volumes in the next four-five years. Edelweiss has a BUY rating on the scrip with a target price of Rs 569. IGL remains a sector overweight for Edelweiss.
The addition of new geographies and the resultant growth in volumes that will bring is also a key drive in HDFC Securities’ ADD call on the stock. “We expect volume to dip by 10.0% YoY to 5.8mmscmd in FY21 given a poor CNG volume outlook in 1HFY21. Thereafter, blended volumes should recover to 7.1mmscmd in FY22 (+21.7% YoY),” HDFC Securities said while pinning a target price of Rs 520 on the stock. IGL shares are up 48% from their March lows, outperforming the benchmark indices.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
