Shares In Chesapeake Energy Set For Delisting, As Historic Bankruptcy Is Finally Official
It’s one thing if the United States is able to compete on the merits. It’s quite another if it is using economic sanctions as a weapon. At issue is Russia’s so-called Nord Stream 2 pipeline — a companion to its Nord Stream 1 pipeline. It not only allows Russia to double its natural gas capacity headed to Europe but it also allows it circumvent its nemesis, Ukraine. Nord Stream 2 is owned by Gazprom and is a $10.5 billion project that stretches 745 miles from Russia’s gas fields to Germany’s Baltic coast. The U.S. says Russia lacks the technology to finish the pipeline. Russia says it will complete it by 2021.
Russia now supplies 39% of Europe’s natural gas. The United States supplies 3.5%, although a third of all U.S. LNG went to the European Union between January and November 2019, the European Commission says.
U.S. Senator Ted Cruz, R-Texas, is a leading proponent of the sanctions that went into effect in December 2019, saying that Nord Stream 2 is a lose-lose: first, the natural gas sales help finance Russian territorial goals while second, the line bypasses Ukraine and deprives it of revenues to run its country. Ukraine, of course, has aligned strategically with the West, creating conflict with Russia with which it shares cultural and business interests.
“It’s far better for Europe to be relying on energy from the United States than to be fueling Putin and Russia and dependent on Russia and subject to economic blackmail,” Cruz said in December when the Nord Stream 2 sanctions were approved. The sanctions also apply to any third party builder or financier. At that time, the Swiss contractor Allseas Group stopped participating while others with money on the table — Shell Oil and Engie — were befuddled by Washington’s moves.
Russian Black Sea fleet Missile Cruiser "Moskva" is anchored in one of the bays of Sevastopol, ... [+] Crimea, Monday, March 31, 2014. In Moscow, the lower house of parliament voted unanimously Monday to annul agreements with Ukraine on Russia's navy base in Crimea. In 2010, Ukraine allowed Russia to extend the lease of the fleet's base until 2042 on an annual rent of $98 million and price discounts for Russian natural gas supplies. (AP Photo/Andrew Lubimov)
But Cruz has an ulterior motive: he represents an oil-and-natural gas-producing state, which needs to jack-up sales to Europe — especially now. The lack of demand coupled with the oversupply means falling prices and job losses.
The Nord Stream 2 sanctions are helping the U.S. crack open European natural gas markets. But they have also had a practical and tangential effect of getting Russia to negotiate with Ukraine. At the end of 2019, the two countries formally agreed on a contract to send Russian gas through Ukraine and into Europe. It is a $7 billion deal that lasts five years.
If —’big if’ — those talks would lead to more deals and the subsequent withdrawal of Russia from Ukraine and Crimea, the sanctions will have paid off. But the developed world is already sanctioning Russia by banning the necessary technologies to develop oil and gas while also preventing those deals from getting financed. Russia has also been kicked out of the Group of Seven, formerly Eight. Its economy is contracting while nosediving energy prices are leading to fewer revenues and budget shortfalls.
With its abundance of unconventional natural gas, the United States has become a net exporter of LNG since 2017. Donald Trump’s pitch to the American people is that this country would become an energy dominant source — that the country would feed its own needs and then export its shale oil and gas around the world. In that regard, the U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has approved a dozen LNG export terminals, on top of the five that currently exist.
“LNG demand is weak right now,” says Neil Chattejee, chair of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission during a call hosted by the Atlantic Council. U.S. “companies are trying to secure long-term contracts and the U.S. is now a net exporter of energy. This has positive benefits economically and geopolitically: It is an alternative to Russia and it is beneficial to our allies. A resurgence of demand will come.”
The biggest European markets for the United States are the United Kingdom, Spain and France. But Germany is the most lucrative catch — a country that is in the process of shutting down all of its nuclear and coal plants. Germany has a goal of replacing much of that energy with renewables. Before that can happen, however, it will look to natural gas to fill the void — a fuel needed to “back up” wind and solar power when the weather does not play ball.
For the record, the Germans are peeved at the Americans, saying that their sanctions against Russia are having an “extraterritorial effect.”
The European Union would be casting a wide net for more natural gas suppliers with or without the U.S. sanctions on Nord Stream 2. In Western Europe, the penalties are largely seen as heavy-handed. In Eastern Europe, and specifically Ukraine, the sanctions are viewed as a hammer — a mechanism to get Russia to the bargaining table.
The geopolitics are complicated. But one thing is not: if the United States wants to gain increasing access to European natural gas markets, it will have to rely on free enterprise and not on coercive techniques.
Since the late 1990s, I’ve covered energy, beginning with the rise and fall of Enron — first as a magazine writer before becoming a columnist and editor. For more than
Since the late 1990s, I’ve covered energy, beginning with the rise and fall of Enron — first as a magazine writer before becoming a columnist and editor. For more than eight years, I’ve been a columnist for Forbes, focusing on fossil fuels, renewables and nuclear energy while  expanding my coverage to include emerging technologies and environmental causes. I now cover all of those  issues on a global basis, especially for the African and Asian regions. My stories have appeared in, and have been cited by, dozens of publications and broadcasts. My features and my columns have also won several national awards. Twitter: @Ken_Silverstein. Email: ken@silversteineditorial.com
