Today, LNG9 said without the lender on board, it would be tearing up the takeover bid
Shares in Liquified have lost over a third of their value today, currently worth seven cents each
Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) has watched a $115 million Singaporean bail-out slip through its fingers today.
The bail-out was to come in the form of a company takeover from Singapore-based liquified natural gas company LNG9.
Today, LNG9 tore up the takeover bid after some upcoming LNG funding from First Wall Street Capital fell through.
In late February, LNG9 launched an offer to take full control of Liquified Natural Gas, or LNGL, for US$0.13 per share or the Australia dollar equivalent.
The offer valued LNGL at US$75 million and represented a 48 per cent premium to the company's 30-day volume-weighted average price leading up to the offer. At today's exchange rate, the offer represents A$117.29 million for LNGL shareholders.
It seems LNGL was eager to jump on the offer, as its cash balance teeters on the verge of collapse.
In fact, LNGL went as far as to tell shareholders in late February that by accepting the offer, they avoided the risk of LNGL entering administration or going into liquidation.
Importantly, First Wall Street Capital was to be a lender for LNGL, providing bridge financing to meet the costs of the takeover while LNGL and LNG9 ironed out the details.
However, after re-jigging some of the financing terms in mid-March, First Wall Street pulled out of the funding deal completely on March 27 .
This left LNGL seeking a new source of funding to stay alive just until the end of the LNG9 offer period.
At the time, LNGL still seemed hopeful, claiming new sources of funding acceptable to both companies in the takeover bid are likely to be found. LNG admitted, however, that though it was hopeful, this was not certain.
Today, the takeover bid has been completely withdrawn.
According to LNGL, the bidder said the loss of First Wall Street as a lender was too likely to have adverse effects on the company for LNG9 to feel comfortable going ahead with the takeover.
This leaves LNGL in a sticky situation, with the company admitting its cash reserves can currently only last until the end of May 2020.
"LNGL must secure additional meaningful funding urgently to continue operating beyond then," the company said in an announcement to shareholders today.
Not all hope is lost, however. LNGL insists LNG9 is still interesting in buying up the company and said the two parties are working to find a new mutually-acceptable transaction structure.
With a month and a half left of cash in the bank, it's likely LNGL will have no issue agreeing to LNG9 demands if a new takeover structure is launched.
Nevertheless, LNGL shareholders don't seem comforted by hope. Today, shares in LNGL have shed 39.13 per cent of their value in mid-morning trade. Currently, shares are worth seven cents each in a $40.34 million market cap.
