Liquid Natural Gas Market May Set New Growth Story | Chevron, Exxon Mobil, Equinor
Growing energy consumption, increasing demand for natural gas vehicles and the rising urban population will help to boost the global liquid natural gas market in the forecasted time period. Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) is a liquid form of natural gas, which is composed mainly of methane and other gases such as Propane, Ethane, Butane, and Nitrogen. LNG liquefaction is a process in which Natural Gas is transformed into Liquefied Natural Gas by cooling it in a liquefaction plant which makes it more proficient to transport. It is used in various industries such as construction & dairy products, food processing, manufacturing, furnaces, fluid bed dryers, mining, power generation sector and rotary kilns. Due to low emission rate of carbon, it is also used as alternative fuels in many modes of transports such as rails, trucks ships (ferries), and natural gas vehicles and is also used by domestic users for cooking & heating purposes.
AMA Research added a comprehensive research document of 200+ pages on ‘Liquid Natural Gas’ market with detailed insights on growth factors and strategies. The study segments key regions that includes North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific with country level break-up and provide volume* and value related cross segmented information by each country. Some of the important players from a wide list of coverage used under bottom-up approach are BP (United Kingdom),Shell (Netherlands),Chevron (United States),Exxon Mobil (United States),Total (France),PetroChina (China),Equinor (Norway),Sinopec (China),Gazprom (Russia),Woodside Petroleum Ltd. (Australia)
Strategic Points Covered in Table of Content of Global Liquid Natural Gas Market:
Chapter 2: Exclusive Summary – the basic information of the Liquid Natural Gas Market.
Chapter 3: Displaying the Market Dynamics- Drivers, Trends and Challenges of the Liquid Natural Gas
Chapter 4: Presenting the Liquid Natural Gas Market Factor Analysis Porters Five Forces, Supply/Value Chain, PESTEL analysis, Market Entropy, Patent/Trademark Analysis.
Chapter 5: Displaying market size by Type, End User and Region 2014-2019
Chapter 6: Evaluating the leading manufacturers of the Liquid Natural Gas market which consists of its Competitive Landscape, Peer Group Analysis, BCG Matrix & Company Profile
Chapter 7: To evaluate the market by segments, by countries and by manufacturers with revenue share and sales by key countries (2020-2025).
Finally, Liquid Natural Gas Market is a valuable source of guidance for individuals and companies in decision framework.
