9 hours ago (Jul 01, 2020 07:40AM ET)
Maxim (NASDAQ: MXIM ) Group analyst Tate Sullivan maintained a Buy rating on Northwest Natural Gas on Wednesday, setting a price target of $74, which is approximately 32.64% above the present share price of $55.79.
Sullivan expects Northwest Natural Gas to post earnings per share (EPS) of $1.56 for the third quarter of 2020.
The current consensus among 4 TipRanks analysts is for a Hold rating of shares in Northwest Gas (NYSE: NWN ), with an average price target of $61.25.
The analysts price targets range from a high of $74 to a low of $52.
In its latest earnings report, released on 03/31/2020, the company reported a quarterly revenue of $285.15 million and a net profit of $76.45 million. The company's market cap is $1.7 billion.
According to TipRanks.com, Maxim Group analyst Tate Sullivan is currently ranked with 0 stars on a 0-5 stars ranking scale, with an average return of -8.2% and a 35.87% success rate.
Northwest Natural Holding Co. operates through its subsidiaries, which engages in the local distribution of gas and water. It supplies natural gas to residential, commercial, and industrial customers in Oregon and southwest Washington. The company is headquartered in Portland, OR.
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read Investing.com's comments guidelines and agree to the terms described.
