Anil Singhvi’s Strategy July 1: Day support zone on Nifty is 10,200-10,250 & Bank Nifty is 10,350 to 10,400
Amid Indian indices showcasing pull-back rally, Zee Business Managing Editor Anil Singhvi has been batting strongly in favour of some quality mid-cap stocks. The Market Guru is of the opinion that mid-cap stocks will give better returns in such volatile markets as they are available at discounted rates. In his mid-cap shares series, Singhvi talked to market expert Sandeep Jain on his long-term, positional or mid-term and short-term picks and he suggested these three stocks — IEX, Carborundum Universal and Mangalam Cement — to buy.
Asked about his long-term call, Sandeep Jain said, "My long-term pick is IEX. The company is in monopolistic trade and recently it has listed natural gas companies also. The company's sales growth is in the range of 12 to 13 per cent and its profit is to the tune of 20 per cent. Apart from this, it has negligible debt that sounds about the strong fundamentals of the stock. I recommend investors to buy this stock for the target of Rs 230 per stock levels." On time horizon in the stock to achieve the given targets Jain said that it would hit its target in next six to nine months.
See Zee Business Live TV streaming below:
Asked about his positional and short-term picks from the mid-cap segment, Jain said, "My positional or mid-term pick is Carborundun Universal. The counter is available at very discounted price and I am expecting it to hit Rs 215 target in the mid-term. "
Warch full coverage in video below:
— Zee Business (@ZeeBusiness) July 1, 2020
His short-term pick was Birla Group Company Mangalam Cement. He said, "Recently, cement stocks have been found performing well and if we look at Mangalam Cement's fundamentals, it's profit has gone up while it is available at a very discounted price that makes this stock an attractive share to buy for short-term investors. It will showcase Rs 215 per stock levels in short-term from its current Rs 193 levels. I would recommend investors to maintain the stop loss at Rs 179 mark as it's a short-term pick."
Get Latest Business News , Stock Market Updates and Videos ; Check your tax outgo through Income Tax Calculator and save money through our Personal Finance coverage. Check Business Breaking News Live on Zee Business Twitter and Facebook . Subscribe on YouTube .
