As a member of New York State’s Climate Action Council, which will helps guide the state’s greenhouse gas reductions, I want to make a few things clear about New York’s energy needs. We need to be realistic about what keeps the lights on. This cannot be a renewable-versus-natural-gas debate.
Renewable energy in New York is growing, but building the electric grid of the future is a process that includes investment in highly-efficient natural gas facilities in the Hudson Valley to replace older, higher-emitting facilities and get closer to that greener future.
Before you dismiss this as a love letter to the fossil fuel industry, consider some numbers.
According to the most recent state data, New York’s power sector has reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 56 percent - more than any other sector. In that same span, transportation sector emissions rose by 24 percent. The power sector only makes up 17 percent of greenhouse gas emissions in New York.
Guaranteeing that your lights will come on and you will stay warm next winter means making sure power is available when you need it. Wind, solar and energy storage projects are being built to help with this, but the unpredictability of relying on Mother Nature as a power source is an important factor. Natural gas facilities can turn on and off quickly when there is no sun or wind. Respected think tanks like the Union of Concerned Scientists and the Brattle Group have emphasized this fact. With technological advances, modern gas generators, with retrofits, could run on renewable natural gas or carbon-free hydrogen.
Natural gas will be a part of our state’s energy mix for years to come so it’s important to make the natural gas power we rely on as clean as possible. The Hudson Valley is home to state-of-the-art natural gas facilities. Those plants, along with upgrades to older, less efficient facilities, can support our growing renewable energy grid in an environmentally responsible way, while maintaining reliable power throughout the region.
Gavin Donohue is President and CEO of the Independent Power Producers of New York.
