Monmouth Beach – Monmouth Beach School District has been matched with an Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) Climate Corps Fellow who will provide expertise and support for evaluation, planning and implementation of projects that will help improve the energy performance of our facilities.
During the 2019-2020 school year, a Green Team was formed in the district that included staff members, administration, Board members and parents. The goals of the team included creating a safer and more environmentally conscientious setting for the staff and students of Monmouth Beach School. In order to do so, the team conducted a collaborative examination of the building and grounds to identify areas in need of more attention and to brainstorm possible ways to enhance the quality of daily life in the school community. After successfully making progress in the area of recycling, which included a grant being provided by the Sustainable Jersey Schools Program, the team realized that more progress was possible. In order to take the collective efforts to the next level, the team applied to receive input from a fellow who will hopefully provide direction and guidance for the district. The first area of focus for the team and their fellow will be energy usage and possible avenues for more practical and cost effective means.
This technical assistance program has been made possible through funding provided by New Jersey Natural Gas. “We are proud of our partnership with Sustainable Jersey – now in its 11th year – to help connect communities with the resources they need to make wise energy choices,” said Anne-Marie Peracchio, director of conservation and clean energy policy for New Jersey Natural Gas. “The host towns and schools will benefit greatly from this unique opportunity as the Climate Corps Fellows provide guidance and insight to help them address challenges and plan customized energy-efficiency solutions that help advance their sustainability goals.” Since 2015, Sustainable Jersey, with the support of New Jersey Natural Gas, has placed 15 EDF Fellows to assist a total of 21 schools/school districts and 19 municipalities.
Since the Climate Corps program’s inception in 2008, over 1,000 graduate students have been placed in more than 500 leading organizations spanning the U.S. and China. Together they have helped identify energy savings worth more than $1.6 billion, the equivalent of 2.3 million metric tons in carbon emissions.
The EDF Fellows will begin work in June 2020. To accommodate COVID-19 restrictions, the Fellows will work remotely. Sustainable Jersey provides guidance to the EDF Fellows to help them advise participating schools and municipalities about resources specific to New Jersey, as well as initiatives that earn points toward the Sustainable Jersey certification program. In particular, the EDF Fellows help the towns and school districts access the many incentives available through New Jersey’s Clean Energy Program and the New Jersey Natural Gas SAVEGREEN Project. In recent years the EDF Fellows have helped the host towns and school districts reduce their own energy usage and also promote the energy efficiency projects within their communities, including the SAVEGREEN Project’s zero-percent on-bill repayment programs that make energy efficiency more accessible for customers.
“Now more than ever, we need our municipal and school district leaders to emphasize and more importantly to showcase how solving climate change also builds a healthier, stronger economy and a more resilient future for all,” said Sustainable Jersey Executive Director Randall Solomon. “Over the course of the summer, EDF Fellows will get energy efficiency projects on the fast track to accomplishment – simultaneously lowering energy costs and environmental impact.”
Learn more about what the EDF Climate Corps Fellows have accomplished in previous years for New Jersey schools and municipalities: NJ EDF Climate Corps Project Reports. The municipalities and school districts that will be paired with an EDF Fellow funded by New Jersey Natural Gas are:
