Get the Latest Investment Ideas Delivered Straight to Your Inbox.
McAlinden Research Partners reports that hedge funds that had been shorting natural gas have suddenly developed a strong appetite for natural gas stocks and bonds on the expectation that U.S. oil wells that generate gas as a by-product will close fast enough to make up for the collapse in global natural gas demand.
2019 was such a rough year for natural gas that by the time February 2020 rolled by, hedge funds had built up the largest net short position on record for the sector. Those investors have suddenly developed a strong appetite for natural gas stocks and bonds on the expectation that U.S. oil wells that generate gas as a by-product will close fast enough to make up for the collapse in global natural gas demand. Some Appalachian gas producers are especially well-positioned to benefit from such a prospect.
Global consumption of natural gas is on track to drop by 5% in 2020 , according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). While that number sounds harmless, it represents a huge shock to the gas industry which has enjoyed ten years of uninterrupted demand growth, until the COVID-19 lockdowns brought that streak to an end.
Early evidence of the impact has already cropped up in the first quarter data, even though the lockdowns in Europe and the United States were still relatively new. While global demand fell more than 3% in 1Q 2020, demand in the United States dropped 4.5% from a year earlier, dragged down by an 18% decline in residential and commercial demand. For context, the last time U.S. gas demand contracted to this extent was during the Great Depression, when domestic demand tumbled by 13% in 1931 and by 7% in 1932.
Although demand has experienced a historic plunge, supply has not been adjusted downward to match that plunge. In fact, the demand/supply imbalance that weighed on natural gas prices last year has only worsened. Natural gas inventories in the United States stood at 2.210 trillion cubic feet on April 24 —up 783 billion cubic feet from a year ago and 360 billion cubic feet above the five-year average, according to the EIA. In other words, U.S. gas stockpiles are 55% higher than a year ago and 20% higher than the five-year average.
The biggest challenge to adapting output lies in the fact that turning the taps off at typical gas fields isn't easy. Moreover, those that can be stopped take time and money to restart, says the CFO of InfraStrata Plc, a U.K. firm focused on the development and commercialization of advanced energy infrastructure.
Back in April, MRP wrote about the sudden wave of oil storage demand that's been boosting the oil tanker market . It so happens that gas storage sites are also filling up quickly due to growing stockpiles of the commodity. Unless a major change occurs in the near-term, Europe could run out of storage space for its natural gas by July, or even earlier in some markets, according to industry players.
Some investors are already betting that the near-term change will be supply-driven, and that it will originate from the same place that, years ago, seeded the conditions that would eventually grow into today's natural gas glut. When oil prices plunged into negative territory last month, the US energy industry received a wakeup call. Better to start shutting off money-losing wells, they realized, than to have to pay traders to get rid of the oil.
More than 12% of U.S. gas output is “associated gas”, extracted as a byproduct of oil drilling. Less oil drilling means less associated gas, which effectively equates to a supply cut. The notion that there may be less shale gas coming from U.S. oil wells this year has prompted the fast money set to reverse their bearish bets on the commodity and its producers. In mid-February, hedge funds and other speculators were piled into the largest net short position on record for natural gas. Now, those same investors are net long for the first time since May 2019 .
Such a dramatic shift in sentiment has helped pushed the price of U.S. natural gas 26% higher in one month—from $1.55 per million British thermal units (MMBtu) on April 2nd to $1.96/MMBtu on May 4. Despite those gains, the commodity's price is still 10% lower than at the start of the year when it was trading at $2.17/MMBtu.
The question some investors are asking is whether these ultra-low prices will compel enough utilities to switch out of alternate power sources into natural gas, triggering a demand-driven price surge in the process. The IEA's forecasts for 2020 also shed some light on this matter.
As mentioned earlier in this report, the Paris-based agency which advises nations on energy policy estimates that global natural gas consumption will fall by 5% this year. Should the world economy recover faster than anticipated from the COVID-19 disruptions, the overall demand loss could narrow to about 2.7%, which would still mark the first annual drop in natural gas consumption since 2009. Much of the decline is expected to come from power generation.
The IEA has also projected that all sources of energy—i.e., oil, coal, natural gas, and nuclear—will see a decline in demand this year, with the exception of renewable energy . That's because renewables in many countries get first priority to feed electricity into the grid, enabling them to maintain or increase market share when there's a huge plunge in overall energy demand.
The energy source most at risk of losing market share to natural gas is coal, which is heading for its biggest fall in annual demand (-8.0%) since World War II. The fact that coal's share in the electricity mix has fallen in India, China, Europe, and parts of the U.S.—four regions with large and varied electricity markets — implies there is more pain ahead for this commodity. Based on the IEA's figures, any market share losses to natural gas are not enough to push the latter's overall growth into positive territory this year. This means, there likely won't be a demand-driven surge in the price of natural gas, unless the recovery from coronavirus delivers an upside surprise.
Investors can gain exposure to movements in the price of natural gas via the United States Natural Gas Fund, LP (UNG), which holds near-month contracts in natural gas futures. Those looking for exposure to natural gas equities can use the First Trust Natural Gas ETF (FCG) as an investment vehicle. FCG tracks an equal-weighted index of US companies that derive a substantial portion of their revenue from the exploration & production of natural gas.
Given that the world is awash in natural gas, it could take a while for the market to rebalance itself, which means there is limited upside for the UNG in the near-term. Any positive headlines, however, would have a bigger impact on FCG. That's because natural gas producers have struggled with declining gas prices for 10 years, during which time their stocks have gotten hammered, losing 92% of their value.
The closure of oil wells in the Permian and North Dakota regions could be especially beneficial to gas-focused companies operating in the Appalachians, since they will be able to capture a greater share of the market by default. Some of these companies—including EQT Corp (EQT), Range Resources Corp. (RRC), and CNX Resources Corp. (CNX)—saw their share prices more than double during the month of April. Those gains helped the FCG deliver a return of +51% last month. There is room for the Appalachian gas stocks to climb higher, since they are rising from a very low base.
This content was delivered to McAlinden Research Partners clients on May 4.
To receive all of MRP's insights in your inbox Monday - Friday, follow this link for a free 30-day trial.
McAlinden Research Partners (MRP) provides independent investment strategy research to investors worldwide. The firm's mission is to identify alpha-generating investment themes early in their unfolding and bring them to its clients' attention. MRP's research process reflects founder Joe McAlinden's 50 years of experience on Wall Street. The methodologies he developed as chief investment officer of Morgan Stanley Investment Management, where he oversaw more than $400 billion in assets, provide the foundation for the strategy research MRP now brings to hedge funds, pension funds, sovereign wealth funds and other asset managers around the globe.
Want to be the first to know about interesting Oil & Gas - Exploration & Production investment ideas?  Sign up to receive the FREE Streetwise Reports' newsletter.
1) McAlinden Research Partners disclosures are below.
2) The following companies mentioned in this article are billboard sponsors of Streetwise Reports: None. Click here for important disclosures about sponsor fees. The information provided above is for informational purposes only and is not a recommendation to buy or sell any security.
3) Statements and opinions expressed are the opinions of the author and not of Streetwise Reports or its officers. The author is wholly responsible for the validity of the statements. The author was not paid by Streetwise Reports for this article. Streetwise Reports was not paid by the author to publish or syndicate this article. Streetwise Reports requires contributing authors to disclose any shareholdings in, or economic relationships with, companies that they write about. Streetwise Reports relies upon the authors to accurately provide this information and Streetwise Reports has no means of verifying its accuracy.
4) This article does not constitute investment advice. Each reader is encouraged to consult with his or her individual financial professional and any action a reader takes as a result of information presented here is his or her own responsibility. By opening this page, each reader accepts and agrees to Streetwise Reports' terms of use and full legal disclaimer . This article is not a solicitation for investment. Streetwise Reports does not render general or specific investment advice and the information on Streetwise Reports should not be considered a recommendation to buy or sell any security. Streetwise Reports does not endorse or recommend the business, products, services or securities of any company mentioned on Streetwise Reports.
5) From time to time, Streetwise Reports and its directors, officers, employees or members of their families, as well as persons interviewed for articles and interviews on the site, may have a long or short position in securities mentioned. Directors, officers, employees or members of their immediate families are prohibited from making purchases and/or sales of those securities in the open market or otherwise from the time of the interview or the decision to write an article until three business days after the publication of the interview or article. The foregoing prohibition does not apply to articles that in substance only restate previously published company releases.
This report has been prepared solely for informational purposes and is not an offer to buy/sell/endorse or a solicitation of an offer to buy/sell/endorse Interests or any other security or instrument or to participate in any trading or investment strategy. No representation or warranty (express or implied) is made or can be given with respect to the sequence, accuracy, completeness, or timeliness of the information in this Report. Unless otherwise noted, all information is sourced from public data.
McAlinden Research Partners is a division of Catalpa Capital Advisors, LLC (CCA), a Registered Investment Advisor. References to specific securities, asset classes and financial markets discussed herein are for illustrative purposes only and should not be interpreted as recommendations to purchase or sell such securities. CCA, MRP, employees and direct affiliates of the firm may or may not own any of the securities mentioned in the report at the time of publication.
Devon Energy's first quarter operational and financial numbers are reviewed and a 2020 cash flow forecast are provided in a Raymond James report.
Energy Firm Posts Solid Q2, Positions Itself for Price Uncertainty
Brien Lundin: To Insure Yourself Against Financial Upheaval, Buy Gold and Silver Now
Brien Lundin, sector expert and publisher of the Gold Newsletter, offers his perspective on the monetary ramifications of the COVID-19 pandemic in this conversation with Maurice Jackson of Proven and Probable.
Shares of ION Geophysical traded higher after the company reported Q1/20 financial results that included a 53% y-o-y increase in revenue.
Texas Oil & Gas Firm Achieves EBITDA, EPS Beats in Q1/20
A recap of Parsley Energy's Q1/20 performance and projections for this year and next are given in a Raymond James report.
Though sector expert Michael Ballanger's focus is on the precious metals, given current market conditions he sees potential in oil as well.
The new agreement and its potential impact on Point Loma Resources are discussed in a Mackie Research Capital Corp. report.
