Without cold weather to support prices, the market is likely to continue lower over the short-term with the psychological $2.250 level the next major downside target.
Natural gas prices plunged on Friday as the latest forecast showed no sign of a lingering cold pressure dome needed to drive up demand for heating fuel.
The outlook for the second week of December turned warmer overnight, with temperatures now expected to be above normal across most of the contiguous U.S., according to forecaster Commodity Weather Group LLC.
“The trends into mid-month should keep getting warmer” without evidence of a stronger high-pressure area that would allow frigid conditions to settle over the Lower 48, CWG said.
On Friday, January natural gas settled at $2.281, down $0.220 or -8.80%.
Prices were down more than 16% in November, and the drop on Friday was the worst one-day slide since January.
The main trend is down according to the daily swing chart. The downtrend was reaffirmed when sellers took out the August 5 bottom at $2.475. The main trend will change to up on a move through $2.743.
Gann angle resistance comes in at $2.423. This angle is moving down $0.08 per day from the $2.743 main top. The next downtrending Gann angle resistance comes in at $2.583.
Without cold weather to support prices, the market is likely to continue lower over the short-term with the psychological $2.250 level the next major downside target.
As long as the weather continues to cooperate with the bearish traders, look for sellers to step in on any rally.
Bearish players are currently holding massive short positions so the market remains vulnerable to a squeeze, similar to the one we saw in September. However, as long as the weather continues to favor more-than-seasonal temperatures, it’s going to be difficult to find any major buyer who will be willing to step in front of the current downside pressure.
Without a shift in the weather pattern, if there is a rally, it will likely be fueled by profit-taking. Additionally, some of the short hedge funds may be a little uncomfortable selling new lows. They will allow the market to rally just so they can re-short at better prices.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
