Natural-gas futures dropped by about 5% Monday to their lowest settlement in almost four years as a milder-than-usual winter continued to limit demand for the heating fuel.
Natural-gas prices took “heavy losses to start the week…as mild weather outlooks continue to pressure prices lower,” said Christin Redmond, commodity analyst at Schneider Electric. The analyst said the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecasts a high probability of warmer-than-normal temperatures across the Eastern and Midwest U.S. over the coming eight to 14-day period.
“With the little remainder of winter waning away, the possibility of a late-season return to colder temperatures to prop up heating demand becomes bleak,” she wrote in a daily note. The winter season official ends on March 19, which marks the start of spring.
On Monday , the front-month March natural-gas futures contract US:NGH20 lost 9.2 cents, or about 5%, to settle at $1.766 per million British thermal units. Prices, which have dropped 19% in the year to date, settled at their lowest since March 9, 2016, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
U.S. production has also contributed to the loss in prices for the fuel. “Production has been slowly rising though not at quite the rate we saw in 2019,” said Marshall Steeves, energy markets analyst at IHS Markit. “Interestingly, production has risen not just from shale (primarily the Permian) but also from offshore in the Gulf of Mexico.”
In a monthly report issued in mid-January , the Energy Information Administration estimated that U.S. dry natural gas production will average 94.7 billion cubic feet per day this year, up 2.9% from 2019. The government agency, meanwhile, said it expects combined residential and commercial consumption for natural gas to average 23.2 billion cubic feet this year, down 1% from last year, citing a lower forecast for space heating demand. Dry natural gas typically contains at least 85% methane and is used in heating and cooling systems as well as for power generation.
The EIA will issue its latest monthly energy figures in a report due Tuesday.
A separate report from the EIA released Thursday revealed that domestic natural-gas supplies fell by 137 billion cubic feet for the week ended Jan. 31. That was less than the 228 bcf decline for the same week a year ago and below the five-year average reduction of 143 bcf, according to S&P Global Platts.
“It’s really a combination of a very mild winter dampening demand with rising supplies,” Steeves told MarketWatch.
