Shares In Chesapeake Energy Set For Delisting, As Historic Bankruptcy Is Finally Official
Given our supposed desire to reign in our emissions and cut our fossil fuel use, this is definitely going in the wrong direction to any green energy future , even if renewables expand significantly.
Renewables have yet to break the 10% mark, but a new report from Morningstar suggests that renewables have the policy momentum to expand to well over 20% by 2030 to become the nation’s second most abundant source of electricity (see figure below).
Natural Gas and Renewable Energy Top Morningstar’s 2030 Power Generation Forecast. Natural gas ... [+] increases because of its price and versatility, while renewable energy is added to achieve state renewable portfolio standards. In graphs, A is actual and E is estimated.
According to Morningstar, the ramp down in solar and wind tax credits during the next few years won’t slow growth as much as other forecasts predict. Utilities that meet state renewable energy portfolio standards will fill most of the growth gap from the elimination of, or reduction, in tax credits. But there has been growth in states that have already surpassed their RPS such as Texas and Iowa, and growth in states that don’t have an RPS, like Florida.
Coal will continue to decline as gas takes over its market share and environmental concerns prevent any new builds. Nuclear will decline slightly based on planned plant retirements partially offset by two new reactors coming online in the next two years, and particularly by small modular reactors, which should take off after 2025.
We have a plan to double hydro in America without building a single new dam. But will we?
The key thing about renewables and gas amounting to over 60% of the mix in only 10 years is that renewables need natural gas for backup , or load-following, or we start having rolling blackouts when the wind stops blowing. It’s why the gas industry has been the major supporter of wind energy.
Hydro and small modular nuclear reactors are also excellent for load-following renewables , but only the Pacific Northwest has sufficient hydro for that on a large-scale, and SMRs will take decades to deploy in sufficient numbers to take over from natural gas.
According to the Morningstar report, integrated utilities with supportive regulatory frameworks should benefit as they retire coal plants and replace them with natural gas, renewables and transmission infrastructure. This can be seen in the largest U.S. utilities. Dominion Energy, Duke, NextEra Energy, Southern Company and Xcel Energy are investing billions of dollars along these lines.
Just look at how Xcel Energy’s generation mix has changed since 2005 and is projected to change by 2030: wind is going from 9% to 60% of its mix (see figure below). The other utilities are changing in some form along these lines as well, depending on their specific mixes, but renewables and gas are the only two sources expected to increase significantly.
Renewables are expected to provide 60% of Xcel’s generation by 2030.
Whether it’s an aircraft carrier, a utility company or the United States, these are big ships to turn. While you can make big changes, they entail lots of effort, money and potential trouble, and you can’t make them often. Choosing the course of renewables and gas, locks us into gas in a big way for decades, twice as long as it locks renewables, because of the difference in unit lifespans.
At this rate, gas will exceed 50% of the power mix by 2050, which may be a double-edged sword. On the plus side:
- it is a lot cleaner than coal in those nasty metal, particulate, sulfur, toxic waste, non-CO2 ways
- outages are rare and most gas systems work when the electricity is out, although polar vortices give gas a headache
- the gas industry supports almost 3 million jobs in the U.S.
- we have lots and lots of domestic natural gas , more than anyone in the world, and enough for several hundred years.
- it requires an extensive network of pipelines, which no one wants in their backyard
Overall, the pluses outweigh the minuses for most of society, which is why gas is growing so rapidly and is now America’s power of choice. Wind will come along for a symbiotic ride, and together will rule America’s generation sector.
