Natural gas threatens our health. Let’s ditch it. | Opinion
If you could choose between two sources of energy, both capable of heating and cooling your home, cooking your food and running your car but one causes health problems and the other doesn’t, wouldn’t you pick the safer one? As a physician, I know I would.
That’s why it’s wise for New Jersey to follow its new Energy Master Plan by switching to clean, healthy, renewable energy sources like wind and solar and phasing out dirty fossil fuels like natural gas.
Fossil fuels (coal, gasoline, oil, natural gas) produce pollution that threatens individuals’ health and causes such conditions as asthma, strokes and heart attacks. Wind and solar do not. Put simply, burning fossil fuels, including natural gas, unavoidably gives off substances that, when you breathe them (which you can’t help but do) are bad for you.
Companies that produce or sell natural gas claim their product is clean. What they really mean is that it’s cleaner than coal. They can say that with a straight face because coal is so dirty and dangerous to health that it makes natural gas seem much less of a risk than it really is. It also bears mentioning that only about 2% of New Jersey’s energy today comes from coal. So the choice we face isn’t between dirty coal and somewhat less dirty natural gas. It’s between dirty natural gas and clean wind and solar.
Natural gas is simply not clean enough when it comes to reducing greenhouse gas emissions that cause climate change. It produces significant amounts of CO2 when burned for electric generation or heating our homes, and methane leakage throughout the gas extraction and delivery system exacerbates the climate impact of gas.
Natural gas also threatens our health and safety and endangers our air, land and water according to several physicians published in the New England Journal of Medicine:
Fracking – today the most common process for extracting the gas -- contaminates ground and surface water, causes air pollution and noise and light pollution, releases radiation and has even been found to cause earthquakes.
Transmission – usually by pipelines -- damages our land and water through pipeline construction and results in deadly fires and explosions. Every year there is at least one pipeline explosion in the U.S., like what happened in the Merrimack Valley of Massachusetts two years ago that damaged more than 130 homes, forced 30,000 people to evacuate, injured 25 and killed one.
Gas combustion in stoves, boilers and furnaces gives off oxides of nitrogen that increase the risk of asthma and exacerbate cardiovascular disease.
Led by Gov. Phil Murphy, New Jersey has made huge strides to address climate threats and pollution over the past few years, including adopting a cutting-edge the state’s energy plan to achieve 100% clean energy by 2050. The Energy Master Plan and ongoing policy initiatives will decarbonize the electric sector, electrify buildings and transportation (including rebates for buying electric vehicles and plans to convert NJ Transit’s bus fleet to electric) dramatically reducing our reliance on polluting fossil fuels and making this a safer, healthier state.
The ravages we face from the COVID-19 pandemic put the need for good health and clean energy into even sharper focus. We are seeing up close how climate change can make health crises more likely and more dangerous. Extreme heat, air pollution, vector-borne diseases and reduced availability of safe water and food are threats from climate change. These health impacts disproportionately harm at-risk groups including people with disabilities, communities of color and those struggling to make ends meet.
Among those most at risk for coronavirus are people with pre-existing medical conditions, including asthma and other lung diseases. In New Jersey, this places nearly 9% of adults and children in our state at an enhanced chance of getting the virus. While the connection between air pollution and lung diseases has long been known, a recent analysis of more than 3,000 US counties by researchers at Harvard’s T.H. Chan School of Public Health found that high levels of air pollution are associated with higher death rates from the coronavirus.
Mobile sources are the largest causes of air pollution in New Jersey. The pandemic is reducing the use of cars, trucks, buses, off-road construction vehicles, locomotives, boats and aircraft. And – to no one’s surprise – the air quality, has improved from decreases in both particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide levels. Imagine if all of those vehicles were in full use, but weren’t polluting the air because they were fueled by electricity. Then, it wouldn’t take a deadly virus to make our air safer to breathe.
We now have the wherewithal to create vehicles that don’t run on fossil fuels and to produce electricity from clean and renewable energy sources without producing emissions that harm our climate and health. I can’t think of better reasons to move as quickly as possible toward a clean energy future.
Dr. Rosina Dixon is a retired senior director of global pharmacovigilance and epidemiology at Sanofi. She is president of the New Jersey Conservation Foundation’s board of trustees.
Our journalism needs your support. Please subscribe today to NJ.com .
The Star-Ledger/NJ.com encourages submissions of opinion . Bookmark NJ.com/Opinion . Follow us on Twitter @NJ_Opinion and on Facebook at NJ.com Opinion . Get the latest news updates right in your inbox. Subscribe to NJ.com’s newsletters .
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
