WALL, N.J.--( BUSINESS WIRE )--New Jersey Natural Gas (NJNG) today announced it has partnered with Google Nest and Energy Federation Inc. (EFI) to provide the Google Nest Thermostat E at no cost to NJNG’s nearly half a million residential customers*, helping households save energy and money.
This offer reinforces NJNG’s commitment to sustainability and delivering energy-efficiency solutions to help customers make energy decisions that save energy, lower energy bills and reduce carbon emissions.
“With customers spending more time at home in response to COVID-19, and warmer weather on the way, energy use and bills will be on the rise,” said Steve Westhoven, president and CEO of New Jersey Resources, parent company of NJNG. “We’re here to help our customers by empowering them with the technology and tips they need to save energy and money, and help protect the environment.”
Nest Thermostat E users save an average of up to 15% on cooling costs and up to 12% on heating costs**, according to Google. Based on typical energy usage, this translates to an estimated average savings of $131 - $145 each year. The free Nest Thermostat E offer complements NJNG’s overarching efforts to provide customers with access to programs to help manage their energy bills.
The Nest Thermostat E automatically programs itself and creates a schedule based on the user’s habits and preferences.
With voice activation capabilities, it is easier than ever to save energy and stay comfortable.
The Nest Leaf icon appears on the thermostat device, or app, to indicate when energy-saving temperatures are selected.
The limited-time offer is valid June 8 through July 20, 2020 for NJNG customers only on the NJNG Marketplace. Customers can visit njng.com/marketplace for this free offer and discounts on other energy-efficiency products. The NJNG Marketplace was launched in 2019 in conjunction with EFI, which provides the e-commerce technology for the NJNG Marketplace and fulfillment services to NJNG clients.
NJNG’s The SAVEGREEN Project® offers rebates and incentives, including 0% APR financing, to help make it affordable to replace HVAC and water heating equipment – with the potential of no upfront costs.*** Plus, enhanced rebates and financing terms are available for eligible moderate-income customers. Visit savegreenproject.com to learn more.
NJNG reminds its customers energy assistance programs are available. If you or someone you know needs assistance paying their NJNG bill, call 800-221-0051 and say "energy assistance" at the prompt to speak with an NJNG customer service representative or email us at energyassist@njng.com .
Google Nest and Google Nest Thermostat E are trademarks of Google LLC.
* Smart thermostats must be purchased through the NJNG Marketplace and are only available to NJNG customers. NJNG instant rebate limited to the purchase of two thermostats only over the lifetime of the NJNG Marketplace. Smart thermostats are not compatible with all heating systems. Price reflects NJNG and manufacturer rebates. Customers are responsible for all applicable sales tax. Terms and conditions apply.
** Independent studies showed that Google Nest saved an average of 10% to 12% on heating and 15% on cooling. Based on typical energy costs, that’s an estimated average savings of $131 to $145 a year. Individual savings not guaranteed.
*** Visit savegreenproject.com for terms and conditions.
NJR is a Fortune 1000 company that, through its subsidiaries, provides safe and reliable natural gas and clean energy services, including transportation, distribution, asset management and home services. It is composed of five primary businesses:
New Jersey Natural Gas, NJR’s principal subsidiary, operates and maintains over 7,500 miles of natural gas transportation and distribution infrastructure to serve over half a million customers in New Jersey’s Monmouth, Ocean, Morris, Middlesex and Burlington counties.
NJR Clean Energy Ventures invests in, owns and operates solar projects with a total capacity of over 315 megawatts, providing residential and commercial customers with low-carbon solutions.
NJR Energy Services manages a diversified portfolio of natural gas transportation and storage assets and provides physical natural gas services and customized energy solutions to its customers across North America.
NJR Midstream serves customers - from local distributors and producers to electric generators and wholesale marketers through its ownership of Leaf River Energy Center and the Adelphia Gateway Pipeline Project, as well as a 50 percent equity ownership in Steckman Ridge natural gas storage facilities, and a 20 percent equity interest in the planned PennEast Pipeline Project.
NJR Home Services provides service contracts as well as heating, central air conditioning, water heaters, standby generators, solar and other indoor and outdoor comfort products to residential homes throughout New Jersey.
NJR and its more than 1,100 employees are committed to helping customers save energy and money by promoting conservation and encouraging efficiency through Conserve to Preserve® and initiatives such as The SAVEGREEN Project® and The Sunlight Advantage®. For more information about NJR: www.njresources.com .
Download our free NJR investor relations app for iPad, iPhone and Android.
