Recently, our colleague on the Climate Action Council, Gavin Donohue, wrote that continued use of natural gas can help New York reach our climate goals. We respectfully disagree.
The Climate Leadership & Community Protection Act became law on Jan.1, setting up the Climate Action Council on which we serve and establishing some important milestones: by 2030, at least 70 percent of electricity in the state must come from renewable sources and greenhouse gas emissions from all sectors (transportation, buildings, and industry, in addition to electricity) must be reduced by 40 percent.
2040, none of the electricity produced in New York can come from fossil fuels. In light of these goals, it makes no sense to build any new natural gas infrastructure, and certainly not large and expensive natural-gas electric plants. Those days ended when our bold climate bill was signed by the Governor last summer.
Any new gas infrastructure will either make it more difficult to meet the CLCPA goals, or will become stranded assets, a waste of capital that should instead be invested in wind and solar power, in storage technology, in an improved electric grid and in electrifying transportation and building heating systems with 21st century technologies.
Donohue wrote of perhaps using “renewable natural gas” to fuel the huge new electric plants in the future. We do not believe that there will be enough economically competetive biomass feedstock in New York to produce the volume of renewable methane that would be needed by these plants.
While the primary focus of the CLCPA is about mitigating climate change, rather than addressing electric power reliability, natural gas is not needed to bridge the intermittency of wind and solar power.
Operators of electric grid systems in many regions in northern Europe are demonstrating that a grid can be reliably run totally on renewable energy sources. Some energy storage is necessary for this.
Better matching of electricity supply and demand through demand management and a smart grid is also essential. Investing in these technologies is investing in a healthy economic and planetary future.
Natural gas is not, in our view, a constructive solution to achieving a carbon-free future for New York.
Bob Howarth, and Peter Iwanowicz are members of the NY Climate Action Council.
