, reclosing or delaying re-opening businesses.
Texas Gov. Greg Abbott said Thursday he is pausing the reopening of the state as it responds to a spike in cases of COVID-19 and hospitalizations.
Delaying re-openings is “not attractive for oil traders who have been counting on improving demand,” Flynn wrote in a Thursday morning report.
Commodity experts also said that a grim outlook for the global economy from the International Monetary Fund published Wednesday weighed on oil sentiment. The IMF sees a global economic contraction of 4.9%, almost 2 percentage points lower than three months ago. “We are definitely not out of the woods. We have not escaped the great lockdown,” said Gita Gopinath, the IMF’s chief economist, at a press briefing.
However, weak oil demand is not expected to be the main factor impacting oil prices this year, according to he Economist Intelligence Unit. Earlier price declines were largely driven by concerns that “rising U.S. stockpiles pointed to slowing GDP growth and a potential [domestic] supply glut,” Cailin Birch, global economist at EIU, told MarketWatch.
On Wednesday, the Energy Information Administration’s report showed that U.S. crude inventories rose for a third week in a row, by 1.4 million barrels for the week ended June 19. It also revealed that total domestic oil production climbed by 500,000 barrels a day to 11 million barrels a day.
On the production side, global “output remains fairly restrained,” and Saudi Arabia and other members of Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries will “largely stick to their production cut agreement in 2020, in the interest of avoiding another price crash,” said Birch.
She also pointed out that U.S. crude production has fallen by nearly 20% between the start of March and the start of June, “wiping out nearly two years of production gains.”
Birch expects the current “push-and-pull” factors in the oil market ton continue to offset each other in the coming months, keeping Brent prices roughly within a range of $35 to $45 in the second half of this year.
Natural-gas futures settled sharply lower after the EIA reported Thursday that domestic supplies of the commodity rose by 120 billion cubic feet for the week ended June 19. That was more than the average increase of 107 billion forecast by analysts polled by S&P Global Platts.
July natural gas US:NGN20 fell 7.2% to $1.482 per million British thermal units. The July contract expires at the end of Friday’s trading session.
Rounding out action on Nymex, July gasoline US:RBN20 lost 0.2% to $1.1942 a gallon, but July heating oil US:HON20 rose 0.4% to $1.1556 a gallon.
The Dow finished lower Wednesday, but the tech-heavy Nasdaq was vaulted to a fresh record close, giving the year’s second half a mixed start as investors focused on signs of economic recovery from the coronavirus crisis and a new Fed promise for clarity on the path of rates.
