This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Oil’s Collapse Has a Far-Reaching Ripple Effect. U.S. Chemical Producers’ Stocks Could Suffer.
The Covid-19 outbreak continues to upend the global economy in unexpected ways . Oil prices are plummeting, causing a ripple effect across industries. And the U.S. chemical sector is one area that could seriously suffer.
Benchmark U.S. crude oil prices, for instance, went negative Monday. People paid others to take oil futures contracts for May delivery off their hands. It’s an unprecedented situation .
The steep drop in oil—relative to natural gas prices —threatens U.S. chemical producers’ profitability and, at the same, gives many of their foreign competitors a competitive advantage. It isn’t a great combination.
That means investors should pay attention to the difference, or spread, between oil and gas prices, or they risk some nasty surprises when U.S. chemical companies update their 2020 outlooks.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
The U.S., for years, has had ample natural gas supplies, which means, in part, that natural gas in America is cheap relative to oil. Petrochemicals, such as polyethylene, can be made out of oil-based derivative products or natural gas. The low price of natural gas has long given U.S.-based chemical plants an advantage over their European and Asian counterparts that use mainly oil-based derivative products for raw materials—but the advantage is shifting.
Natural gas prices are down too, sliding 27% year over year. But those declines don’t come close to the 85% dive in oil prices.
As oil prices fall faster than gas, U.S. chemical assets are in a slightly weaker competitive position compared with foreign competitors. What’s more, petrochemical product prices adjust rapidly and product prices react more to the drop in oil than the drop in natural gas. That’s another blow to U.S. natural-gas-based chemical producers.
“The headline of negative May WTI oil futures is more dramatic than will be the reality for the U.S. Gulf Coast petrochemical producers as little business is done on that basis,” Fermium Research analyst Frank Mitsch tells Barron’s. “However, we’re more concerned with Brent oil falling hard ,” he says, explaining that the drop improves the cost position of European and Asian producers that rely on crude oil.
Brent crude is the international oil price benchmark. WTI, short for West Texas Intermediate, is the U.S. contract. Brent crude prices are down 70% year to date.
Feedstock, or raw material, costs are a problem, but so is falling demand and the subsequent decline in petrochemical prices. “The longer [industrial plant] shutdowns go on, the weaker [chemical] demand will be,” adds Mitsch. He’s not sure when things will get better and offers, reflectively, “no one knows anything.”
Chemical components of the S&P 500 are down about 24% year to date, worse than declines of the broader Index and Dow Jones Industrial Average over the same span.
That drop belies the situation for petrochemical producers. The chemical components of the S&P also include some companies not tied to oil prices, such as fertilizer producer Mosaic (ticker: MOS). And there are companies that benefit from lower oil prices. Sherwin-Williams (SHW) and PPG Industries (PPG) make products—such as paint—from oil-based products. Both are happy to pay lower prices for oil-derived products.
But petrochemical producers, including Dow (DOW) and LyondellBasell (LYB), have profitability tied to both the absolute level of product prices, as well as the relative price levels of oil and natural gas. Petrochemical stocks in the Russell 3000 are down more than 40% year to date and trade for less than 11 times estimated 2020 earnings on average. They have been hammered by the Covid-19 economic fallout.
Whether or not that is an opportunity depends on the future direction of oil and natural gas prices. Things will return to normal—but like Mitsch says, exactly when normalcy returns is anyone’s guess.
The analyst rates both Dow and Lyondell shares the equivalent of Buy. He, of course, is a chemical analyst, so he ranks shares against other stocks in his coverage universe. Both Dow and Lyondell yield more than 9%. It’s a very high payout if the companies can maintain their dividends . The dividend yield of the Dow Jones Industrial Average, for comparison, is about 2.8%.
Mitsch has another investing idea, but it might be difficult to execute. “I wish I had an Olympic-size swimming pool to fill [with oil] and wait.” That’s one way to arbitrage negative oil prices. Unfortunately, environmental regulators—and Mitsch’s neighbors—probably wouldn’t approve of the strategy.
Oil’s Collapse Has a Far-Reaching Ripple Effect. U.S. Chemical Producers’ Stocks Could Suffer.
The Covid-19 outbreak continues to upend the global economy in unexpected ways.
