ONGC jumps 4% on oil block win; Goldman Sachs sees 36% upside in stock
ONGC gained 4% in Friday's session after it won exploration rights for seven oil blocks.
At 10.27, ONGC was trading up 2.34 per cent at Rs 131 on the BSE. It touched an intraday high of Rs 133.4.
Shares of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation ( ONGC NSE 1.22 % ) gained 4 per cent in Friday's session after it won exploration rights for seven oil blocks.
The upstream oil major on Thursday walked away with all the seven oil and gas blocks on offer in the latest bid round that saw just eight bids coming in.
"These 7 blocks are adding exploration acreage of 18,510 square kilometres spread over three sedimentary basins of India and have a resource potential of approximately 33 billion barrels of oil and oil equivalent gas," Oil Minister Dharmendra Pradhan said.
ONGC put in bids for all the seven blocks on offer, while OIL put in an offer for one block at the close of bidding on October 31, 2019.
ONGC was the sole bidder in five blocks in Madhya Pradesh and one in West Bengal and it was locked in competition with OIL in one block in Rajasthan.
Meanwhile, global brokerage firm Goldman Sachs upgraded ONGC and Oil India to ‘Buy’. It has a target of Rs 175 for ONGC and Rs 205 for Oil India. This translates into a potential upside of 36 per cent for ONGC and 34 per cent for Oil India.
Goldman Sachs said it has turned more positive on the Indian upstream as free cash flow generation and dividend yield remain strong.
ONGC closed 0.39 per cent higher at 128.50 on the BSE. It touched an intraday high of Rs 133.40.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
