Energy has been among the hardest-hit sectors in the latest selloff.
From June 8 through Monday’s close, all of the energy stocks in the S&P 500 were down at least 10%. The overall S&P 500 index was down 5.1% over that period. Among the biggest decliners were National Oilwell Varco (ticker: NOV), down 25% and ONEOK (OKE), down 24%. ExxonMobil (XOM) is down 14%.
And of the 80 energy stocks in the S&P 1500, only one traded positive from June 8 through Monday’s close. That lone holdout is Antero Midstream (AM), a Denver company that owns pipelines and processing plants. Antero was formed to own, operate and develop midstream energy assets to service the activities of Antero Resources (AR), a natural gas producer that is also a public company. Natural gas stocks have been holding up slightly better than oil stocks in the past week, though both commodities have been struggling in recent days. Natural gas futures fell 3.3% on Tuesday to $1.61 per million British thermal units.
Antero Resources got some good news this week when the company announced a royalty sale that will allow it to pay down debt. The company has a significant amount of debt maturing in the next two years. Its recent actions have reduced that burden, however. At the end of 2019, the company had just under $1.9 billion in debt coming due by the end of 2022. Now, they’ve reduced that to $1.3 billion. Morgan Stanley analyst Mark Carlucci wrote that the royalty sale was “a positive step towards derisking the liquidity outlook.” He still rates shares at Underweight because of the company’s longer-term risk.
Antero Midstream’s prospects are tied to the health of Antero Resources, and its stock rallied on Monday to close above $6 for the first time since January. The company’s dividend yield is at 21%, implying skepticism among investors that it can continue to keep its payout at this level. On Tuesday, shares were down 3.8% amid the decline in natural gas futures.
Energy has been among the hardest-hit sectors in the latest selloff.
