Shares In Chesapeake Energy Set For Delisting, As Historic Bankruptcy Is Finally Official
A second case being considered by SCOTUS is PennEast Pipeline Co. versus New Jersey. In that case, a U.S. federal appeals court prohibited the developer from seizing property partly owned or controlled by New Jersey to build a $1 billion pipeline. Under the Natural Gas Act, pipeline companies can sue landowners in either federal or state court under the laws of “eminent domain”
But Justin Hodge, a partner with Marrs Ellis & Hodge LLP in Houston told this writer that this decision would merely limit developers’ ability to sue in federal court when condemning state land.
“Although the Supreme Court recently ruled in favor of the pipeline company in the Appalachian Trail case, there is a chance that the Supreme Court would uphold the 3rd Circuit’s opinion based on state sovereignty under the Eleventh Amendment,” Hodge says. That amendment restricts the ability of companies to file suit in federal court. They can still sue in state courts.
FILE - In this May 3, 2018, file photo, Becky Crabtree displays a flyer that she posted on a fence ... [+] on the route of the proposed Mountain Valley pipeline on their property in Lindside, W.Va. A Virginia-based legal group is asking the U.S. Supreme Court to end what it says has become an abuse of eminent domain by companies that build natural-gas pipelines. (AP Photo/Steve Helber, File)
The third case involves the controversial Keystone XL oil pipeline, which is owned by TC Energy Corp. There, a U.S. district court judge in Montana ruled against the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers when he said that the agency cut corners on the permitting process — one that added risks to endangered species. Last month, the 9th U.S. Circuit of Appeals refused to step in. Now, the Trump administration has asked the U.S. Supreme Court to intervene.
If the case is allowed to stand, it would mean that the pipeline operator has to get individual permits for each body of water that it would cross — as opposed to a single, streamlined permit to allow it to bypass hundreds of streams. Environmentalists applaud the move to stop construction while business groups say that it could prevent the completion of the $8 billion line that starts in Canada and runs through the U.S. Midwest before ending in the Gulf Coast.
“The issue in these cases arise because congress and the courts want the process streamlined,” says Bret Birdsong, a law professor at the University of Nevada Las Vegas, in an interview. “If left to individual discussions, you can’t put a project together because there are too many players.”
“Congressional directives will always take priority over administrative directives,” adds Mike Mills, partner in the law firm of Stoel Rives, in an interview. “But Congress can’t undo what the constitution has mandated. Yes, it is industry versus environment and those who support oil and gas development as opposed to those who do not. But constitutional issues are the driver, not environmental issues.”
Is the nation’s natural gas pipeline network able to meet demand? It consists of 3 million miles that link natural gas production with storage facilities, says the U.S. Energy Information Administration . In 2018, it said that this network delivered 28 trillion cubic feet to 75 million customers. But over the next two decades, gas producers say that as many as 62,000 new miles will be needed to fuel both electric generators and to feed the chemical and manufacturing processes.
And that puts America’s oil and gas producers at odds with the environmental movement that is urging more green energy use to combat climate change. To that end, the Trump administration is more supportive of resource and infrastructure development while a different executive branch may have a more balanced view — one that appreciates natural gas while favoring the green energy transition.
“In broad outlines, the more conservative the justices, the more business-oriented the court will be,” says Noah Sachs, a professor at the University of Richmond law school, in a talk with this reporter. “The more liberal wing is likely to be more environmentally friendly. But it can be scrambled based on the statute at issue. The outcomes do not reflect one’s political considerations.”
America’s legal system is the ultimate arbiter of disputes and especially those centered on economic growth versus the environment. As for pipelines, the nation’s highest court is more focused on the issues-at-hand and not on policy questions set by the legislative branch — something embodied in the cases now before it. If history is a precedent, however, the justices will not view economic development and environmental protection as isolated matters .
Since the late 1990s, I’ve covered energy, beginning with the rise and fall of Enron — first as a magazine writer before becoming a columnist and editor. For more than
Since the late 1990s, I’ve covered energy, beginning with the rise and fall of Enron — first as a magazine writer before becoming a columnist and editor. For more than eight years, I’ve been a columnist for Forbes, focusing on fossil fuels, renewables and nuclear energy while  expanding my coverage to include emerging technologies and environmental causes. I now cover all of those  issues on a global basis, especially for the African and Asian regions. My stories have appeared in, and have been cited by, dozens of publications and broadcasts. My features and my columns have also won several national awards. Twitter: @Ken_Silverstein. Email: ken@silversteineditorial.com
