Home NYSE Stocks Pre-Market Stocks Roundup: Blackstone Group LP (NYSE:BX), Enterprise Products Partners L.P. (NYSE:EPD), Philip Morris International Inc. (NYSE:PM)
Pre-Market Stocks Roundup: Blackstone Group LP (NYSE:BX), Enterprise Products Partners L.P. (NYSE:EPD), Philip Morris International Inc. (NYSE:PM)
July 1, 2020 Travis Garlick NYSE Stocks , Uncategorized Comments Off on Pre-Market Stocks Roundup: Blackstone Group LP (NYSE:BX), Enterprise Products Partners L.P. (NYSE:EPD), Philip Morris International Inc. (NYSE:PM)
On Tuesday, Shares of Blackstone Group LP (NYSE:BX), lost -0.23% to $1.29.
Blackstone, one of the world’s leading investment firms, has been awarded the Investors in People Gold standard, joining the top 7% of accredited organizations across the UK.
As a leading investment firm, Blackstone seeks to create positive economic impact and long-term value for its investors, the companies in which it invests, the companies it advises and the broader global economy. Blackstone achieves this by using extraordinary people and flexible capital to assist companies solve problems. Blackstone’s asset administration businesses, with over $330 billion in assets under administration, comprise investment vehicles focused on private equity, real estate, public debt and equity, non-investment grade credit, real assets and secondary funds, all on a global basis. Recently, Blackstone has over 2,000 employees in 17 offices worldwide.
Investors in People is the UKs leading accreditation for business improvement through people administration, and provides a wealth of resources for businesses to innovate, improve and grow, with a focus on good people making great business.
The Blackstone Group L.P. is a publicly owned investment manager. The firm also provides financial advisory services to its clients. It provides its services to public and corporate pension funds, academic, cultural, and charitable organizations.
Shares of Enterprise Products Partners L.P. (NYSE:EPD), inclined 2.46% to $28.33, during its last trading session.
Enterprise Products Partners, declared it will be conducting a binding open commitment period to gauge shipper support for a projected expansion of the Aegis pipeline. The 270-mile Aegis system is designed to transport purity ethane from Enterprise’s Mont Belvieu, Texas liquids storage complex to petrochemical facilities in Texas and Louisiana.
The initial 60-mile segment from Mont Belvieu to Beaumont, Texas began service in September of 2014, followed by the 48-mile portion from Beaumont to Lake Charles, Louisiana in September of 2015. The remainder of the Aegis pipeline, which will extend to the Mississippi River corridor area, is on plan for completion by the end of 2015.
The incremental capacity being offered reflects the continued strong interest in the Aegis pipeline and marks the second supplemental open season to expand the system. The expanded capabilities of the Aegis system, which are being achieved by the addition of pumps and related infrastructure, is predictable to come online in stages through 2019, depending on the level of customer commitments.
Enterprise Products Partners L.P. provides midstream energy services to producers and consumers of natural gas, natural gas liquids (NGLs), crude oil, petrochemicals, and refined products in the United States and internationally. Its NGL Pipelines & Services segment provides natural gas processing and related NGL marketing services, in addition to import and export terminal services.
Finally, Shares of Philip Morris International Inc. (NYSE:PM), ended its last trade with -0.54% loss, and closed at $88.33.
Philip Morris International, informs its stockholders its Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 has been filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
PMI makes available free of charge on its website at www.pmi.com, its Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, reports filed following Section 16 of the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after PMI electronically files or furnishes such materials to the SEC. All of these documents will be offered free of charge to any shareholder requesting a copy by writing to: Philip Morris International Inc., 120 Park Avenue, New York, New York 10017, U.S.A., attention: Corporate Secretary.
Philip Morris International Inc., through its auxiliaries, manufactures and sells cigarettes, other tobacco products, and other nicotine-containing products. Its portfolio of brands comprise Marlboro, Merit, Parliament, Virginia Slims, L&M, Chesterfield, Bond Street, Lark, Muratti, Next, Philip Morris, and Red & White.
Investor’s Alert – Rite Aid Corporatio…Traders Alert – Ford Motor Co., (NYSE:F), Ki…News Buzz: Whole Foods Market, (NASDAQ:WFM), Micro…Traders Recap – Microsoft Corporation, (NASD…Eye-Catching Stocks – Chesapeake Energy Corp…Worth Watching Stocks – Freeport-McMoRan, (N…Hot Stocks to Keep Your Eyes on – Apple, (NA…News Recap – FireEye, (NASDAQ:FEYE), Avon Pr…Stocks in the Spotlight – Valeant Pharmaceut…
Been writing about and trading stocks since 2013. Manage a group of micro-cap investors on Facebook with over 15,000 members. Turned $8,500 into 185k the first year I started trading stocks and haven't looked back.
