This milestone was highlighted by the EIA in a recent brief . The brief was based on the EIA’s Monthly Energy Review . Although most of the coverage over this development has focused on the fact that renewables overtook coal, there is another story within the data that is missing.
The Monthly Energy Review highlights all categories of U.S. energy consumption. So, how does the consumption of renewables and coal compare to our consumption of petroleum, natural gas, and nuclear power? The following graphic puts everything in context.
What this graphic shows that the previous graphics don’t show is that it was natural gas that took the biggest share of coal’s market. Further, it shows that fossil fuels still dominate our energy consumption. Nuclear power consumption has remained flat for years, and like coal, has been surpassed by renewables.
Last year the U.S. consumed 11.3 quadrillion BTUs (quads) of coal and 11.5 quads of renewables. But we also consumed 36.7 quads of petroleum and 32.1 quads of natural gas. Each of these categories of fossil fuel consumption was greater than our combined consumption of renewables and coal, which provides a broader perspective on our energy consumption.
In total, the U.S. consumed 80.5 quads of fossil fuels, 11.5 quads of renewables, and 8.5 quads of nuclear power. Renewables represented 11.4% of U.S. energy consumption in 2019, versus 8.1% a decade ago.
So, renewables did play an important part in coal’s demise, but they often get most of the credit. In fact, without cheap natural gas from the shale gas boom, U.S. coal consumption would still be substantially higher than U.S. renewable energy consumption.
Robert Rapier is a chemical engineer in the energy industry. Robert has 25 years of international engineering experience in the chemicals, oil and gas, and renewable
Robert Rapier is a chemical engineer in the energy industry. Robert has 25 years of international engineering experience in the chemicals, oil and gas, and renewable energy industries, and holds several patents related to his work. He has worked in the areas of oil refining, oil production, synthetic fuels, biomass to energy, and alcohol production. He is author of Utility Forecaster at Investing Daily, and of the book Power Plays: Energy Options in the Age of Peak Oil. Robert has appeared on 60 Minutes, The History Channel, CNBC, Business News Network, CBC, and PBS, and his energy-themed articles have appeared in numerous media outlets, including the Wall Street Journal, Washington Post, Christian Science Monitor, and The Economist.
