1of2The Permian Basin is producing so much natural gas alongside of crude that it has become a nuisance to be burned away.Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle / Staff photographer
2of2A flare near Eunice, N.M. The oil bust has reduced flaring in the Permian Basin.Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle / Staff photographer
When it comes to the Houston energy sector, crude oil is king. But it’s called the oil AND gas industry for a reason.
After all, the shale boom started with natural gas more than a decade ago. Since then, a flood of natural gas has launched a burgeoning liquefied natural gas industry, provided the feedstock that triggered the petrochemical boom and almost put coal out of business.
But the natural gas sector is suffering, even more than oil producers stuck in the purgatory of $50 to $60 a barrel oil.
Natural gas prices have plunged about 35 percent in the past 12 months. The U.S. benchmark’s average price in October of $2.33 per million British thermal units was the lowest October average in 21 years.
On HoustonChronicle.com: Has the peak of the shale revolution come and gone?
In West Texas’ booming Permian Basin, many companies drilling for oil are burning away their natural gas in a process called flaring as they consider it little more than an annoying byproduct of crude production.
The U.S. has essentially doubled its natural gas production sine 2005, just prior to the first wave of the shale revolution. Oil output has surged even more, more than doubling since 2011, when the shale revolution shifted from gas to oil.
Simply put, United States has a natural gas glut that has recently extended to Asia and Europe, putting LNG exports in jeopardy heading into 2020. Despite challenging prices, U.S. natural gas production has still jumped 10 percent from 2018. And the pesky Permian keeps producing more natural gas the chagrin of lot of the companies.
The S&P 500’s select index for oil and gas producers is down nearly 40 percent over the past 12 months. But investors have been even tougher on companies focused on natural gas. The stock of Oklahoma shale gas pioneer Chesapeake Energy is down more than 80 percent in a year, trading at only about 60 cents per share. The stock of Spring-based Southwestern Energy is down more than 60 percent in a year to less $2 per share.
Ultra Petroleum filed for bankruptcy, emerged and moved its headquarters from Houston to Denver. Its shares are now trading for pennies after being delisted by the Nasdaq stock exchange in August. In September, Ultra suspended its drilling activities and said in November that it has no plans to drill for all of 2020.
The stock of Denver’s Antero Resources is down about 85 percent in 12 months. Fort Worth’s Range Resources’ shares are down 75 percent in a year. The shares of nation’s largest natural gas producer, EQT Corp.of Pittsburgh, are down more than 50 percent.
Only one major natural gas producer is performing relatively well and that’s Houston’s Cabot Oil & Gas. Don’t let the name fool you; Cabot doesn’t produce oil. The company focuses on natural gas Pennsylvania’s Marcellus shale.
Cabot’s stock price is down 33 percent this year and that’s deemed a borderline miracle. Considered the lowest-cost gas producer, Cabot is making money, hiking dividends and buying back shares, so the sharp slide in its stock price really speaks to the state of the natural gas sector.
It’s a tough, cold world out there for these companies, but at least there’s plenty of excess natural gas to keep them warm during the rough winter.
