Royal Dutch Shell warned on Tuesday it expects post-tax impairment charges of around $15-22 billion in the second quarter, Kallanish Energy reports.
The estimate follows a revision of its mid and long-term commodities prices, as well as refining margin outlook. It reflects the expected effects of the Covid-19 pandemic, related macroeconomic conditions, and demand and supply fundamentals, Shell said in a statement.
“Given the impact of Covid-19 and the ongoing challenging commodity price environment, Shell continues to adapt to ensure the business remains resilient,” said the supermajor. The review of the Upstream, Integrated Gas and Refining tangible and intangible assets also reflect “Shell’s strategy to reshape and refocus” to support decarbonization of its energy product mix.
Most of the expected post-tax impairment charges ($8-9 billion) will happen in the Integrated Gas business, primarily in Australia. Upstream’s charges are forecast at $4-6 billion, largely in Brazil and North America shales; while charges for Oil Products should amount to $3-7 billion across the refining portfolio.
Shell sees a 30% decline in its average long-term refining margins, from its previous assumption. In terms of commodities prices, it now forecasts Brent to average $35 a barrel in 2020 and gradually increase to $60/Bbl from 2023 onwards.
The outlook for natural gas prices has Henry Hub averaging $1.75 per million British thermal units (MmBtu), $2.5/MmBtu in 2021 and 2022, $2.75/MmBtu in 2023 and $3/MmBtu in the long-term.
The Anglo-Dutch company noted that over 90% of its term contracts for liquefied natural gas in 2019 were linked to oil prices, with a lagging of three to six months. “The impact of lower oil prices on LNG margins become more prominent from June onwards,” Shell added.
It expects Q2 liquefaction volumes to reach 8.1-8.5 million tonnes, and upstream production volumes to average 2.3-2.4 million barrels of oil equivalent per day. The latter estimate is higher than previously forecast, but a positive impact on earnings will be “limited” due to the current macro environment.
Wood Mackenzie’s Luke Parker, vice president corporate analysis, said the write-down sends a message about stranded assets, just like BP did a few weeks ago.
“The impairment Shell has announced is about more than an accounting technicality, or an adjustment to near-term price assumptions. It’s about fundamental change hitting the entire oil and gas sector,” noted Parker.
