Shares In Chesapeake Energy Set For Delisting, As Historic Bankruptcy Is Finally Official
The effects of social distancing guidelines are likely to continue affecting U.S. electricity consumption during the next few months. EIA expects retail sales of electricity in the commercial sector will fall by 6.5% in 2020 because many businesses have closed and many people are working from home. Similarly, industrial retail sales of electricity are projected to fall by 6.5% in 2020 as many factories cut back production.
Total U.S. electric power sector generation is projected to decline by 5% in 2020. Most of the expected decline in electricity supply is reflected in lower fossil fuel generation, especially at coal-fired power plants.
After decreasing by 2.8% in 2019, EIA forecasts that U.S. energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions will decrease by 11% in 2020. This record decline is the result of restrictions on business and travel activity and slowing economic growth related to COVID-19.
The EIA is projecting a significant recovery of energy prices in the second half of this year, and then a major recovery in demand next year.
Because of the sudden and dramatic impact on the global energy sector, this STEO reflects enormous changes from recent reports. The world’s energy system is complex and interlinked, and the impacts one sector may have on another aren’t always immediately obvious.
For example, the collapse in global oil demand has an obvious impact on global oil prices. In fact, the May STEO contains a graphic that clearly illustrates why oil prices collapsed in the first quarter of this year.
The world has simply never seen such a dramatic decline in demand for liquid fuels, which in turn led to a large increase in inventories for petroleum and finished products. That put downward pressure on prices, but also greatly increased the premiums received by companies that can store oil (both in onshore tanks and in ships).
In addition, the U.S. produces a lot of natural gas as a byproduct of oil production. Because oil production is falling in response to the demand collapse, that natural gas byproduct is also falling in places like the Permian Basin. That decline in natural gas production prevented natural gas prices from experiencing the collapse seen in the oil markets. As a result, even though natural gas demand is down too, companies that are predominantly natural gas producers have been among the best performers in the energy sector since the oil price collapse started.
The disruptions to U.S. businesses have cut into electricity demand, which is disproportionately impacting coal generation. Because there was significant momentum in the growth of renewables for new generating capacity, the EIA is forecasting that renewables will outpace electricity production for coal in 2020 for the first time. The trend had been clear for years that renewables would overtake coal, but the COVID-19 impact has accelerated the timeline. As a result, it seems likely that renewables have now permanently overtaken coal in the U.S. power sector.
One of the few long-term silver linings from this pandemic will be the positive impacts on the environment. The decline in demand for fossil fuels across the board leads to a prediction of a record decline in U.S. carbon dioxide emissions.
As fossil fuel demand plunged in response to the pandemic, the skies and waterways in many locations cleared. I believe those images will be a powerful long-term reminder of the environmental impact of limiting our fossil fuel consumption.
Robert Rapier is a chemical engineer in the energy industry. Robert has 25 years of international engineering experience in the chemicals, oil and gas, and renewable
Robert Rapier is a chemical engineer in the energy industry. Robert has 25 years of international engineering experience in the chemicals, oil and gas, and renewable energy industries, and holds several patents related to his work. He has worked in the areas of oil refining, oil production, synthetic fuels, biomass to energy, and alcohol production. He is author of Utility Forecaster at Investing Daily, and of the book Power Plays: Energy Options in the Age of Peak Oil. Robert has appeared on 60 Minutes, The History Channel, CNBC, Business News Network, CBC, and PBS, and his energy-themed articles have appeared in numerous media outlets, including the Wall Street Journal, Washington Post, Christian Science Monitor, and The Economist.
