NLC India: State-owned NLC India NSE -0.76 % resumed operations at its mines in Neyveli, Tamil Nadu which had come to a halt last month as a precautionary measure to ensure the safety of its workers amid the spread of coronavirus, a source privy to the development said.
Tata Communications: Fund manager Fidelity offloaded more than 78 lakh shares worth over Rs 185 crore of Tata Communications through open market transactions.
Adani Gas: The company announced reduction in prices of compressed natural gas (CNG) and piped natural gas (PNG) used for cooking in household kitchens, in line with a cut in raw material rates.
Maruti Suzuki: The company continued to hold on to its 51% share of the home market in FY20 despite its decision to junk diesel-powered vehicles in the run-up to the industry’s transition to strict emission norms.
VA Tech Wabag: Water technology solutions provider VA Tech Wabag said it has bagged a Rs 90 crore-contract for operations and maintenance of sewage treatment plant in Bahrain.
IDBI Bank: Private sector lender IDBI Bank NSE 4.99 % said it has targeted to raise up to Rs 7,500 crore through rupee bond in the current fiscal.
Bharti Airtel: Telecom operator Bharti Airtel is expected to witness a 13 per cent annual growth in consolidated revenue, and 26 per cent growth in EBITDA by financial year 2022, mainly driven by tariff hikes, according to CLSA.
ABB India: The Swiss power major said it has postponed its annual general meeting, scheduled on May 14, till August in view of the lockdown to contain COVID-19.
REC: The state-owned shadow banking firm said its board has approved a proposal to incorporate seven power transmission projects which would facilitate evacuation of renewable energy.
Vadilal Industries: Markets regulator Sebi exempted two family trusts from making open offer to the shareholders of Vadilal Industries following acquisition of shares in the company.
Snowman Logistics: All its warehouses are fully operational amid the nationwide lockdown to contain the coronavirus outbreak, the company said.
Lemon Tree: Patu Keswani, chairman of Lemon Tree Hotels, has written to his employees, stating that the listed hospitality chain is undertaking salary cuts for the management or leadership teams in order to ensure job security for all staff members.
Graphite India Limited: Emerald Company Private Limited has bought 20,476 shares through Market Purchase on Mar 30, 2020.
Patel Engineering Limited: Praham India Llp has bought 20,600,000 shares through Preferential Offer on Mar 26, 2020.
Digicontent Limited: Ht Media Employee Welfare Trust has sold 103,701 shares through Market Sale from Mar 1, 2020 to Mar 31, 2020.
Note: Disclosure made under Reg 13(4), 13(4a) of SEBI (IT) regulations 1992.
