Neil Chatterjee, chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Democratic attorneys general from 10 states and the District of Columbia are urging the FERC to stop permitting gas pipelines, LNG facilities and other fossil fuel projects until the “end of the COVID-19 crisis.”
WASHINGTON — A long-standing political battle over the construction of natural gas pipelines is intensifying amid the pandemic as clean energy advocates increase pressure on government not to let up on climate change.
Democratic attorneys general from 10 states and the District of Columbia are urging the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to stop permitting gas pipelines, LNG facilities and other fossil fuel projects until the “end of the COVID-19 crisis.”
“The COVID-19 pandemic has imposed even greater burdens on communities attempting to organize their interests and participate in commission proceedings,” the attorneys general wrote in a letter to FERC last week. “COVID-19 has required individuals and state and local governments to attend to matters of pressing, existential urgency. The federal government and its agencies, including the commission, must acknowledge that fact, and modify their practices accordingly.”
OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS: With oil reeling from pandemic, clean energy looks to capitalize
The moves come as the Trump administration is working on an update of federal environmental rules to limit states’ ability to block pipelines because of climate change, amid increasing tension about the future of fossil fuels.
Politicians worldwide are moving toward expanding wind and solar energy at the same time investors and banks are pulling back from large fossil fuel projects such as pipelines, export terminals and oil drilling in the Arctic, which cost billions of dollars and can take more than a decade to turn a profit.
New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, is weighing whether to block Williams Co., based in Tulsa, Okla., from building a 37-mile gas pipeline off his state’s coastline, as he has done with other pipeline projects running through New York in his bid to get the state carbon neutral by 2050.
“This is an unprecedented time, and it’s fully important what we do here is the old adage of do no harm,” said Gillian Giannetti, a staff attorney at the environmental group Natural Resources Defense Council. “What we shouldn’t be doing is using this opportunity to push through policies or procedures that undercut our environment and climate.”
So far, commissioners at FERC, which must sign off on natural gas pipeline and LNG projects, are moving ahead on permitting.
In a letter to Virginia Attorney General Mark Herring on Tuesday, Chairman Neil Chatterjee said FERC was taking steps to ensure the public could participate in its proceedings.
“It is imperative that the commission continue to operate as close to normal as possible,” he wrote, “so that the energy sector is well-positioned to contribute not only to Virginia’s economy but also to the nation’s economy as a whole.”
So far, the push to stop FERC from permitting has yet to catch on in Congress, where last week a group of bipartisan House members including Rep. Lizzie Fletcher, D-Houston, and Rep. Bill Flores, R-Waco, urged Chatterjee to continue FERC’s work as normal.
For the natural gas industry, the coronavirus protest by the state attorneys general represents the latest in a campaign by environmental groups and liberal Democrats to shift the United States away from a cleaner-burning fuel that former President Barack Obama once called a bridge to the clean energy of the future.
And the pressure is not likely to let up soon. Between Trump’s move to limit states’ authority on pipeline projects and environmental groups’ ongoing campaign to halt the construction of LNG terminals, a rash of litigation is expected over the next 12 months.
FERC is currently weighing whether to hold a rehearing on its decision to approve construction of the Jordan Cove LNG project on Oregon’s Pacific coastline, which both state officials and environmental groups, including the NRDC, are opposing.
“That’s highly likely to go to litigation,” Giannetti said. “There’s been a growing amount of litigation about what are the boundaries of FERC’s obligation, and what it has to consider in terms of the environmental impacts of these projects.”
