China might have to import an additional 2 million barrels a day of crude and liquefied petroleum gasses a day.
The trade deal signed by U.S. President Donald Trump and Chinese Vice Premier Liu He on Wednesday requires that China buy more goods and services from the U.S., including a major increase in energy products, over the next two years.
China is expected to buy $52 billion in additional energy products from the U.S. over that period, a substantial sum even though China is already the largest energy importer in the world. In 2017, China bought $8 billion worth of U.S. energy, and that number fell in 2018 after China imposed a moratorium on U.S. energy imports amid the tariff battle.
To meet the trade deal’s requirements, China will likely have to import an additional 2 million barrels a day of crude and liquefied petroleum gasses a day, according to Bernstein analyst Neil Beveridge. The added U.S. imports could displace oil and gas that China now buys from other countries, including Saudi Arabia and the Congo. China may also need to process more American crude at its refineries for export to other Asian countries.
The U.S. exported about 9 million barrels of crude and petroleum products a day to other countries, as of the most recent government data from October.
Get a sneak preview of the top stories from the weekend's Barron's magazine. Friday evenings ET.
Beveridge picked the biggest winners and losers in energy from the new trade deal. Winners could include liquefied-natural-gas exporters such as Cheniere (LNG), which has already signed a long-term contract for LNG exports with Chinese oil company CNPC. Crude and petroleum product shipping companies such as Frontline (FRO), Teekay Tankers (TNK), and Golar LNG Ltd. (GLNG) could also see increased business as more U.S. oil and crude is shipped across the ocean. Chinese importers and refiners could also benefit, helping stocks like China Gas (CGHLY), China Resources Gas (1193.HK), ENN Energy (XNGSY) and Hengli Petrochemical (600346.China).
Losers could include some oil-and-gas exporters, including Saudi Arabian Oil Co. (2222.SA), whose exports could be displaced by U.S. products, and Asian refiners outside of China.
Much of this is still early speculation, however. The details of how China will meet these requirements are still unknown. In particular, it isn’t clear which products China will be importing, because China has imposed tariffs on U.S. energy products and those tariffs may or may not be lifted in conjunction with the trade deal.
The trade deal signed by U.
