The Oil And Gas Situation: The E&P Sector Faces A Reckoning
Again, none of this should come as a surprise to any industry observer. Companies with healthier balance sheets are keeping their powder dry due to all of the volatility in the market, plus the anticipation that this week’s Chapter 11 filing by Chesapeake Energy represents the first hole in what might soon become a dam break of bankruptcies in the upstream segment of the business. One can’t help having the feeling that the Q3 and Q4 M&A trackers from Enverus will show more robust activity.
The rig and frac spread counts continue to crater. - A new trend seems to be developing around the U.S. count of active drilling rigs. As companies begin to execute on their revised, lower capital budgets for the second half of 2020, the downward spiral in the rig count appears to be accelerating.
The Enverus daily rig count on June 30 dropped to just 272 active rigs, a fall of 8% week-over-week, and 13% lower than a month before. Meanwhile, the count of active frac spreads by Primary Vision stood at just 70 nationally as of Friday. That’s down from 78 the week before, although it is substantially higher than the low of 45 recorded on May 15.
Thus, while operators continue to re-activate wells they had shut-in during the depths of the March/April price bust, shale producers are most certainly not drilling the number of wells that would be required to offset production losses due to the rapid initial decline rates seen in shale wells. It is likely that most of the additional frac crews added since mid-May are focused on efforts by shale drillers to work off their inventories DUC (drilled but uncompleted) wells rather than the drilling of new wells.
While there could be some non-obligational drilling taking place in the sweetest spots of the Permian Basin at this point, in shale plays like the Eagle Ford, where break-even prices are higher and fewer than 15 active rigs were working last week, it is likely that pretty much every well being drilled is being done in order to satisfy lease obligations.
Drilling obligations in order to hold leases is pretty much the only drilling activity most upstream companies can justify at the moment. With the 2nd half budgets for the larger, corporate operators now set in place, we should expect drilling and fracking activities to remain low for the rest of 2020. The natural well-decline rates in these shale plays will ensure that the U.S., which has already seen a loss of at least 2 million barrels of oil per day in overall production, will lose millions more before the year is over.
David Blackmon is an independent energy analyst/consultant based in Mansfield, TX. David has enjoyed a 39-year career in the oil and gas industry, the last 23 years of
David Blackmon is an independent energy analyst/consultant based in Mansfield, TX. David has enjoyed a 39-year career in the oil and gas industry, the last 23 years of which were spent in the public policy arena, managing regulatory and legislative issues for various companies, including Burlington Resources, Shell, El Paso Corporation, FTI Consulting and LINN Energy. During this time, David has led numerous industry-wide efforts to address a variety of issues at the local, state and federal level, and from April 2010 through June 2012, he served as the Texas State Lead for America’s Natural Gas Alliance. In addition to client-related work, David also maintains a growing media communications practice. He is currently Associate Editor for Shale Magazine (www.shalemag.com), a contributor on energy-related matters at Forbes.com, and a feature writer for World Oil Magazine. He is the resident energy expert on the "In The Oil Patch" radio program, and executes frequent public speaking engagements around the state of Texas and at conferences. The text or links to all of David’s writings and podcasts can be found at www.dbdailyupdate.com. He attended Texas A&I University and The University of Texas, earning B.A. in accounting in 1979.
