1of5A gas flare is seen at dusk in this aerial photograph taken above a field near Mentone, Texas, on Aug. 31, 2019. MUST CREDIT: Bloomberg photo by Bronte Wittpenn.Photo: Bronte Wittpenn, Bloomberg / Bloomberg
2of5A flare stack is pictured next to pump jacks and other oil and gas infrastructure on April 24, 2020 near Odessa, Texas. - Permian Basin Crude oil extraction is one of the main economic drivers of this area, and the industry is looking to take a hit after the price of oil dropped below due to decline in demand from the novel coronavirus pandemic. US oil surged on April 24 and headed for a positive finish to a torrid week that saw prices drop below zero, as output cuts and US-Iran tensions lifted coronavirus-ravaged markets. (Photo by Paul Ratje / AFP) (Photo by PAUL RATJE/AFP via Getty Images)Photo: PAUL RATJE, Contributor / AFP via Getty Images
3of5A flaring stack burns off natural gas at an oil extraction site operated by Recoil Resources near Poth, Texas on Monday, Apr. 13, 2020. Recoil Resources and other small oil producers are struggling and are facing a plan to cut production by 20 percent if approved by the Railroad Commission. The commission is scheduled to vote on the matter on Tuesday.Photo: Kin Man Hui, San Antonio Express-News / Staff photographer
4of5A gas flare at the Targa Driver Gas Plant in the Permian Basin in Texas, Nov. 5, 2019. Immense amounts of methane are escaping from oil and gas sites nationwide, worsening global warming, even as the Trump administration weakens restrictions on offenders. (Jonah M. Kessel/The New York Times)Photo: JONAH M. KESSEL, STF / NYT
5of5A flare burns in the distance looking down Texas Avenue in downtown Baytown, Tuesday, Jan. 29, 2019.Photo: Mark Mulligan, Houston Chronicle / Staff photographer
The Texas Railroad Commission permitted oil and gas producers to destroy $750 million worth of natural gas in a single year, and despite the pleas of royalty owners and environmentalists, it allows that waste to continue.
The three elected officials who supervise the oil and gas industry in Texas are mandated to promote efficiency and minimize waste but have issued permits allowing drillers to burn billions of dollars’ worth of natural gas through a process called flaring over the past seven years.
Last week, commissioners finally began considering new rules to stop it, but it doesn’t look good.
First, a quick lesson on flaring. Oil wells also produce natural gas, much to the chagrin of the driller who wants only oil. This associated gas must go somewhere, and when there are no pipelines, drillers ask the Railroad Commission to burn it off with flares.
Anyone driving through South or West Texas at night has seen these huge flames. Refineries also use flares to burn off dangerous gases, so they also are common along the Houston Ship Channel.
Natural gas contains methane, a gas six times more harmful to the climate than carbon dioxide. Getting rid of methane is essential, and capturing it can generate additional revenue. But lately, drillers have been in such a rush to pump oil, they are not waiting for gas pipelines.
The commission almost never has rejected a flaring permit. Since the fracking revolution kicked off in 2013, commissioners have allowed flaring to increase four-fold, and drillers have burned enough gas to meet Texas’ power, heating and industrial needs for three years, state records show.
The Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, a nonpartisan group that researches industry trends, calculated Texas drillers flared gas worth $749.9 million in 2018 alone.
“The RRC’s duty to address waste in oil and gas production is not only a legal requirement but also a practical imperative that is becoming more and more critical for the financial future of Texas,” the group concluded. “It needs to recalibrate itself and align its actions with its critical responsibility to protect the public.”
Commission Chair Wayne Christian formed a task force to recommend what should be done about flaring. Outgoing Commissioner Ryan Sitton oversaw a study. Oil and gas lobbyists and environmentalists drafted their own reports.
The hyperanalytical Sitton devised what he calls a flaring intensity benchmark, which is a ratio of gas flared to barrels of oil produced. He thinks it’s a fair measure of efficiency, if not necessarily the best measure for environmental or royalty owner protection.
Sitton calculated that Texas has one of the best flaring intensities in the world, which prompted him to ask whether the commission should impose additional regulations that may hurt Texas’ competitiveness in export markets. Reducing flaring will cost money, and foreign producers flare like maniacs.
Environment Texas, meanwhile, argued that flaring hurts the environment, wastes energy and signals the industry’s long-term decline. If drillers must flare to make money, then the industry is doomed. The commission should phase out flaring forever , the group concluded.
Lastly, a group of seven trade associations calling itself the Texas Methane and Flaring Coalition has a plan that it says will reduce flaring through minor tweaks to the current permit process. The coalition predictably argues that additional regulation will cost Texas jobs.
The Railroad Commission, which desperately needs a name change because it has nothing to do with railroads anymore, is supposed to strike a balance between energy production, environmental impacts and financial royalties. We need oil and gas. We need to fight climate change. Drillers should not cheat mineral rights owners.
TOMLINSON’S TAKE: Oil companies need a nudge, or more, to stop flaring waste gases
Christian, a former lawmaker known for conservatism and religious fundamentalism with no industry background, has signaled a historic shift away from being in the pocket of drillers to worrying about royalty owners and investors.
“We cannot continue to waste this much natural gas and allow the practice of flaring to tarnish the reputation of our state’s thriving energy sector to the general public and investors on Wall Street,” he said after Tuesday’s hearing . He called on commission staff to prepare proposals by the fall.
Environmentalists sighed in dismay, the commission remains uninterested in climate change. Lobbyists for drillers and royalty owners girded for a fight.
If Christian’s new rules mean less gas is flared, that is a great outcome, but that’s not the long-term problem.
The world is moving away from fossil fuels, especially oil. Natural gas will remain important, but demand will fade. The commission needs to manage not only the end of flaring but the safe winding-down of oil and gas in Texas to a much smaller industry.
Rather than worry about investors, commissioners should worry about Texas.
Tomlinson writes commentary about business, economics and policy.
