However, due to a lack of measurements, no one knows the true scale of methane emissions from oil and gas production, which makes comparing gas from different regions extremely difficult, if not impossible.
“People are throwing around whatever they want in terms of numbers and we need to bring order to this chaos,” said Nikos Tsafos, senior fellow at the D.C.-based policy research organisation Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). “I know people in the U.S. who are convinced that once you do the numbers right the U.S. will look great,” said Tsafos. “And there are those who think the U.S. would be totally prohibited from reaching European markets.”
The problem is that no one knows the true scale of methane emissions from oil and gas production.
Levels reported to the United Nations are largely based on calculations, not measurements. A common approach in the national greenhouse inventories annually prepared by each country is to use emission factors for individual activities as well as measurements – if available – to scale up to countrywide emission inventories.
“A company would say ‘we have x-number of pneumatic valves, we flared y-amount of gas. These are how many tanks we have’ and then they do an emission factor calculation,” explains Colin Leyden, oil and gas industry expert at the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF). “It is not a very accurate way of estimating emissions.”
Over recent years, there have been numerous studies using measurements and calculations to varying degrees to assess methane emissions in different producing regions in the United States. In 2018, EDF led a group of researchers on a report that synthesised several studies. It said supply chain methane emissions were about 60 percent higher than the EPA’s inventory estimate. The scientists said the large divergence was due to the EPA missing high emissions caused by abnormal operating conditions, such as malfunctions, including for example emissions released from liquid storage tank hatches and vents.
The report said in 2015 the rate of methane leaked or vented was 2.3 percent of gross U.S. gas production – with a short-term climate impact roughly equal to that of CO₂ emissions from all U.S. coal-fired power plants in operation that year.
In contrast, the 2019 life cycle analysis of natural gas by the National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL), which is owned and operated by the U.S. energy department, says that the average national methane emissions rate is 1.24 percent.
EDF’s Leyden says “we really need to move towards a more direct measurement type of programme.” Such measurements can be done on the ground at the individual facility or using planes or drones with special equipment. These methods made the headlines in a recent New York Times story .
Another way to measure emissions is by satellite. EDF plans to launch its MethaneSAT in autumn 2022, to be operational in 2023. Other satellites have been developed to assess climate-harmful emissions, such as the Japanese Space Agency’s Greenhouse Gases Observing Satellite ( GOSAT Ibuki ) or the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Copernicus Sentinel-5P mission. EDF says its MethaneSAT will provide better coverage and measurement and be less expensive than the multi-function satellites built by government space agencies. “The concept is to have a global eye in the sky looking at methane emissions across the globe,” said Leyden. NASA is also planning to launch its Geostationary Carbon Observatory ( GeoCarb ) by 2023 to observe the concentrations of key carbon gases such as CO₂ and methane over the Americas.
According to the International Energy Agency’s (IEA) Methane Tracker , emissions from Russia’s oil and gas industry are slightly higher than from the American industry. Each is responsible for roughly 15 percent of global methane emissions in that sector. However, the U.S. produces both more crude oil and natural gas.
Looking at existing studies, Germany’s Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources ( BGR ) compared the methane emissions across the value chain of natural gas arriving in Germany in a report earlier this year . The institute put a focus on the United States, because there is a lot of available data. Compared to that the data, availability for Russia is very poor, says Stefan Ladage, geologist at the BGR . “Looking at the compiled literature in our study, methane emissions along the value chain from U.S. LNG are higher than those from Dutch or Norwegian pipeline gas, as well as Russian pipeline gas – bearing in mind that data availability is not as good in Russia,” he told Clean Energy Wire.
Aside from methane, natural gas production, liquefaction and transport is an energy-intensive endeavour and leads to a considerable volume of CO₂ emissions , for example from compressors. There are some studies assessing the full climate footprint of natural gas used in Europe and comparing different regions of origin, but without independent data, the climate footprint of natural gas from different regions can quickly become a controversial issue with the potential for politicisation.
A U.S. government analysis the country's LNG to have a climate advantage over LNG from Algeria, pipeline gas from Russia and regional coal used in power plants in Europe. Source: National Energy Technology Laboratory 2019.
The U.S. government published an analysis in 2019 and found its LNG to have a climate advantage over LNG from Algeria, pipeline gas from Russia and regional coal used in power plants in Europe. “We continue to see benefits of LNG,” commented the energy department’s Bennett. “We have done a very good job of making sure that we have a low-carbon footprint within our industry.” However, the government used Appalachian region shale gas in its U.S. scenarios, which has a low methane leakage rate compared to other regions or the country’s average.
In contrast, a 2017 thinkstep report commissioned by Nord Stream 2 AG sees the advantage with natural gas transported through the pipeline currently being built in the Baltic Sea. Aside from the modern pipeline, the study assumes a “new gas field in northern Russia” with “very efficient technologies”, which results in very low emissions during production.
“We stand behind our work here in the U.S. and Russia can provide their information as well,” said Bennett when asked about the comparison. “At the end of the day, when the EU thinks about emissions of gas from the different origins, you have to make sure that the factors are equal on all settings.”
One also needs to take into account which fuel the imported LNG replaces. Studies comparing the climate footprints make assumptions for “European domestic coal” which do not reflect the reality in many countries. In Germany, for instance, domestically mined coal is emission-intensive lignite . The hard coal the country imports – its mining in Germany ended in 2018 – often comes from far-away suppliers like Russia or Colombia. A recent study also shows that methane emissions from coal mines could be greater than previously thought.
Aside from venting and leakage of methane, there is another issue – the one that was so clearly visible from Sue and Jim Franklin’s front porch: flaring.
It is a matter of debate whether the emissions caused by flaring can be counted towards the climate footprint of U.S. natural gas arriving in Europe. “In our view, the emissions that result from flaring associated gas are part of the oil value chain, not natural gas, because the associated gas is not used,” says the BGR .
EDF’s Leyden argues that it is all part of the same system. “The point is: if you’re drilling for oil, you need to be managing your gas as well as your oil. We don’t tolerate oil leaking onto the ground and we shouldn’t tolerate natural gas leaking into the atmosphere.”
Driving through the vast oil and gas regions in Texas, burning flares are almost constantly visible across the landscape. They may be the most illustrative sign of the industry’s activity, and serve as a beacon for public objection to its operations. At the well head, the flares can be necessary for maintenance and emergency reasons, or during start-up in the first days after well completion. They are also used in plants as an industrial incinerator to burn waste gases like hydrogen sulphide.
Flares may be the most illustrative sign of oil and gas industry activity, like here in Big Spring, Texas. Photo: CLEW/Wettengel 2020.
In regions with high levels of associated gas, like the Permian or Texas’ Eagle Forde Shale, the problem is much greater. Oil exploration in West Texas expanded rapidly in recent years, unlike the pipeline infrastructure necessary gather the natural gas that came to the surface with the oil and transport it off to regional hubs. Due to the extremely low gas prices, there was no economic incentive for companies to gather, store and use it. It was and continues to be simply cheaper to just burn it on the spot, rather than to put effort and funds into accelerated infrastructure development.
In terms of climate change, flaring is better than simply venting the methane, because the result is less-harmful CO₂ emissions. However, helicopter surveys from EDF’s PermianMAP project show that many flares are unlit – venting methane into the atmosphere – or only partially burning the gas.
In regions like the Permian Basin, natural gas is often burned rather than transported off due to a lack of pipeline infrastructure. Photo: CLEW/Wettengel 2020.
The state’s oil and gas industry regulator – the Texas Railroad Commission (RRC) – has been very generous in granting permits to flare over recent years. In 2019, flaring in the Permian reached new records of 800-900 million cubic feet per day – or about five percent of total gas production – a report by energy research company and consultancy Rystad Energy shows. However, due to the effects of the coronavirus pandemic on production and demand, Rystad estimates that flaring levels have fallen sharply in the first quarter of 2020 and will continue to decline throughout the year.
“So, interestingly, due to the low oil prices this flaring issue will be automatically resolved, just because activity will go down,” Artem Abramov, head of shale research at Rystad Energy, told Clean Energy Wire. “A lot of operators have very nice emissions charts showing that they improved a lot on their emissions intensity, but the real driver is simply the slowing activity.”
The gas industry, meanwhile, is increasingly tackling greenhouse gas emissions. Rystad’s Abramov said that operators have worried about issues like flaring, because “they were getting so much pressure from their investors over the last three or so years in regards to ESG [sustainability criteria for investments] and climate change topics.”
The liquefaction of natural gas at export terminals such as Freeport LNG on the Gulf of Mexico has so far been very emissions-intensive. Photo: CLEW/Wettengel 2020.
Work on the methane strategy in the European Union certainly does not go unnoticed across the Atlantic. The EU delegation in Washington, D.C. is in talks with the oil and gas industry about methane emissions, an EU official told Clean Energy Wire. “We invite them here and they come in big numbers. They are very interested in that conversation.”
The next generation of proposed LNG export facilities is already advertising efforts to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions from planned operations. They see it as an advantage over competitors especially vis-à-vis transatlantic customers.
“Europe is one of our most promising export markets, given that we will have the lowest carbon footprint among LNG export terminals in North America, if not the world,” said Omar Khayum. The CEO of Annova LNG told Clean Energy Wire that his planned export facility in Brownsville, close to the Texas-Mexico border, will have access to low-cost gas supply from the Permian Basin. Annova LNG plans to use electrically driven compressors fuelled with 100-percent carbon-free renewable energy, said Khayum. The project has yet to land contracts with customers, reports the Houston Chronicle , and it has seen heavy opposition from neighbouring communities, fishermen, environmentalists and Native Americans.
Texas also produces the most wind power of any U.S. state and renewables and oil and gas often exist side by side. Photo: CLEW/Wettengel 2020.
Like the U.S. administration, Khayum argued for natural gas as a way to reduce emissions in receiving countries. “We look forward to supporting the downstream reduction of greenhouse gases through displacement of coal- and oil-derived power globally.”
Sue Franklin, now in her new home town of Fort Davis, would rather support the build-out of renewables in Texas than the continued development of fossil fuels. “I think it’s very important to move towards renewable energy,” she said. “I would have let them put a hundred windmills on my property, rather than any of those wells. Or solar panels. Either one. But I don’t want those wells.”
    They can be copied, shared and made publicly accessible by users so long as they give appropriate credit, provide a
    link to the license, and indicate if changes were made.
