Mirroring events that rocked the international oil industry earlier this year — catalyzed by the fallout from the COVID-19 pandemic — a now sluggish global economy is hitting the liquefied natural gas (LNG) industry. Like oil before it, prices of spot LNG around the world are collapsing, storage is rising, and LNG exporters are responding to mounting challenges. The situation spells bad news for the nascent U.S. LNG export business and the geopolitical benefits it bestowed on the United States. Dominant natural gas exporters Qatar and Russia are responding to the current LNG supply glut by accelerating their own mega-projects to lock in market share for the next ten years and beyond. Their moves could set back the U.S. LNG export industry for years to come, depending on the state of global economic growth in the coming years. Already, forty U.S. LNG cargoes have been cancelled for August pushing the total cargo cancellations for this summer over one hundred, bringing total U.S. LNG exports to half of capacity. Goldman Sachs estimates that 4 billion cubic feet per day (Bcf/d) of U.S. gas exports will be cancelled this summer.
Amy Myers Jaffe delves into the underlying forces shaping global energy. 1-2 times weekly.
Just a year ago , the U.S. natural gas industry saw few obstacles to becoming a major LNG exporter due to the U.S. shale revolution and the growing liquidity in LNG markets. A more liberalized LNG market funded through an “equity/cost model” was indicative of a shift away from traditional government to government sponsored financial agreements, with potential global demand growth of 40-65 million tons per annum (MMtpa). Interest in U.S. LNG was driven mainly by commercial considerations, with favorable future price curves for the Henry Hub benchmark, the main price link for U.S. LNG, giving buyers the impression that U.S. LNG was both geopolitically reliable and highly economical. However, today, U.S. LNG producers find themselves in a very different situation, one that may have them wishing for the days when the U.S.-China trade war was their main obstacle.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) recently released its 2020 LNG Outlook , with forecasts for a 4 percent drop in global natural gas demand as a result of global lockdowns to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 and low heating demand due to warm weather. The bleak outlook does not take into account the possibility of a second COVID-19 wave. Additionally, global storage is brimming at almost 2.8 trillion cubic feet (Tcf) of working natural gas as of May, 18 percent more than the five-year (2015-19) average. The economic incentive for buyers in Asia and Europe to import U.S. LNG has disappeared, as the U.S. natural gas Henry Hub benchmark is now hovering around $1.70 per million British Thermal Unit (MMBtu), too high compared to Asian $1.95/MMBtu and European $2/MMBtu spot prices once transportation and other costs are taken into account. Even when the actual U.S. natural gas spot price is lower than global spot prices, additional costs associated with U.S. LNG exports impact their economic viability. U.S. gas exporters charge an additional cost for liquefaction, typically around $2.00 to $3.00 per MMBtu, and tanker transport from the U.S. Gulf coast to Asia currently varies from around 60 cents to Japan and 81 cents to China. The rule of thumb is that the Henry Hub spot price should be about $2.00/MMBtu lower than other global spot prices in order for buyers to breakeven. Asian spot prices rebounded 20 percent from record lows, but they still do not make U.S. exports profitable. U.S. feedgas demand for LNG exports since April fell from just above of 8 billion cubic feet per day (Bcf/d) in the first quarter of this year to 6.4 Bcf/d in May and 3.9 Bcf/d in June. These poor market conditions and cargo cancellations come at a time when three major U.S. LNG terminals, Freeport, Cameron, and Elba Island, just came online in 2019. After running at full speed until April, the six operational U.S. export terminals are now using only 65 percent of their capacity, mainly for take or pay shipments of gas under long range contracts.
The paltry sales of U.S. LNG to China as part of the January 2020 U.S.-China trade deal will do little to prevent rising exports from Qatar and Russia to discourage financing for future U.S. export projects. According to figures from the U.S. Department of Energy, China imported 21.1 Bcf of U.S. LNG during the month of April 2020, after Beijing started granting tax waivers to some importers. But this rare bright spot was short lived as U.S. exports to China have dwindled to two ships in June and one booked for July. For now, China appears to be shifting the sources from which they import their natural gas, cutting certain pipe gas imports, in favor of cheaper LNG spot imports. Chinese interest in spot LNG is rebounding based on demand from independent Chinese buyers such as ENN Energy Holdings Limited and Jovo Energy Co., who have access to terminals. To save money, these independent companies are taking the bare minimums required under their long-range gas contracts, in effect, exercising downward quantity tolerances (DQT) of their offtakes, and thereby replacing a small portion of their contract supplies with cheaper short-run, spot LNG imports from regional suppliers such as Qatar and Australia.
In the longer run, U.S. LNG also faces a formidable challenge from other low-cost producers who are expanding future export capacity. Qatar has said it will not slow its North Field Expansion (NFE), which will increase their LNG production to 110 million tonnes per annum by 2024, from current 77 million tonnes per annum. The small Gulf state, home to the United States’ largest air presence in the region and U.S. Central Command’s (CENTCOM) forward headquarters at Al-Udeid Air Base near Doha, is actively challenging Russia’s stronghold on the European natural gas market. In addition to its long-range planning, Qatar is actively adding supplemental shipments of LNG to European ports to bolster its market share as prices continue to fall. For its part, Russia, is responding by taking concrete actions to ensure it can expand its sales to China by committing to construction of a second $55 billion giant pipeline project to bring its Siberian gas through Mongolia to Jilin and Liaoning, China’s top grain hubs, just miles away from Beijing. According to Gazprom, the Power of Siberia 2 pipeline could supply as much as 50 Bcm/y to China annually. The costly pipeline is not projected to come online until 2030. This is not the first collaboration between Gazprom and Chinese energy interests — Chinese entities have provided tens of billions of dollars in loans for energy projects to capital-poor Russia since the 2008 financial crisis. The second pipeline supplements the existing Power of Siberia pipeline, already in operation since December 2019, which has transported around 300 million cubic meters per month of natural gas to China from the Kovyktinskoye and Chikanskoye gas fields in eastern Russia. The second pipeline is aimed to help Russia diversify its markets away from Europe in the long run, given expectations that natural gas demand could decline over time in Europe due to rising use of renewable energy and strict carbon emissions policies. Russia is still moving forward with the Nordstream-2 pipeline despite currently flagging European demand and competition from the United States and Qatar for market share. Analysts expect Russia will cut prices to ensure its pipeline natural gas can compete for market share in Europe. Russia’s Yamal LNG, operated by Russian firm Novatek, also gives Russia flexibility for water-borne shipments in summertime that can go east or west depending on market conditions. Novatek is also inaugurating ice breaking LNG tankers for its Yamal routes.
