Denver — Withdrawal season started with a bang last week as natural gas stocks likely declined at a rate nearly triple the five-average, as frigid temperatures accelerated pulls from storage fields across the eastern half of the US, but a return to milder weather looks set to prompt a weaker drop this week.
The US Energy Information Administration is expected to report a 91 Bcf withdrawal for the week ended November 15, according to a survey of analysts by S&P Global Platts. Responses to the survey ranged from a draw of 78 Bcf to 102 Bcf. The EIA plans to release its weekly storage report on Thursday at 10:30 am EDT (1530 GMT).
A 91-Bcf withdrawal would be less than the massive 109 Bcf pulled in the corresponding week last year, but much more than the five-year average draw of 32 Bcf. A draw within expectations would decrease stocks to 3.641 Tcf. The slight surplus versus the five-year average would flip to a 57-Bcf deficit and the surplus to last year would increase to 509 Bcf.
This Thursday's Weekly Natural Gas Storage Report from the EIA is expected to begin withdrawal season on a bullish note. As a result, the short-lived inventory surplus relative to the five-year average is forecast to flip back to a net deficit.
Temperatures in the major demand regions were all between 9 and 10 degrees colder than normal, resulting in US residential and commercial demand gaining 10.3 Bcf/d week over week, according to data from Platts Analytics. The massive gains in residential and commercial demand were split between the Northeast, Southeast and Midwest regions.
Larger-than-average withdrawals were reported by the Dominion Energy Transmission and Columbia Gas Transmission storage systems in the Northeast. As a result, the Northeast pulled an additional 6 Bcf of supplies from Canada, while restricting outflows to the surrounding regions by 11 Bcf to meet local demand, exacerbating tightness in the Midwest and South Central storage regions.
The effect appears similar to the cold front that hit the US last November resulting in a record-breaking pull of 134 Bcf for the month.
An early forecast by Platts Analytics shows a net withdrawal of 29 Bcf for the week ending November 22, which is roughly half the five-year average drop.
Current weather forecasts as well as the Thanksgiving holiday point to a possibly smaller draw for the week ending November 29 as total demand typically drops during holidays.
With temperatures during the back half of November expected to return to normal levels, the weather-driven rally at Henry Hub will likely weaken leading into December. The NYMEX Henry Hub December contract was down 6 cents at $2.50/MMBtu during late trading Tuesday.
-- Edited by Shashwat Pradhan, newsdesk@spglobal.com
To continue reading you must login or register with us.
It’s free and easy to do. Please use the button below and we will bring you back here when complete.
