Shares In Chesapeake Energy Set For Delisting, As Historic Bankruptcy Is Finally Official
Even though U.S. crude oil production has risen 160% in the shale-era since 2008, imports from Canada have continued to soar. The U.S. shale revolution has yielded a lighter crude, while our refinerie s are based on processing the heavier grades that have long been imported from Venezuela, Mexico, and Canada. And with the first two of those suppliers facing domestic production declines, Canada has filled the void . And some areas of the U.S. are removed from our shale plays so looking north for supply makes sense. In 2019, Canada accounted for nearly 60% of U.S. crude oil imports, up from less than 20% in 2007.
Indeed, I called it a few years ago: “ Canada is North America's Great Oil Security Blanket .” Canada could offer as much as a quarter of new global oil supply in the decades ahead, flows that will be available for export since incremental domestic demand needs are quite low. Oil is the heart of the ~$120 billion in bilateral annual energy trade between the U.S. and Canada.
Even though domestic production has been surging, U.S. crude imports from Canada have doubled over ... [+] the past 12 years.
Next comes natural gas, which generates 40% and 65% of U.S. and Mexico electricity, respectively. Even though Canada is a hydro-based power system, it still gets a quarter of its overall primary energy supply from gas.
U.S. gas production has seen double digit annual growth in recent years, a boom of new supply that has easily outpaced new demand and become available for export. In 2019, Mexico and Canada took a combined 65% of the 4.7 Tcf of U.S. gas exports. The U.S. is on pace to become the world’s largest liquefied natural gas (LNG) exporter in just a few years. And USMCA has installed a streamlined regulatory process for U.S. LNG shipments to Mexico and Canada. “ Mr. Trump, NAFTA 2.0 Must Promote Natural Gas Trade With Canada .” LNG is probably the fastest growing traded commodity in the world and is evolving natural gas from a regional product into a global commodity sold like oil - making prioritizing it absolutely essential to our path forward.
Mexico really needs cheap U.S. gas to keep its own costs low. With falling domestic production amid rising demand, Mexico gets some 70% of its overall gas supply from its northern ally. Gas is being relied upon to lift a mostly poor population out of poverty. Per capita, Mexico still has electricity usage rates that are just a third of its OECD partners and just one-sixth of the U.S. Researchers at Stanford University report the plan: “ Reducing Energy Poverty With Natural Gas .” And the International Energy Agency, our OECD advisor, wants us using more gas to lower greenhouse gas emissions.
Piped U.S. natural gas exports to Canada remain high but exports to Mexico have taken flight.
Further, with U.S. crude oil production rising almost 45% since 2016 alone, still very high but flat demand has allowed more shipments abroad. Mexico is the leading destination for U.S. exports of gasoline, fuel oil, and total refined products. “ The value of U.S. energy exports to Mexico exceeded import value for third year in a row .” Trying to feed a fast growing population of 135 million, Mexico has just six refineries. And the AMLO administration has been advised not to obsess over uneconomical new builds that cost $8-10 billion.
The USMCA also locks in for U.S. investors, service suppliers, and other firms the benefits of Mexico’s historic 2013 Energy Reforms to bring in more foreign investment and expertise. Crucially for U.S. companies operating in Mexico’s heavily-resourced but stagnated oil market, the USMCA preserves the investor dispute settlement mechanism (ISDS) from Chapter 11 of NAFTA. ISDS Supports U.S. Oil, Natural Gas, And Electricity Companies .”
This means that U.S. companies who have invested in Mexico over the past years under the Energy Reforms will continue to receive protections under the USMCA. This is required for Mexico to attract the investment for full-scale energy development. The prize is huge: Mexico could have over 60 billion barrels of deepwater oil and 550 trillion cubic feet of shale gas potential.
With oil production sliced in half over the past 15 years, Mexico needs all the help that it can get. Oil sales account for a quarter of the federal budget. At over $100 billion , Pemex the national oil company is the most indebted energy producer in the world. “ Mexico’s state oil company hasn’t paid hundreds of workers for months .” In all ways imaginable, never forget that a prospering Mexico is great for the U.S.
Fast-growing and refinery short Mexico has really needed more oil products from its northern ally.
The USMCA is vital to the energy sectors and economies of all three partners. In an energy world where Russia wants to supply China and Iran wants to supply India, a united North America energy alliance is increasingly the basis of our national security. COVID-19 is exposing the enormous problem of relying on distant supply chains for such essential goods.
For the U.S., free trade lifts industry and the country as a whole. Americans should know that energy exports are vital markets for U.S. products. They allow for more production, more employment, and help to lower costs here at home. “ Overwhelmingly ” so, this explains why our exports enjoy bipartisan support , unfortunately a rare amity these days.
Let the era of North American “energy dominance” be upon us.
