EVANSVILLE, Ind. — Vectren, a CenterPoint Energy company, plans to close three coal-fired generating stations while adding renewable energy sources such as solar and wind in the next four years.
Company officials said the switch will save customers an estimated $320 million over 20 years and lower carbon emissions about 75 percent from 2005 levels.
"We feel good about the planning process. It's a cost-effective plan built on cleaner generation," said Natalie Hedde, company spokeswoman.
The portfolio for future power generation comes after months of public meetings and work by Vectren employees aimed at finding a means of power generation that balances environmental and consumer considerations.
However, Vectren will continue burning coal at one generating station of its F.B. Culley power plant in Warrick County and add 460 megawatts of natural gas generated power generation capacity.
As a result, the plan is drawing mixed reveiws from environmental advocates such as the Sierra Club who want Vectren to switch completely to renewable energy.
Those details and more are part of the utility's preferred portfolio of energy generation sources over the next 20 years, made public as it develops its latest Integrated Resource Plan .
Indiana law requires utilities to update the plans every three years with input from the public. The evolving 20-year plans look into how much electricity each utility thinks it will need and where it will come from but the plans are not considered binding.
Individual components of the plan must each be approved by the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission.
Vectren will file the plan with the IURC on June 30 and there will be an opportunity for public comment, said Jason Stephenson, company vice president and general counsel.
Here is how Vectren says it plans to change its energy sources through 2024:
2024, add two natural gas combustion turbines, totaling 460 megawatts.
Hedde said Tuesday the new mix of power generation moving forward will avoid an estimated $700 million that would have been spent to comply with environmental regulations.
Stephenson said the $320 million estimated customer savings would come from a mix of tax credits for solar and wind power and the lower cost to operate and maintain such renewable energy sources.
While Vectren will close its A.B. Brown power plant in Posey County and one of the two generating units at its Culley plant in 2023, there is no plan to stop using the remaining 230-megawatt Culley generating station, said Matt Rice, the company's manager of resource planning.
Rice said the generating station is fully equipped with pollution controls for sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide and particulate pollution.
However, Melissa Williams, a spokeswoman for the Sierra Club's Beyond Coal Campaign, said continuing to operate the aging Culley generating station keeps Vectren customers on the hook for the high cost of maintaining the aging coal plant.
The Culley power plant has been in operation since 1973, according to Vectren.
Vectren will also add two natural gas combustion turbines, each capable of producing 230 megawatts of electricity. Hedde said the turbines will provide a backup generation source during times of peak demand.
The utility retired four older natural gas peaking units, totaling a 135 megawatts, during 2018 and 2019.
Company officials said a location for the new turbines isn't determined but that the current A.B. Brown site would be a logical place.
A previous proposal to replace A.B. Brown with a 897-megawatt natural gas power plant was rejected by the IURC.
As other investor-owned utilities in the state developed their own IRP plans, pressure has increased on utilities to move to renewable energy sources as a way of both addressing climate change and pollution issues as well as consumer concerns.
"Community members and city leaders have called on Vectren to announce a plan that would provide us with a clean energy future. With a confluence of health, economic and climate crises impacting Southwest Indiana communities, this plan simply does not meet the demands of the day," said Wendy Bredhold, senior campaign representative for the Sierra Club’s Beyond Coal Campaign in Indiana who’s also an Evansville resident.
She said Vectren said in its presentation that there is high customer demand for renewable energy and their own analysis shows they could have given customers a 100 percent renewable energy portfolio by 2030 at a comparable cost that Sierra Club estimates at an additional $0.68 per month for residential customers.
"Instead Vectren chose to continue to burn coal and build new gas plants that will become stranded assets at some point in the not too distant future," Bredhold said.
Hedde said Vectren's analysis showed its choice of power generation portfolios was the most cost-effective across the entire time span of the next 20 years.
"The renewable piece is certainly what we are going to lead with," she said.
However, Hedde said the decision to continue burning some coal was one of flexibility and reliability, giving the utility to meet electricity demand at times when solar or wind capacity might not be able to do so.
She noted that when regulators approved Vectren's 50-megawatt solar project near Troy, Indiana, in April 2019, upgrades to the Culley plant also were approved which will make it the most efficient of Vectren's coal-fired units.
