VIRGINIA BEACH, Va. - Virginia Natural Gas is helping customers who are facing financial hardships due to COVID-19 by connecting them to energy assistance funds, offering more flexible payment plans and providing energy saving measures to help keep bills manageable as the pandemic continues to impact Virginians.
“While we have been working to keep our communities and employees safe to ensure reliable natural gas service, we understand these are trying times for many of our customers,” said Jim Kibler, president of VNG. “Customers can take comfort knowing we are here to help and provide options to those who may be struggling to pay their bills, many for the first time.”
Virginia Natural Gas suspended service disconnections for non-payment March 14 for both residential and commercial customers. The Virginia State Corporation Commission recently extended the moratorium until August 31 to give the General Assembly time to address the economic impact of the crisis on utility customers.
VNG is providing the following to assist customers with their bills:
Payment arrangement plans are available for customers to help manage their natural gas bills by spreading out costs over time. VNG is now offering extended payment arrangement options of up to 12 months for customers impacted by the pandemic and will eliminate the required down payment.
The Virginia Natural Gas Budget Plan provides a convenient way for customers to plan for and pay their monthly natural gas bill. Customers pay a more consistent amount by estimating natural gas usage and natural gas prices for the next year and adjusting quarterly to allow a credit balance to build up and help offset bills that may be higher during the winter heating season
VNG’s Energy Efficiency Program helps customers save energy. A free online energy audit provides a customized report on ways to save energy at home since many customers are spending more time at home and experiencing increased energy usage due to the pandemic. Customers can also request a free energy-savings kit filled with items to help them weatherize their home to start saving money
For more information on any of these programs, click here.
Copyright 2020 Scripps Media, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
Sign up for the Headlines Newsletter and receive up to date information.
now signed up to receive the Headlines Newsletter.
