As oil prices go, so goes Clean Energy stock.
I like things that go "boom." Sonic or otherwise, that means I tend to gravitate towards defense and aerospace stocks. But to tell the truth, over the course of a dozen years writing for The Motley Fool, I have covered -- and continue to cover -- everything from retailers to consumer goods stocks, and from tech to banks to insurers as well. Follow me on Twitter or Facebook for the most important developments in defense & aerospace news, and other great stories besides.
Shares of natural gas fleet fuel provider Clean Energy Fuels ( NASDAQ:CLNE ) stock closed 10.7% higher on Wednesday -- a rather remarkable result given that there was no company-specific news to report today. Neither did Clean Energy issue any announcements about itself, nor did a single analyst change so much as a price target about the stock.
Why did it move? Let's look again at that statement about analysts. No one said "boo" about Clean Energy today, but a little over a week ago, as TheFly.com points out, investment banker Raymond James issued a curious note warning that it seems "risky" for anyone to be shorting Clean Energy stock right now -- and matching actions to words, RJ promptly canceled its own short recommendation and upgraded Clean Energy stock to "market perform."
I see two good reasons for this. For one, Clean Energy is due to report Q4 earnings less than a month ago. Should that news be better than expected, shorts could be burned -- and right now, analysts are predicting very good news indeed, saying Clean Energy could theoretically have earned as much as $0.16 per share in Q4, a big improvement over last year's $0.01-per-share loss.
A second reason to favor Clean Energy right now, as RJ also points out, is that there's a "close relationship between oil prices and investor sentiment on Clean Energy." Specifically, the stock tends to do well when oil prices go high , because this makes natural gas more attractive as an alternative to high oil prices.
Right now, oil prices are riding a couple-day streak of higher prices, with a barrel of West Texas intermediate crude costing 3.8% than it cost on Monday. Whether this is just a blip in a longer-term trend of declining oil prices (since January, oil prices are down 19%) or the start of a rebound is anybody's guess. Raymond James, though, is leaning toward the latter theory and predicting that by 2021, oil prices will be at seven-year highs.
If RJ is right about that, and if Clean Energy does indeed follow the path blazed by higher oil prices, shorting Clean Energy shares could be a risky and money-losing endeavor for some time to come.
