Motley Fool Australia » Share Fallers » Why James Hardie, LNG, Mesoblast, & Westpac shares are tumbling lower
James Mickleboro | April 14, 2020 11:25am | More on: JHX LNG MSB WBC
In late morning trade the S&P/ASX 200 Index (ASX: XJO) is on form again and pushing higher. At the time of writing the benchmark index is up 0.7% to 5,424.4 points.
Four shares that have failed to follow the market higher today are listed below. Here’s why they are tumbling lower:
The James Hardie Industries plc (ASX: JHX) share price has fallen 2% to $19.85. This decline appears to have been driven by a broker note out of Credit Suisse this morning. It has downgraded the building materials company’s shares to a neutral rating and cut the price target on them to $21.50. It believes there is a risk that building activity could decrease materially.
The Liquefied Natural Gas Ltd (ASX: LNG) share price has crashed 36% lower to 7.4 cents. Following the recent failure for LNG-9 to gain funding, the company has notified Liquefied Natural Gas that it is withdrawing its takeover bid. Liquefied Natural Gas also advised that it has existing cash reserves to meet all of its commitments until May 2020. As a result, it warned that it must secure additional meaningful funding urgently to continue operating beyond then.
The Mesoblast limited (ASX: MSB) share price has tumbled 7.5% to $2.31. This appears to have been caused by profit taking after a stellar gain this month. Prior to today’s decline, Mesoblast’s shares were up over 65% since the start of April. This gain has been driven by the company’s progress towards trialling a COVID-19 treatment for ARDS patients.
The Westpac Banking Corp (ASX: WBC) share price is down 0.5% to $15.88. This morning the banking giant announced expected new and increased provisions (excluding impairment provisions) and asset write-downs. These provisions total approximately $1,430 million after tax and will reduce its first half FY 2020 cash earnings and statutory net profit after tax accordingly. The release advises that a provision of $1,030 million after tax is related to the AUSTRAC proceedings and its response plan.
We hear it over and over from investors, "I wish I had bought Altium or Afterpay when they were first recommended by The Motley Fool. I'd be sitting on a gold mine!" And it's true.
And while Altium and Afterpay have had a good run, we think these 5 other stocks are screaming buys. And you can buy them now for less than $5 a share!
Motley Fool contributor James Mickleboro owns shares of Westpac Banking. The Motley Fool Australia has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy . This article contains general investment advice only (under AFSL 400691). Authorised by Scott Phillips.
When our resident dividend expert Edward Vesely has a stock tip, it can pay to listen.
After all, he’s the investing genius that runs Motley Fool Dividend Investor, the newsletter service that has picked huge winners like SDI Limited (+53%) and National Storage (+35%)
Sign up now for instant access to your copy of this free report.
By clicking this button, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . We will use your email address only to keep you informed about updates to our website and about other products and services we think might interest you. You can unsubscribe at anytime. Please refer to our Financial Services Guide (FSG) for more information. Returns quoted are as of 7/4/2020
