An employee pushes shopping carts toward a Kroger store in Peoria, Illinois.
Stocks plunged on Thursday , as investors moved to price in greater concerns about a second wave of coronavirus infections and a slower economic recovery. The S&P 500 ended the day down 5.9%, its largest drop since March . The selling was broad, with 504 of the index’s 505 components (some companies have multiple share classes, such as Alphabet’s GOOGL and GOOG) closing in the red today.
One stock bucked the trend: Kroger (ticker: KR), which managed to post a slight 0.4% gain. The grocery chain’s business has been a rare beneficiary of the coronavirus outbreak and resulting physical-distancing requirements. If the recent rise in cases in several U.S. states continues or accelerates, new stay-at-home orders and restrictions could follow.
With many restaurants closed and people working from home cooking more, Kroger and other grocers have seen higher-than-normal sales of food and other staples since February. Other retailers classified as nonessential have been closed as well, and that has boosted sales of nongrocery items at Kroger and other big-box stores that have remained open. Walmart (WMT) stock slipped a relatively modest 0.9% Thursday.
That advantage has waned in recent weeks, as more nonessential businesses and restaurants reopened in more states. Kroger stock is down about 5% since the middle of May, while the S&P 500 has returned more than 13%. But should investors’ worst fears be realized and a new wave of stay-at-home orders appear, Kroger’s business could see another boost .
It isn’t in the S&P 500, but Zoom Video Communications (ZM) stock also closed up 0.5% today, thanks to investors betting on a slower return to the workplace. It has been the poster-child stock for the coronavirus market, up 226% year to date.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
Even if state and local governments don’t issue new orders, Kroger could still benefit if consumers still slow their return to riskier activities. And if that means the economic recovery will be slower than the ‘V-shaped’ rebound that some investors have been betting on, Kroger’s downside is limited. Spending-conscious consumers may reduce their discretionary splurges, but people still need groceries no matter the state of the economy. That defensive posture helps stocks like Kroger on days like Thursday.
Several consumer staples stocks were among the smallest decliners on Thursday. Shares of toilet-paper maker Kimberly-Clark (KMB) fell 1.1%, as did Clorox ’s (CLX), which sells cleaning liquids, disinfecting wipes, and germ-killing bleach—thank economic resiliency and heightened demand for their products during the coronavirus outbreak.
Cabot Oil & Gas (COG) stock lost 0.5%, the smallest loss in the S&P 500 Thursday. There are a few layers to explain that relative outperformance. A slower economic recovery means less demand for energy, and extended physical distancing means less driving from commuters and consumers. Accordingly, oil prices tumbled alongside stocks on Thursday.
Cabot is one of the largest U.S. natural gas companies, and about a third of U.S. natural gas output comes as a byproduct of shale oil production. If lower oil prices cause shale producers to cut back on supply, that should lead to lower natural gas supply and higher prices. That would benefit Cabot.
Stocks plunged on Thursday, as investors moved to price in greater concerns about a second wave of coronavirus infections and a slower economic recovery.
