Colorado consumers will have some financial help in fending off the colder temperatures as winter rolls in.
Xcel Energy has filed natural gas rates with the Colorado Public Utilities Commission that are 25% lower for the upcoming quarter than they were in the same period a year ago.
The typical household will pay $20.18 less a month for natural gas, Xcel Energy estimates. The average bill will drop to $59.21 a month from $79.39 a month in the first quarter of 2019.
PDC Energy will pay $688K to settle allegations that it tapped federal minerals without getting lease, permits
That decline reflects an abundant supply of natural gas. But gas furnaces typically rely on electric motors, and no relief is coming on that front.
Xcel Energy has asked to pass on a 0.34% increase in the commodity price of electricity in the first three months of the year. That should raise the typical residential electric bill to $62.89 a month from $62.68 a month at the start of the year.
Beyond that, Xcel Energy has asked the PUC for a more permanent 6.7% increase in the base rate for electricity next year to help it upgrade the power grid and fund other improvements. But that request is facing opposition .
Metro Denver is on track to record its coldest year since 1997, and the state is seeing its coldest average temperature for a year since 2008, according to meteorologist Chris Bianchi .
Aldo Svaldi has worked at The Denver Post since 2000. His coverage areas have included residential real estate, economic development and the Colorado economy. He's also worked for Financial Times Energy, the Denver Business Journal and Arab News.
To cover an anticipated budget shortfall of nearly $4 million, the Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission is proposing a higher mill levy on companies.
Parents and educators from the Bella Romero Academy in Greeley sent a petition to Gov. Jared Polis this week demanding the shutdown of natural gas fracking wells near the school that they say are exposing students to the cancer-causing chemical benzene.
Gov. Jared Polis on Monday named a new, five-member commission to take over crafting and putting in place major changes to Colorado's oil and gas regulations, as the multibillion-dollar industry struggles with a global pandemic and slump in demand for energy.
A federal judge this week sentenced a Denver man to 27 months behind bars for perpetrating an elaborate decade-long scheme to defraud Xcel Energy and the IRS.
