By Steven Anderson February 15, 2020 Off
CZ Binance tweeted :  “Parts of the system are still struggling to keep up with the high traffic. Given so many updates per day, not all parts of the system have been live tested under this load. I guess the good news is: there is very high SUSTAINED demand. Working on it, all hands on deck.”
Binance has recently facilitated 15 Fiat currency options to make it easier for users to purchase cryptocurrencies.  The list of the support currencies has increased in number, which includes but might also expand in the future furthering from, “British pound sterling, South Korean won, Russian ruble, Australian dollar, Swiss franc, Czech koruna, Danish krone, Norwegian krone, New Zealand dollar, Polish złoty, Swedish krona, Turkish lira, South African rand, Hungarian forint, and Israeli shekel.”
Sydney Ifergan, the Crypto Expert Tweeted :  “Binance is in the limelight for introducing a lot of fiat exchange options.  The options are expensive but worth for those who are keen about making profits when opportunities arise.”
Binance has launched a program in January, and they are focused on adding more cryptocurrency merchants in the process.
To take advantage of the Binance option, users would do best by making use of the stop-loss orders.  Several other options, like taking profit-limit orders and closing out of position before touching the liquidation points, are particularly useful. This is possible even when the user is not watching the market.
Binance is focused on facilitating sustainable futures by protecting users against potential losses by providing them with loss mitigating options.
Binance would be upgrading and bringing in further enhancements without interfering with trading operations.
Binance recently tweeted : “Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence – the Future of Technology Explained It is impossible to predict the potential effects of strong AI, but many believe the future of blockchain & AI will likely be intertwined.”
The Binance Academy provides a clear explanation about the synergy between AI and Blockchain. They also cover concepts like AI improvements for the blockchain, decentralized data economy, decentralized supercomputers, and better audibility of AI decisions.
There will be a point in time when it will become impossible to separate blockchain technology and artificial intelligence.  Artificial intelligence will mainly be useful to improve mining algorithms and to optimize energy consumption.
