Demand for Bitcoin futures on Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) keeps rising as CME plans to consolidate on the bullish market for more growth.
Increased activity in the bitcoin market is CME’s main motivation. The exchange plans to continue making bitcoin futures a recognized stream of revenue.
Other platforms are experiencing the same growth in Bitcoin futures, but not as high as the current rate at CME.
interest. Ina recent statement by Arcane, the CME keeps
growing steadily in the demand for Bitcoin futures compared to other platforms.
CME bitcoin’s future demand has risen to a great level, with a strong
Based on the report by Skew, CME’s Bitcoin future’s open interest stood at 101% between the 1st and 20th January. Another Bitcoin derivatives platform, Bakkt , also improved in its bitcoin future open interest, as it realized an interest of $3.8 million on the 1st of January. However, the figure rose to an impressive $7.8 million by 20th January.
But results from other platforms show that the performance of Bitcoin is more closely in line with gold than S & P. Just three weeks into the New Year, bitcoin has gained about 14.41%, and at the time of writing, the price of the digital asset stands at $8,314.72.
As there is an improved relationship between BTC and ETH,
the price of the later has equally increased, but not to the level of BTC. The
asset is currently valued at $161.35. We are still in the first month of the
growth prospects of both Bitcoin and Ethereum.
As a multi-billion dollar derivatives firm, CME would have no need to push for Bitcoin futures , Bitcoin options, and other investment vehicles if the market for Bitcoin wasn’t favorable. Tim McCourt, the firm’s executive said the company trade on Bitcoin’s future is almost $264.8 million daily.
He stated that the company is happy that its Bitcoin futures have become one of the most liquid as it has evolved quickly within the past two years. According to him, the Bitcoin futures contract has averaged about 31,850 Bitcoin with 6400 contracts per day.
At the current price of $8,314 per BTC, it means that 31,
850 BTC would be equivalent to about $264.8 million. The growth is comparable
to the spot volume of other major exchanges in the world crypto market.
As far as CME is concerned, Bitcoin futures, as well as other product derivatives, are recognized streams of revenue for the company. The high level of activity on Bitcoin futures also spurs the company to continue in the crypto market .
Just seven days after its launch, the volume of CME’s
investment mechanisms on its platform.
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
