Litecoin price is among the most improved cryptoassets in the market on Thursday and during the European session. The crypto features a 2% gain on the day after advancing from an opening value of $45.01 to $45.90 (market value). Litecoin is trailing other cryptocurrencies such as Ethereum at 3%, IOTA at 2.69% and EOS at 2.19%. On the other hand, Bitcoin stepped above $9,300 from $9,158 (opening value).
Ethereal Summit, a virtual crypto conference devoted to the Ethereum project and cryptocurrency industry in general, will go live today, May 7 at 7:15 am EST. Everyone can register and participate in the event for free, via their computer of an internet-enabled device.
Ripple Price Analysis: XRP/USD recovery on the way, once it clears daily SMA200
XRP/USD has recovered from the intraday low of $0.2099 to trade at $0.2145 by press time. The coin has gained 1.3% since the beginning of Thursday, though it is still 2.5% lower from this time on Wednesday. Ripple’s XRP has been moving in sync with the market, influenced by general sentiments and technical factors. Now it is the third-largest digital coin with the current market value of $9.4 billion and an average daily trading volume of $2.2 billion.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
