CHICAGO & NEW YORK--( BUSINESS WIRE )--ErisX is thrilled to be the first U.S. based exchange to introduce Ether physically settled futures contracts. Starting today, both institutional and individual investors can access Ether physically delivered futures on the ErisX platform.
ErisX is committed to being the leader in the cryptocurrency space by bringing to market an innovative and unified platform for spot and regulated futures. Trades are executed through the Exchange’s central limit order book, which ensures all submitted orders are treated equally, and are cleared at the ErisX clearinghouse to eliminate counterparty risk. Block trading will also be available on ErisX’s Ether futures contracts.
“We strongly believe that the Ethereum blockchain community and broader capital markets benefit from access to regulated products and we are pleased to be the first U.S. exchange to offer these futures contracts,” said Thomas Chippas, CEO of ErisX. “Our contract sizes are accessible for any investor while our technology stack and regulatory framework meet institutional expectations.”
"The Ethereum network is the leading programmable blockchain delivering real-world value to enterprises, governments, and individuals. As the digital fuel for the network, Ether is structured similarly to commodities traded in traditional capital markets today,” said Joseph Lubin, Founder of ConsenSys, an early investor in ErisX. “We are proud to support ErisX as they leverage existing precedents and standards to meet market demands for a secure, transparent, compliant and sophisticated Ether futures product.”
ErisX currently operates a live spot market for Bitcoin, Bitcoin Cash, Ether and Litecoin and a regulated futures market for physically delivered Bitcoin and Ether futures. The Exchange is currently running a promotion which includes a fee holiday and eliminated account minimums through May 2020 for individual investors. Individuals can start trading ErisX’s spot market here and institutions please contact business.development@erisx.com .
The information contained herein does not constitute a prospectus, nor is it a recommendation to buy, sell or retain any specific financial instrument or security. The information is provided to you for informational purposes only and is intended as a broad overview of certain aspects of ErisX and the market and should not be considered investment, legal, or tax advice.
ErisX offers individuals and institutions a single, innovative platform to access crypto spot and futures markets. By combining professional tools, advanced technology, sophisticated regulatory oversight, and a diverse product set, ErisX offers compliant, capital markets friendly workflows to digital market participants. Backed by some of the world’s largest trading firms and financial institutions, ErisX brings transparency and reliability to the digital asset class. ErisX, Eris Exchange, and the ErisX and Eris Exchange logos are trademarks of the Eris Exchange group of companies.
ErisX Futures are offered through Eris Exchange, LLC, a Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) registered Designated Contract Market (DCM) and Eris Clearing, LLC, a registered Derivatives Clearing Organization (DCO). The CFTC does not have regulatory oversight authority over virtual currency products including spot market trading of virtual currencies. ErisX Spot Market is not licensed, approved or registered with the CFTC and transactions on the ErisX Spot Market are not subject to CFTC rules, regulations or regulatory oversight. ErisX Spot Market may be subject to certain state licensing requirements and operates in NY pursuant to Eris Clearing’s license to engage in virtual currency business activity by the New York State Department of Financial Services.
