Starbucks is the world's largest coffee chain, boasting more than 30,000 stores.
Users of the Bakkt app will be able to spend bitcoin on Starbucks coffee via the app, however, they won't be making bitcoin payments directly to the company–a process that is still too slow for most consumer transactions.
"We’re now focused on the development of the consumer app and merchant portal, as well as testing with our first launch partner, Starbucks, which we expect in the first half of next year," Bakkt chief product officer Mike Blandina said in a blog post announcing the app.
"A key feature of the model we’ve designed is to support a superset of digital assets, including cryptocurrencies, as seamlessly as investors transact in stocks in a retail brokerage account."
Earlier this week, the chief executive of New York Stock Exchange-owner ICE, Jeffrey Sprecher, said that for bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies to become a long-term store of value transactions need to pick up.
"Because I’m old I think of [how] gold became a store of value because at one point it was a currency," Sprecher reportedly told investors during an ICE quarterly earnings call.
"We had gold coins, it was in circulation, and over time because of the nature of its ability to spend, … it became a store of value and today, you know, in a crisis we all accept gold as a form of payment.
The bitcoin price surged earlier this year on reports some of the world's biggest technology ... [+] companies were interested in bitcoin and crypto but stalled as global regulators poured cold water on plans.
Meanwhile, the bitcoin halving may not have the effect on the price many expect it to , with litecoin, one of bitcoin's major rivals struggling after going though its own halving event this year.
The litecoin price surged ahead of the halving, in which the number of new digital tokens rewarded to so-called miners is reduced by half, but has since fallen back.
In May next year the coin reward for mining new bitcoin blocks is scheduled to drop from 12.5 bitcoin to 6.25 bitcoin–cutting the supply of new bitcoin coming onto the market by half.
