How to Trade Litecoin (LTC) with Leverage on BitMEX?
How to Trade Litecoin (LTC) with Leverage on BitMEX?
BitMEX is the world’s leading exchange for trading cryptocurrency derivatives. The process of registering on the platform is extremely quick, and requires no KYC.
, the maximum leverage is on BitMEX is 33x.
The volatility of the cryptocurrency market means that crypto trading inherently comes with a lot of risk. This is even more true for trading cryptocurrencies on margin, as losses can pile on extremely quickly due to rapid price swings. For this reason, inexperienced traders should avoid trading cryptocurrencies on margin.
If you are interested in checking out BitMEX but do not wish to put your BTC at risk by trading, you can try out the BitMEX testnet to see how the platform functions.
While BitMEX allows traders to speculate on the price movements of a variety of cryptocurrencies, all deposits and withdrawals on BitMEX are done through Bitcoin (BTC) only.
In this guide, we will be setting up an account on BitMEX, deposit some BTC to the exchange, and place a margin order to speculate on the price of Litecoin.
As mentioned previously, creating a BitMEX account is a very simple process. Enter your e-mail address, password, country of residence, name and read the terms of service. Once you’re finished, you will receive a confirmation e-mail with a link that will activate your account.
For additional safety of your account, we recommend you use 2-factor authentication.
Once you activate your account and log in, you will be greeted by the main BitMEX dashboard. In order to trade on BitMEX, you will need to deposit some Bitcoin first. BTC is the only cryptocurrency you can deposit to BitMEX, and the exchange doesn’t handle fiat currencies. Go to the Account section in the navigation bar.
For the purposes of this guide, we have already deposited a very small amount of BTC to the exchange. In order to make your deposit, click on “Deposit” and a Bitcoin deposit address will appear. You will receive a confirmation from BitMEX once your Bitcoin deposit transaction is complete and you will be ready to start trading.
BitMEX primarily offers two types of trading products - futures contracts and perpetual contracts.
A futures contract is an agreement to purchase an asset on a certain date at a predetermined price. The buyer of a futures contract is obliged to buy the asset when the contract expires, while the seller is obliged to sell the asset.
While futures contracts can be used for hedging against price movements, they are mostly used on BitMEX for the purposes of speculation. Depending on which side of a futures contract (long/short) a trader is on, they can make a profit from the asset either appreciating or depreciating in value.
BitMEX has developed perpetual contracts, which function similarly to futures contracts but do not have an expiration date or settlement. This means that once you enter a position, you can hold it indefinitely (unless your position gets liquidated). Perpetual contracts are designed to trade close to the spot price of the underlying asset.
BitMEX allows margin trading with up to 100x leverage on certain products. Margin trading enables a trader to amplify their buying power. For example, a trader can use 0.1 BTC to enter a position worth 1 BTC by using 10x leverage.
However, losses are amplified as well if the market moves against the trader. BitMEX offers two types of margin: cross margin and isolated margin. To read about the difference, click here. In our example, we will be using isolated margin.
Before making any trading decisions, be sure to read up on the specifics of how BitMEX deals with margin, liquidation, and the different types of products they offer. This information is all available on the BitMEX platform itself. When you are starting with trading on BitMEX, use small amounts until you become comfortable with the platform's features and products.
Now, we are ready to place an order. Select the Litecoin tab in the cryptocurrency selection bar (pink) and the kind of product you would like to trade (blue). The June 28 futures contract is selected by default, and this is the contract we will be trading. This contract is set to expire on June 28 - if we don't close our position before then, it will be automatically closed on Jun 28, 2019, 2:00:00 PM.
Let’s say we think the price of Litecoin is going to increase. In this example, we will be going long on the June 28 contract with 16x leverage. Please note that this is relatively high leverage, but we are using very small amounts of BTC in this demonstration. When you start trading on BitMEX, it is recommended to use lower leverage until you become comfortable with the platform and develop your trading strategy.
In order to enter our position, we can choose a limit order or a market order. The contract size for BitMEX's Litecoin futures is 1 LTC. This means that you cannot enter a position that's smaller than 1 LTC.
In this example, we will be using a limit order. First, we enter the quantity of contracts we wish to buy or sell and the price that we wish to enter our position at. The value of each contract equals 1 LTC. In our example, we will be purchasing 1 contract at 0.0122 XBT. Next, we use the leverage slider below to set our leverage to 16x. We will set the leverage to 16x by clicking the pen icon, which allows us to specify a number that's not available on the slider.
When opening a position, the cost of the position (blue) cannot exceed our available balance (red). If we attempt to open such a position, the platform will notify us by displaying an error message.
The cost of our position consists of our initial margin + fees.
The cost of our position consists of our initial margin + fees. In this example, the cost of the position is 0.0008 XBT. In our trade, the cost of our position (0.0008 XBT) is the maximum amount we can lose. If the price reaches the liquidation price, our position will be automatically liquidated and we will lose 0.0008 XBT.
If we kept all of the parameters the same but increased the leverage, the cost of our position would decrease, although this would also mean that the liquidation price would come closer to our entry price – a smaller price movement would be necessary for our position to be liquidated.
Once we click BUY/LONG, an order confirmation window will appear where we can see all the parameters of our order and confirm it.
When our order is filled, we can track the status of our position at the bottom of the exchange’s dashboard. Here, we can also close our position and choose whether we want to close it at a specific price or at the market price (immediately). The "Unrealised PNL" tab shows how profitable or unprofitable the trade is at the moment. The "Liq. Price" tab shows the liquidation price. If this price is reached, we will lose our entire position.
A stop market order can be used to limit the maximum loss we are willing to take in case we end up on the wrong side of the trade. The liquidation price for this position is at 0.01164 XBT. However, let’s say we want to protect ourselves against the possibility of our position getting liquidated. To do this, we will select the “Stop Market” feature in the “Place Order” tab.
Let’s say that we want to exit our entire position in the event that Litecoin drops to 0.0118 XBT, as we anticipate a further decline if the price falls that low. We will place a stop market order for 1 contract (the size of our position) at 0.0118 XBT. If the price falls to 0.0118 XBT, the order will trigger and will be automatically placed in the order book.
We can track the status of our stop orders under the “Stops” tab.
In addition to Litecoin, you can use BitMEX to trade Bitcoin , Ethereum , Cardano, Bitcoin Cash, EOS, TRON and Ripple.
