Is the Tesco share price a buy amid stock market panic?
With supermarkets among the only businesses permitted to stay open during the coronavirus pandemic and consumers stockpiling food during lockdown, Tesco shares have held up better than the broader market.
Aaran Fronda | Financial writer, London | Publication date : 2020-03-24T19:29:28+0000
With supermarkets among the only businesses permitted to stay open during the coronavirus pandemic and consumers stockpiling food during lockdown, Tesco shares have held up better than the broader market.
Tesco shares have tumbled 15% since the start of the Covid-19 outbreak, with the stock performing exceptionally during such challenging times and considering that the FTSE 100 has fall 32% over the same period.
Tesco closed at 216p a share on Tuesday.
Looking to trade Tesco and other UK supermarkets? Open a live or demo account with IG.
On Tuesday, analysts from HSBC upgraded Tesco’s investment rating from ‘hold’ to ‘buy’, with the market relatively optimistic about the stock’s performance in 2020 despite the economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic.
In fact, of the 14 analysts offering 12-month price targets for the stock, the median target sits at 287p a share, with a high estimate of 315p.
Based on Tesco trading at 216p a share, the median price represents a potential upside of 32%, with the high estimate implying a 45% rise in value over the course of the year.
Earlier this month, Tesco announced that it will divest its Thailand and Malaysian units to That conglomerate CP Group in a deal valued at £8.2 billion, with the supermarket chain planning to return £5 billion to shareholders via a special dividend.
Tesco also said that it plans to use the proceeds from the sale to reduce the amount of debt on its balance sheet though a £2.5 billion pension contribution, eliminating the fund’s deficit and ‘significantly’ reducing the prospect of making further such payments in the future.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Market volatility continues as coronavirus concerns amplify. Trade with IG and take advantage of:
Tight spreads – from just 1 point on major indices, and 2.8 on US crude
Guaranteed stops – they’re free to use, and only incur a fee when triggered
