Founded in May of 2017 by a group of experienced business specialists who had previously worked on projects such as Ant Financial and iBox PAY, KuCoin is a third party exchange that allows traders to buy, sell, and trade a wide variety of cryptocurrencies.
Its goal is to build a simple and safe platform for people all over the world to trade a range of digital coins that traders can access via a desktop computer or the KuCoin app on both Android and iOS, letting you trade anywhere you are.
To take advantage of all of KuCoin's features and currencies, click here to sign up. The exchange provides you a user-friendly experience which is sure to help you complete your trades quickly and easily while supporting all your favorite cryptocurrencies.
There are more than 40 different trading pairs and more than 75 individual cryptocurrencies available on KuCoin such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin, Bitcoin Cash, VeChain, Lympo, and more.
KuCoin is popular for new cryptocurrencies that have already completed their ICO, making it a great exchange for beginners to purchase cryptocurrencies.
Apart from the blockchain transaction fee that you pay to make the transfer, cryptocurrency deposits are free.
Once a trader makes a trade, he will only pay 0.1% of the amount he is buying. For example, when purchasing $1000 worth of Litecoin, a trader would only pay $1.
Withdrawal fees depend on what cryptocurrency you want to take out but they are in-line with the rest of the industry.
The KuCoin website is protected by an encryption protocol that keeps the privacy of account information secure.
To get more protection in users’ accounts, the exchange offers you the chance to set up Google Authenticator or other authenticator services.
This work by needing to enter a code from the user’s mobile phone on to the Kucoin website before logging in, as well as to make a trade.
In case someone was able to find out your password, they still would not be able to access your account since they would need access to your mobile device.
The Kucoin exchange has a lot of features to analyze pricing trends, such as candlestick bars, that is good for beginners and experts alike. The platform is easy to use, with everything from depositing to completing a trade being pretty straight forward.
The website offers security, flexibility, and ease of use to make the experience as simple and pleasant as possible, as it should be when trading crypto.
Nicholas Say grew up in Ann Arbor, Michigan with a father that would read him the Wall St. Journal.
Nicholas spent many years in the Southern Cone of South America, sometimes in the middle of absolutely nowhere, draining a whiskey bottle as he dreamed of a better way of living.
Now he lives in the Far East and writes on a variety of subjects. He supposes that ‘nowhere’ is perhaps the only truth there is.
