People in Venezuela have been struggling against economic collapse and hyperinflation over recent years, with the president Nicolas Maduro clinging onto power despite a U.S.-backed challenge from opposition leader Juan Guaido and international sanctions.
The litecoin price rallied to year-to-date highs today.
Use of bitcoin, litecoin and other cryptocurrencies in Venezula has risen over recent months as people trade on platforms such as LocalBitcoins to dodge international sanctions and the collapsing bolívar.
There were more than 25 billion bolívars traded on LocalBitcoins last week, according to CoinDance data.
Others have meanwhile suggested litecoin has benefitted in recent months from developer efforts to improve security and privacy and several high-profile partnerships —as well as its upcoming halving event.
“A combination of climbing crypto volumes and their ability to sustain these levels has created a welcome change for investors. In turn, this has given crypto prices a real boost over the last 24 hours, allowing market momentum to stretch its legs again," said Mati Greenspan, senior market analyst at brokerage eToro.
"Litecoin’s strong rally should not come as a surprise; it was high time the fast-paced growth of the community and user base was priced in. Investors may also have one eye on litecoin’s upcoming reward halving event, so it’s likely they’re already pricing in the supply reduction, which is scheduled for August."
Bitcoin trading on the peer-to-peer LocalBitcoins trading platform in Venezula has risen sharply... [+] over recent months.
The bitcoin sector is currently trapped in a long-running bear market, with some $400 billion in value wiped from the world's cryptocurrencies over the past 12 months as adoption stalls and banks put closely-watched plans to wade into bitcoin and cryptocurrencies on hold .
Bitcoin's epic 2017 bull run was largely put down to expectations institutional investment and big bank support for bitcoin would soon arrive. As 2018 dragged on and that investment failed to appear many investors and traders got cold feet, bailing out of their bitcoin and cryptocurrency positions .
Many bitcoin investors and traders are however looking toward things like the highly-anticipated Bakkt bitcoin platform and a U.S. bitcoin exchange-traded fund (ETF) to boost the price, though those expectations have been somewhat dampened lately as the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission frets over potential price manipulation.
The Bakkt bitcoin platform, which is being developed with New York Stock Exchange owner Intercontinental Exchange as well as partnerships with coffee shop chain Starbucks and PC giant Microsoft, plans to offer bitcoin futures trading from the first quarter of this year and open bitcoin and cryptocurrencies up to a wider retail market.
Be among the first to get important crypto and blockchain news and information with Forbes Crypto Confidential. Sign up for free now .
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
