When DiPasquale stated that litecoin "follows" bitcoin, he meant that the price of the two have frequently moved in tandem.
This relationship was explored in a CoinDesk analysis , which used CryptoCompare data.
Bitcoin's price has suffered over the last few days, falling from more than $9,700 to less than $8,400 yesterday on CoinMarketCap.
The world's most prominent cryptocurrency is in a "significant recent downtrend" and pulled the majority of the altcoin market with it," said Michael Conn, founder and managing partner of financial services firm Quail Creek Ventures.
He described this, along with the aforementioned challenges surrounding the halving and development, as "a perfect storm for Litecoin."
While several analysts spoke to the difficulties facing the digital currency, Ilir Gashi, community manager of the Litecoin Foundation , emphasized that the altcoin's price climbed more than 500% between December 2018 and June 2019.
As a result, the cryptocurrency is "currently retracting and pulling back," he stated.
Further, litecoin's "hashrate has remained relatively secure around ~310 TH/s which means that the mining pools are not that moved from the recent drops in price," Gashi noted.
Akbar Thobhani, CEO and cofounder of cryptocurrency prime dealer SFOX , emphasized that the altcoin's recent volatility may be a perfectly natural consequence of the halving that took place last month.
"'Halvenings' of any major cryptocurrency, historically, have correlated with increased volatility as traders are uncertain about the effect that the change in the rate of new coin supply will have on the coin's price," he stated.
"SFOX previously suggested that the Litecoin halvening could correspond with more LTC volatility, and we appear to be observing that trend."
"As with any asset class, lasting value comes from fundamentals such as number of users and transactions, and these are the metrics to watch as Litecoin and other cryptocurrencies continue to grow."
I am a financial writer and editor with strong knowledge of asset markets and investing concepts. Currently, I serve as VP of Content for financial services firm Quantum
I am a financial writer and editor with strong knowledge of asset markets and investing concepts. Currently, I serve as VP of Content for financial services firm Quantum Economics. I have worked for financial institutions including State Street, Moody's Analytics and Citizens Commercial Banking. An author of more than 500  publications, my work has appeared in mediums such as New York Post, Washington Post, Fortune, CoinDesk and Investopedia. Previously, I created all the industrial finance training for a company with more than 300  people. I have spoken at industry events across the world and delivered speeches on financial literacy for Mensa and Boston Rotaract. I currently hold Bitcoin, Bitcoin Cash, Litecoin, Ether and EOS.
