Through this partnership, LTC users will be able to use their coins for payments and investing in Atari.
Atari will offer discounts for all LTC-based purchases of its much-anticipated VCS game console.
Atari CEO says LTC was the best fit due to its ease-of-use and low transaction costs.
The Litecoin Foundation has entered into a partnership with Atari, a renowned consumer brands, and entertainment producer. The foundation unveiled this news on May 19, noting that the collaboration is multi-faceted. As such, the two firms will venture into numerous areas together. This includes the use of litecoin (LTC) across gaming platforms within the Atari ecosystem, which includes video games such as Asteroids and Breakout among others. Also, the two firms will engage in other projects such as merchandising.
Per the announcement , LTC holders will be able to use their coins as a means of investment on Atari. Apart from this, they will be able to use their LTC as a form of payment in the soon to be released Atari Token. Reportedly, the Atari Token will have multiple uses. These include allowing its holders to manage purchases and track digital assets within the Atari ecosystem. The token holders will also be able to use it as a payment method in the recently announced Atari Casino.
LTC will also become a payment option for buying the much-awaited Atari VCS console. Gamers that purchase the rig using LTC will reportedly get discounts. The VCS is a PC/console hybrid that will let gamers play a plethora of classic and modern games. Additionally, the rig supports 4K streaming and will also let users create and upload games and apps for other users to enjoy.
Commenting on this partnership, Charlie Lee, the managing director of the Litecoin Foundation said,
“Many of us remember growing up and playing games from Atari. It is great to see Litecoin being used in a variety of different ways within the Atari ecosystem, from purchasing the new Atari VCS gaming console to being used as a way to invest in Atari Tokens. The Litecoin Foundation is excited to see the possibilities a partnership like this can have for not only Litecoin and cryptocurrencies but also the gaming industry and lifelong fans of Atari.”
“We are pleased to have Litecoin as a means of payment for the Atari Token sales. Litecoin’s ease-of-use and low transaction costs make it a perfect fit for use alongside the Atari Token and other projects.”
Do you think Litecoin’s partnership with Atari will help boost crypto adoption by onboarding gamers? Share your thoughts in the comment section below.
