Litecoin (LTC) Fdn. Partners With Legendary Videogame Maker, Atari
The partnership will boost the use of LTC within the Atari Ecosystem.
The Litecoin Foundation has announced a partnership with the legendary videogame company of Atari.
LTC will now be accepted as a means of investing in the Atari token to be issued in September 2020.
Additionally, LTC will become a payment option for purchasing the new Atari VCS gaming console.
The Litecoin Foundation has notified the LTC community that they have sealed a partnership with the Legendary Videogame company of Atari. The partnership will boost the use of Litecoin (LTC) in the Atari ecosystem along with other potential joint ventures such as merchandising.
This means that Litecoin (LTC) will be a payment option for investors willing to participate in the Atari Token sale. The latter token has been scheduled for launch by September 2020 and will be issued by Atari Chain LTD.  Investors willing to get a headstart can participate in the Atari Token Presale that is LIVE at the time of writing this.
The CEO of Atari, Fred Chesnais, explained that LTC’s ease of use and low transaction fees will be the perfect fit for the Atari ecosystem.
We are pleased to have Litecoin as a means of payment for the Atari Token Sales. Litecoin’s ease-of-use and low transaction costs make it a perfect fit for use alongside the Atari Token and other projects.
The Atari Token will have a list of uses such as managing Atari purchases and playing games in Atari Casino. The token will also be used in yet-to-be-released games where users play against each other.
Additionally, Litecoin can now be used to preorder the highly anticipated Atari VCS game console at a discount. According to Atari, the VCS is a PC/console hybrid that allows users to play hundreds of modern and classic videogames as well as stream 4K video. The Atari VCS will also allow users to create and upload their own games and apps which other users can enjoy.
Charlie Lee explained that the partnership brought back memories of growing up while playing Atari games such as Asteroids, Breakout, Pong, and more. He also added that the Litecoin Foundation was excited in exploring the possibilities that lay ahead.
Many of us remember growing up and playing games from Atari.
It is great to see Litecoin being used in a variety of different ways within the Atari ecosystem, from purchasing the new Atari VCS gaming console to being used as a way to invest in Atari Tokens.
The Litecoin Foundation is excited to see the possibilities a partnership like this can have for not only Litecoin and cryptocurrencies but also the gaming industry and lifelong fans of Atari.
Disclaimer: This article is not meant to give financial advice. Any additional opinion herein is purely the author’s and does not represent the opinion of EWN or any of its other writers. Please carry out your own research before investing in any of the numerous cryptocurrencies available. Thank you.
