The back and forth price flow continues for Litecoin, which started the current 4 hour candle off at 41.63 US dollars, up 1.12% ($0.46) from the previous 4 hours. On a relative basis, the previous 4 hours were pretty good: Litecoin bested all 5 of the assets in the Top Cryptos class 🙂
The back and forth price flow continues for Litecoin, which started today off at 41.18 US dollars, up 0.32% ($0.13) from yesterday. This move happened on lower volume, as yesterday’s volume was down 38.77% from the day before — and down 48.97% from the same day the week before. Relative to other instruments in the Top Cryptos asset class, Litecoin ranked 3rd since yesterday in terms of percentage price change. Below is a daily price chart of Litecoin.
The first thing we should note is that Litecoin is now close to its 20 day averages, located at 42.73 respectively, and thus may be at a key juncture along those timeframes. The clearest trend exists on the 14 day timeframe, which shows price moving down over that time. Also of note is that on a 90 day basis price appears to be forming a base — which could the stage for it being a support/resistance level going forward. For additional context, note that price has gone up 5 out of the past 10 days. Also, candlestick traders! Note we see pin bar pattern appearing here as well.
For laughs, fights, or genuinely useful information, let’s see what the most popular tweets pertaining to Litecoin for the past day were:
We will upgrade our $LTC Litecoin wallet on July 9th, which will take about 24 hours to complete. When it’s done,‼️Your LTC wallet address will be different‼️Please ensure you update any saved/whitelisted addresses. We will not be able to recover funds sent to old addresses.
How pissed would you be if MW launches and #Litecoin does like a 2x? Meanwhile #ADA, (does it even work?) launches something called Shelly and it basically does a 7x
@litecoin_bull @ccunningham821 @SikeNawGaming @ROYALMRBADNEWS No it won’t be for everyone but I think it needs to be exposed and transparent. Everyone can choose to see it or not. I think they deserve to make that choice. I know everything can’t come out but what can must.
