By Steven Anderson December 31, 2019 Off
Mimble Wimble Implementation of Litecoin has touched upon a crucial milestone.  David Burkett, the major contributor to Mimble Wimble Privacy Protocol, published the progress report for the foundation.
A major portion of the released code belongs to Grin++. On a tight deadline to release the code, every line double-checked.
The core logic of the update is common between Grin++ and Litecoin.  The current progress is about the standardization of patterns.   David Burkett contributed full time to implementing MimbleWimble into the Litecoin’s Protocol.
The monthly expenses counted for $6000, and Charlie Lee, re-doubled every donation from the community to cover for the costs.  The Protocol will be mainly used to upgrade the privacy and security of the Litecoin’s network.
Litecoin Block Explorers regularly buy and sell LTC, and they check the status of their transactions using block explorers.  The success of the payments checked as well miners use the explorer to find out if they have successfully mined or not. Overall, the other users make use of the explorer to track market data, market cap, and details of the coin mined.
There is a live feed of all blocks added to the network. The history of the public Litecoin addresses is directly readable.  The addresses of senders and recipients of transactions verified.   The most notable deals of the day are displayed.  Details of the mining pool found in the block, are seen. Anyone trading Litecoin considers it to be a viable tool to get a hold of the Litecoin market.
Magic Mushroom Mike tweeted :  We will probably get some price action in 2020 for $LTC. Citing the seven-day bands’ squeeze. Yet another tweet by Asad read:  “The power of #Litecoin community is strong. Can’t wait to see what 2020 has to offer for # LTC .”
Litecoin (LTC) has a current market capitalization of $2.7 billion.  The token lost 3.5% over the past 24 hours.  LTC/USD is changing hands at $42.20 with low trading volumes.  LTC is vulnerable to overall market sentiments. Through New Year 2020, Litecoin continues with range bound trading with a downside bias.  If the bullish momentum sets in place, the token will touch the $50 and $60 price levels.
