Introduced in 2011 and described as a clone of Bitcoin , Litecoin began with the Bitcoin codebase. However, Litecoin brings a few unique traits of its own. Among its distinguishing features is a finite supply of 84 million coins compared to Bitcoin’s 21 million.
The cryptocurrency can also be mined up to four times faster than Bitcoin, which means that transactions settle faster because the process of mining involves verifying transactions and adding them to the cryptocurrency’s ledger. Litecoin is often referred to as the cryptocurrency equivalent of silver (Bitcoin is gold). As such, Litecoin often targets smaller transactions.
However, both Bitcoin and Litecoin can be subdivided up to eight decimal places. In today’s transactions, the smallest units are not currently in wide use. If or when the value of these cryptocurrencies increases well beyond their current values, the smaller increments will become more useful. Litecoin uses SegWit (Segregated Witness), a technology that allows more transactions within a block, which speeds up the processing time for individual transactions. Slow transaction completion times have been one of the leading criticisms of Bitcoin compared to alternatives.
Litecoin can support smart contracts, which are computer programs that live on the cryptocurrency’s blockchain and govern transactions or perform other functions. However, much of the active development for smart contracts is centered on Ethereum.
Since Bitcoin was invented in 2009, many cryptocurrencies have come and gone but Litecoin’s endurance may speak to its future longevity. Probably one of the biggest fears that people have about cryptocurrencies is the fear that they buy vaporware, a digital asset that will simply disappear into cyber-oblivion without any clear explanation of where their money went.
Government regulation of currencies or bans are also a concern. The fact that Litecoin has survived this long (since October 2011) and that it is one of the few currencies available on the highly-selective Coinbase exchange could indicate a better future than other altcoins.
A potential risk of owning Litecoin is that one of its main selling features, SegWit, a method of shrinking transaction sizes, is being considered for Bitcoin as well, which would eliminate a significant advantage of Litecoin. However, SegWit has been a topic of spirited discussion within the Bitcoin community for years and may never be added to Bitcoin.
Like many cryptocurrencies, Litecoin enjoyed a massive runup in price at the end of 2017 and into early 2018. Prices have fallen since that time but remain substantially higher than early 2017 levels.
