The movie is dubbed We Summon the Darkness.
It stars Johnny Knoxville, who co-created Jackass and acted in Men in Black II.
Litecoin hopes its participation in this film will help boost LTC adoption.
The Litecoin Foundation has unveiled that it helped produce a new horror movie. The firm unveiled this news through a tweet on April 12. Per the tweet, another Litecoin community member known as @CommonEnemyInc was also involved in the production of this flick. The movie is dubbed “We Summon the Darkness”.
“Check out “We Summon the Darkness”, a fun movie produced by a member of the #LitecoinFam, @CommonEnemyInc ! Litecoin Foundation is an executive producer, so be sure not to miss our LF logo animation at the start.”
Litecoin Foundation is an executive producer, so be sure not to miss our LF logo animation at the start.?
— Litecoin Foundation (@LTCFoundation) April 12, 2020
We Summon the Darkness was released on April 10, and it stars Johnny Knoxville, Alexandra Daddario, Amy Forsyth, Maddie Hasson, Keean Johnson, Logan Miller, and Austin Swift. Marc Meyers, who directed “My Friend Dahmer” and “How He Fell in Love” directed this film.
According to the movie’s description on iTunes, it involves three friends that are on their way to a big heavy metal concert. They then hear a news report of a local murder that is linked to a series of satanic killings. After the show, the three girls invite three guys to join them at an estate owned by one of their fathers. While the party starts innocently, it quickly turns dark and deadly.
While it seems awkward that a crypto -focused firm has dipped its toes in the movie production scene, it is worth noting that this is not the first time the Litecoin Foundation has done something unusual. Before participating in the production of this movie, the firm came up with a deal to showcase the LTC logo in the UFC octagon and at Miami Dolphins games.
The partnership with UFC octagon in December 2018 saw the promotion firm showcase the LTC logo on the octagonal fighting canvas.
The collaboration with the Miami Dolphins, on the other hand, saw the team accept LTC as their official cryptocurrency in July 2018.
Speaking on the benefits of this move, Charlie Lee, Litecoin’s creator said ,
“This collaboration propels Litecoin in front of an audience of millions of people around the world at a time where adoption of cryptocurrencies continues to gain momentum and the ecosystem is able to support real world use cases in ways previously not possible. We see this as a powerful way to raise awareness and educate people about Litecoin and cryptocurrencies on a tremendous scale.”
Do you think the participation of the Litecoin Foundation in producing “We Summon the Darkness” will have a positive impact on LTC’s price? Share your thoughts in the comment section below.
