Myer share price: where next following Covid-19 Business Update?
As Australia’s economy grinds to a halt, retailers have been particularly hard hit, with the Myer (MYR) share price falling a staggering 70% in the last month alone.
Shane Walton | Financial Writer, Australia | Publication date : 2020-03-28T23:23:48+0000
At 8:13PM – after the market close on Friday – Myer (MYR) announced that it would be standing down 10,000 team members as a result of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic.
These measures are set to come into effect over the next two days and last for an initial period of four weeks. Though Myer’s physical stores will be shuttering, its online businesses will remain open.
As part of Friday’s market release, the company plainly said that as ‘team members will not be working, they will not be paid during this period of imposed closure.' It was noted at least that ‘Full time and part time members will have greater flexibility to access their annual leave and long service entitlements, in addition to government assistance measures.'
A select group of business critical employees will continue to carry out their duties however, though they will do so at slightly reduced salaries and contact hours.
Myer’s Chief Executive – John King – took this announcement as a chance to reiterate the good progress that has been made on shoring up the company’s balance sheet and reducing its debt position, in recent times.
‘We are now taking all necessary measures to minimise our cost base, including engaging in ongoing discussions with suppliers and landlords,’ Mr King said.
Myer’s Board and its Executive Team – including Mr King – will not receive any renumeration during this closure period.
In the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, retail stocks have faced particularly heavy selling pressure, as investors seemingly look to dump anything at all leveraged against consumer spending. To illustrate this point, in the last month JB HI FI has seen its share price fall 32.6%, Super Retail Group has dropped 48.3%, Nick Scali has collapsed 57.3% and Kathmandu has seen its stock pushed 66.2% lower.
Unfortunately, Myer has proven to be the worst performing of that bunch: from trading at 35 cents per share on 2 March to just 10 cents per share last Friday, the iconic retailer has seen its stock plummet a monumental 70% in just four weeks.
This precipitous decline is one that has likely displeased some of the markets biggest players. On just 5 March we wrote:
‘Heading into its H1, the renowned investment bank J.P. Morgan was Overweight the retailer, pegging Myer’s fair value at 75 cents per share.’
At the time J.P. Morgan’s price target was well under-water and continues to be so now. To be fair at least, even though the investment bank did lower its price target on Myer to ‘just’ 50 cents between our last piece of coverage on the retailer – J.P.’s revised fair value estimate remains well off the current mark.
What are your thoughts: could Myer’s share price rebound or are there more declines to come? You can trade Myer and other ASX-listed stocks – both up and down – through IG’s world-class trading platform now.
For example, to buy (long) or sell (short) Myer using CFDs, follow these easy steps:
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Go long or short on thousands of international stocks.
