You might be able to buy crypto on PayPal soon, but it’s unlikely that you’ll be getting anything from Wirecard.
Coming every Sunday, Hodler’s Digest will help you track every single important news story that happened this week. The best (and worst) quotes, adoption and regulation highlights, leading coins, predictions and much more — a week on Cointelegraph in one link.
There have been a lot of rumors surrounding PayPal this week. A report suggested that the online payments giant plans to allow hundreds of millions of users to buy and sell crypto directly. Job vacancies for crypto and blockchain experts have added fuel to the fire. PayPal is yet to confirm whether the reports are true — but if they are, it could be a landmark moment in Bitcoin’s quest to go mainstream. As you’d expect, some of crypto’s best-known names saw this as a bullish sign, and they renewed predictions of BTC rallying to $12,000. But some — such as Decred co-founder Jake Yocom-Piatt — are dubious about the rumors. He told Cointelegraph: “PayPal, specifically, is notorious for depriving its users of access to legitimately acquired funds on their platform with little to no justification. Users having their funds restricted in this fashion is something cryptocurrencies are designed to prevent, making this integration, if it is indeed in progress, an odd combination.”
It’s quite rare for the top story of the Financial Times to send shockwaves through the crypto sector — but this week, it has. Wirecard, the troubled fintech company which recently discovered a $2.1-billion hole in its finances, has opened insolvency proceedings. The company powers many of the crypto debit cards in the market, and it’s been struggling to keep up with its debt obligations. Earlier in the week, former CEO Markus Braun was arrested on suspicion of falsifying the embattled firm’s accounts — and was released on $5.6 million bail. Wirecard’s demise is already affecting crypto card users, and a subsidiary responsible for issuing these debit cards has been suspended by the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority. This has meant customers were unable to use them. Crypto.com, one of the companies that used Wirecard’s services, has stressed that its users’ assets are secure — and said funds will rapidly be credited back to crypto wallets. It is now looking for alternative solutions so the cards can be used again.
Saturday saw BTC fall under $9,000 to lows of $8,813 — but it seems buyers have been keen to purchase these dips. Mild pullbacks are common over the weekends as trading volume tends to thin. Cointelegraph contributor Marcel Perlman said the market is in a bit of a neutral zone after Friday’s $1.06 billion BTC futures and options expiry. He explained: “The options expiry did not have a meaningful impact as most of the call options were aimed at $10,000 or higher.” Other threats are on the horizon. There’s a strengthening correlation between Bitcoin and U.S. equities — fuelling fears that BTC is vulnerable to a price pullback. Some, like stock-to-flow model creator PlanB, believe this might not be a bad thing. He said: “I see it as good news. I would be really worried if all these trillions QE money would flow to stocks, bonds, real estate, gold... but not to Bitcoin.” Other crypto analysts are also optimistic. Popular trader SteveCrypt0 said: “We could go as low as 6300 or even dip to 6k and still be bullish. In fact, it would even be a healthy correction right into the golden pocket of the 0.618 Fib level.”
It’s finally over: Telegram and the SEC have reached a settlement. The encrypted messaging app has been in hot water after it raised $1.7 billion in an ICO for GRAM tokens, which the regulator said was an illegal securities sale. Now, Telegram is returning $1.2 billion to investors and has to pay an $18.5-million penalty. The company has already confirmed that the Telegram Open Network is dead in the water. Announcing that a conclusion had been reached, the SEC said: “New and innovative businesses are welcome to participate in our capital markets but they cannot do so in violation of the registration requirements of the federal securities laws.” Unfortunately, it’s not exactly clear how Telegram or other potential ICO issuers can actually appease the SEC at this point.
Simon Dedic, the co-founder of the crypto research house Blockfyre, has kicked a massive hornet’s nest — and it had the potential to upset a lot of people. In an inflammatory tweet, he said: “I will get some serious hate for that, but I stand by my opinion: $XRP, $BCH, $BSV, $LTC and $EOS absolutely do NOT deserve belonging to the TOP 10 cryptocurrencies.” He explained that the likes of Bitcoin Cash, Bitcoin SV and Litecoin are ultimately trying to be a “better Bitcoin” — and argues this simply isn’t necessary. He also criticized EOS and XRP for being centralized and called out Ripple for dumping billions of XRP tokens on a regular basis. Dedic believes the traceability platform VeChain as well as Tezos are far worthier of having a bigger market cap.
At the end of the week, Bitcoin is at $9,141.43, Ether at $226.35 and XRP at $0.18. The total market cap is at $259,573,858,203.
Among the biggest 100 cryptocurrencies, the top three altcoin gainers of the week are Celsius, Quant and Ren. The top three altcoin losers of the week are SwissBorg, Flexacoin and Compound.
For more info on crypto prices, make sure to read Cointelegraph’s market analysis .
“If your Bitcoin bet pays off it will be cataclysmically destructive for the world. And that’ll have enormous consequences to many people we all know and care about who weren’t hedged in Bitcoin. And so you almost don’t want it to happen.”
“Like I’ve been saying for months now, I have no reason to walk away from my prediction early in the year that Bitcoin is going to get stuck between $6,000 and $10,000 for the majority of this year.”
