Aviation services group SATS’s market value continues to see-saw as analysts give a less-than-ideal earnings and dividend prognosis.
Kelvin Ong | Financial writer, Singapore | Publication date : 2020-04-15T05:42:44+0100
Singapore aviation ground handling services group SATS (SGX: S58) continues to see its share price trading well below pre-coronavirus levels.
On Wednesday 15 April 2020, the stock fell 3.2% to S$3.06 per share within the first 90 minutes of trading.
Since late-January this year – when the coronavirus first broke out in China, SATS’s shares have plummeted as much as 49.10%, from above S$5.00 per share to around S$2.50 each by late-March.
With many countries globally banning or minimising air travel in a bid to prevent the importation of more coronavirus infections, travel and tourism companies and stocks have been among some of the hardest hit.
Singapore Airlines , the flagship carrier of the country, also saw share price drop to a 21-year low in March , as the pandemic crisis worsened globally, sending more countries into self-imposed month-long border control measures.
IG is a world-leading online trading and investments provider for thousands of financial markets . With CFDs, you can buy long or sell short on SATS and Singapore Airlines shares depending on whether you think prices will rise or fall. Start today by opening an account on IG's market-leading trading platform .
SATS – a provider of passenger, baggage and ramp handling, aviation security, cargo and food catering services at over 40 airports across Asia Pacific and the Middle East – unsurprisingly saw air traffic and revenues impacted significantly once countries ramped up their Covid-19 measures.
Three separate fiscal stimulus plans amounting to nearly S$60 billion in aid rolled out by the Singapore government, with the latest announced just last week on 06 April, helped to cushion the share price slightly.
In view of these factors, the prognosis from top equity analysts for the stock for the next two quarters remain on the gloomy side.
CIMB analysts, in a recent note, stated that they expect a net loss of S$101 million for the group’s current 2021 financial year, before returning to profitability on a net gain of S$119 million for FY2022. Even at that profit estimate for 2022, this would still represent a 48% drop from FY2019.
This is on top of the fact that a 15% to 30% reduction in staff costs per quarter starting from the fourth quarter of 2020, as well as an estimated S$51 million in aid per quarter as part of the Singapore government’s job support scheme grant have already been factored into calculations.
Are you bullish or bearish on SATS? Either way, you can buy long or sell short on SATS shares and other aviation stocks using CFDs and other instruments offered on IG's world-leading trading platform . Start today by opening an IG account .
According to CIMB’s estimates, the first quarter of FY2021 (April to June 2020) will be the worst reporting quarter for SATS, as it would be operating at just 10% of its normalcy before a return to 50% by the fourth quarter of 2021.
‘Our base case assumes SATS returns to profitability in 4QFY21F (Jan-Mar 21), at the earliest, given the magnitude of the global lockdown,’ they wrote, adding that the company’s share price took a year during the 2008 global financial crisis to normalise back to a 15x forward price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio.
SATS’s share price now trades at c.30x FY22F P/E, implying that a sharp recovery is in store if there are no further setbacks, they further noted.
Taking into consideration the upcoming losses, the brokers have maintained their rating on the stock at ‘reduce’ alongside a much lower 12-month share price target of S$2.56 per share (down from S$4.07).
They added that dividend rate cuts are ‘inevitable’ with dividend yields possibly to be reduced to a much lower 2% for 2020 (versus 2019’s 6.17% yield), even though the company had on 25 March issued S$200 million worth of five-year bonds as part of a pre-emptive measure to cushion losses and cash burn.
With CFDs, you can buy long or sell short on SATS shares and other major aviation stocks depending on whether you think prices will rise or fall. Start today by opening an account on IG's market-leading trading platform .
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Market volatility continues as coronavirus concerns amplify. Trade with IG and take advantage of:
Tight spreads – from just 1 point on major indices, and 2.8 on US crude
Guaranteed stops – they’re free to use, and only incur a fee when triggered
