Here are four key trading takeaways from Singtel's latest financial update.
Kelvin Ong | Financial writer, Singapore | Publication date : 2020-06-03T11:16:07+0100
Singapore Telecommunications (Singtel) released its fourth quarter and year-end results for its 2019/2020 financial year on Thursday 28 May 2020.
Here are four main highlights from the conglomerate’s latest financial update.
Singtel’s operating revenue for the full year declined 2% in constant currency terms at S$16.54 billion, which the group said was a result of lower mobile service revenue and equipment sales aggravated by the onset of Covid-19 this February.
Underlying net profit decreased 13%, due in large part to pronounced fourth quarter weakness in the Australia business caused by continuing data price competition and weak consumer sentiment in the face of Covid-19 movement measures.
Group net profit – minus exceptional items – plunged 65% to S$1.08 billion, which is lower than the S$1.28 billion average predicted by analysts.
Gain access to Singtel and thousands of Singapore and global shares via IG's world-leading trading and investments platform . With CFDs ( read about CFDs here ), you can buy long or sell short on shares, forex and indices depending on whether you think prices will rise or fall. Start today by opening a live or demo IG account.
Most of that earnings drop, however, can be attributed to regulatory fees relating to Singtel’s Indian associate Bharti Airtel.
In January 2020, Airtel was fined by the Indian Supreme Court a hefty sum of S$17.44 billion – to be paid in instalments, over a payments dispute regarding the telco’s use of the state’s telecommunications spectrum.
As Singtel owns roughly 35% of Airtel as of October 2019, its portion of the fine for the March-ending quarter worked out to be S$302 million, which was reflected as a net exceptional charge in the final financial statement.
Overall, Singtel’s regional associates were able to put in good grades in the fourth quarter, with higher data usage growth, and pre-tax contributions rising 29% to S$500 million this quarter and 15% to S$1.64 billion for the full year.
Fines aside, Airtel’s performance had improved following tariff increases in India last December and strong growth in 4G customers. Group CEO Chua Sock Koong said Airtel was also able to gain market share in a three-player market.
Meanwhile, its African operations also recorded double digit revenue growth as well as margin expansion, currency headwinds notwithstanding.
Elsewhere, Globe in The Philippines delivered healthy revenue growth, even though net income fell on higher network depreciation costs. Indonesia’s Telkomsel continued to face intense competition outside Java and pressures on its legacy business.
IG is a world-leading online trading and investments provider for thousands of financial markets. With CFDs , you can buy long or sell short on Singtel and other SGX-listed stocks depending on whether you think prices will go. Start today by opening an IG account .
Singtel’s share price opened 4.6% lower following the financial update. Shares then kept falling to a 2.5-month low of price S$2.47, but have since recovered slightly to close at S$2.58 a share on Wednesday 03 June.
Analysts from OCBC and UOB have given the stock a ‘buy’ rating, alongside lower 12-month price targets, citing the company’s weak outlook for the first quarter of 2021 as a factor.
UOB cut Singtel’s FY2021 and FY2022 earnings forecasts by 14% and 9% respectively, with share price target reduced to S$2.80 from S$3.
OCBC also lowered their earnings per share forecast for FY2021 by 4.1% and increased capital expenditure assumptions, which led them to a new fair value share price estimate of S$3.24 (from S$3.61).
Are you bullish or bearish on Singtel and other Straits Times Index (STI Index) shares? Either way you can buy (long) or sell (short) the asset using derivatives like CFDs in a few easy steps:
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Go long or short on thousands of international stocks.
