Bitcoin has more than tripled in value since December    and surged to nearly $14,000 this week before    faltering.
Several stocks have soared and slumped in line with the    cryptocurrency.
Bitcoin has more than tripled in value since December, surging north of $12,000 this week before faltering.
Several stocks with exposure to the cryptocurrency industry have  soared and slumped in tandem with bitcoin. We examine six of the  most volatile ones below.
Shares in Overstock.com have surged 40% in the past month as the internet retailer has  significant blockchain interests. For example, its tZERO  subsidiary launched a digital wallet and exchange-services mobile  app this week , allowing users to buy, sell, and store bitcoin and  ethereum on their smartphones.
Meanwhile, its Medici Land Governance division is working with  the World Bank and authorities in Rwanda, Liberia, Zambia,  Mexico, and Teton County, Wyoming to improve land administration  and securely store property records.
Overstock.com was the first major retailer to accept  cryptocurrency in 2014, and CEO Patrick Byrne has continued to  bet on the asset class. He explained his sale of 900,000 company  shares earlier this year by saying , "I simply had to supplement my nominal salary with  stock sales in order to fulfill personal commitments to invest  personally in blockchain projects" and fulfill charity  commitments.
Shares of Grayscale Bitcoin Trust have soared a quarter in the past  week, even after dropping 12% on Thursday as they tracked bitcoin  lower. Grayscale is the world's largest digital currency asset  manager with about $2 billion in assets, and invests in bitcoin,  ethereum, litecoin, and other cryptocurrencies.
Grayscale's business turned the corner in the first quarter of  this year. Product inflows surged 42% to about $43 million, and  six of its 10 investment vehicles posted their first returns  since the end of 2017, when bitcoin crashed.
Shares of MGT Capital Investments plunged 16% on Thursday, but have  still climbed more than 60% in the past week. MGT is one of the  largest US-based bitcoin miners, overseeing the operation of  about 5,700  mining machines , most of them in Colorado and Ohio.
MGT shut down most of its machines last quarter as the low bitcoin price meant they weren't  economically viable to run, meaning its revenue plunged by more  than 95% to $28,000, but its operating loss more than halved to  about $2 million. However, MGT has ramped up its mining  activities again following the bitcoin rally.
Shares of Riot  Blockchain slid 14% on Thursday, but have still surged by  almost a quarter in the past month. Riot operates more than 8,000  cryptocurrency mining machines in Oklahoma City and hopes to  launch RiotX, a US digital currency exchange.
It has also invested in Canadian cryptocurrency exchange Coinsquare, blockchain-based  escrow services provider Tesspay, and Verady, a cryptocurrency  accounting and audit technology specialist.
Riot unearthed about 330 bitcoins, 356 bitcoin cash, and 1,423  litecoins in the first quarter of  this year , driving its mining revenues up 56% to about $1.4  million. However, more than $4.5 million in operating costs  resulted in an operating loss of $3.2 million.
Bitcoin's surge and subsequent retreat this week more than  doubled the value of shares in DPW Holdings then dragged them  down 35% on Thursday. The investment firm's cryptocurrency mining  business, Digital Farms, " immediately  responded " to the rally this quarter by "increasing  exponentially its mining of Bitcoin."
Shares of Marathon Patent tumbled 19% on Thursday but are still  up by more than a quarter this week. Marathon - which was in the  uranium and vanadium minerals business in 2011, shifted to  investing in Southern California real estate in 2012, then  pivoted to intellectual property licensing later that year -  purchased cryptocurrency mining machines and a Canadian data  center in November 2017, weeks before bitcoin crashed.
Marathon's mining revenues grew 16% to $231,000 last quarter , and totaled $1.5 million last year . The company expects the bitcoin rally to boost its  second-quarter performance, but remains on the lookout for  further acquisitions.
