Regardless of whether you take a short or long-term approach to trading or investing, knowing how to consistently identify and pick the best ASX penny stocks has the number of key benefits. Here’s how to pick the best penny stocks in Australia:
Start by eliminating mid and large-cap companies. Any stocks with a market capitalisation below $1 billion is typically considered a penny stock.
Analyse the company’s share price history. Next, you want to see if a company’s share price is low because it’s a relatively young company – or if it’s an old company that has witnessed significant decline.
Examine the fundamentals: in line with the above point, is the company growing its revenues or are they declining? If the company is currently loss-making (as many ASX penny stocks are) read up on management commentary: is there a clear path to profitability? To growth?
Are there positive or negative macro conditions at play? For example, investors may potentiallywant to avoid penny stocks dabbling in iron ore given the current commodity outlook. That’s not to say that out-of-favour sectors aren’t capable of providing investors with market-beating returns, only that it is often preferable to look for companies in sectors that are poised to grow – not decline.
Now that you’re familiar with some of Australia’s most promising penny stocks and how to pick and identify them, below we look at how you how you can buy, sell and trade them for yourself.
Whether you’re a trader, speculator or investor – buying and selling any of the ‘Top 10’ penny stocks we have discussed today can be easily done on IG’s proprietary trading platform. To start your buying journey today, simply:
Fund your newly created share trading account. Open the classic platform on the share trading account, go to the 'finder' panel on the platform, type in and select which growth stock you would like to buy
Click on the deal ticket: where the ‘on exchange’ option will appear. On exchange means interacting directly with the relevant exchange.
Besides buying the ‘Top 10’ ASX penny stocks we have discussed today, IG’s trading platform also gives more risk tolerate investors and traders the flexibility to go LONG and SHORT – utilising CFDs – to potentially capitalise on the underlying price movements of an asset.
Importantly, as a leveraged product, while CFDs give investors the chance to maximise their trading gains, it also gives them the chance to maximise their losses.
To begin trading penny stocks, simply:
As we noted at the start: investing in ASX penny stocks can be an exhilarating experience. A great penny stock can help investors multiply their money many times over – far outpacing the gains an investor is likely to witness from a large-cap stock.
The likes of Afterpay (ASX: APT), WiseTech WiseTech (ASX: WTC) and a2 Milk (A2M) come to mind when one thinks of ASX penny stocks that have successfully transitioned from obscurity into the limelight.
Yet for every market darling that has made it to the top: there are a string of no-name failures. In some cases, investors lost some – or in extreme cases – all of their capital investing in penny stocks.
The line between going big or going bust seems most apparent in the micro-cap market.
As such, investors should take extra caution when investing in ASX penny stocks, thoroughly research any promising opportunities themselves, and never invest more than they are willing or able to lose.
Click here now to sign up for a Live Trading Account and begin your trading journey with IG today.
Not ready to start trading real stocks but still eager to get involved in the markets? Click here now to get access to $20,000 in virtual funds and practise trading ASX penny stocks with an IG Demo Account today.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Go long or short on thousands of international stocks.
