STEL operates one of the largest communications companies in Asia, headquartered in Singapore and with a key subsidiary, Optus, in Australia. The company also holds stakes in companies across Asia and Africa including Bharti Airtel in India and Telkomsel in Indonesia. STEL is segmented into consumer, group enterprise and group digital life, offering services such as mobile, internet and TV solutions across a wide range of profile of customers.
For the rather saturated Singapore market, revenue is affected to a large extent by the existing competition. That said, being well-diversified, STEL had also been regarded as the strongest amongst incumbents. Awaiting the 5G wave, Singtel stands ready to strengthen its offering with a 5G standalone network in Singapore despite shrinking revenue at home.
At the same time STEL had also been looking to the virtual banking space with ride-sharing company Grab in the application for the virtual banking license with the MAS.
OCBC is Singapore’s oldest bank formed from the merger of three local banks in 1932. Akin to DBSM, the bank is highly rated by ratings agencies and regarded as one of the safest banks in the region. OCBC’s business also spreads across Asia, mainly covering Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and Greater China markets.
Bank of Singapore and Great Eastern Holdings serves as OCBC’s private banking arm and insurance subsidiary respectively while Lion Global Investors is the bank’s asset management subsidiary. As with the above, the bank is susceptible to largely the same factors as DBSM in terms of exposure though compared to peers, OCBC has a largely higher profit derived from overseas operations.
UOBH was incorporated in 1935 as the United Chinese Bank before changing its name in 1965. As with DBSM and OCBC, the bank provides financial services across its global network of offices primarily within Singapore, Malaysia and greater China.
Compared to peers, however, the bank evidently holds a greater exposure to the Singapore market. As noted by the bank, it is a market leader in the credit card and private residential home loan business, the latter a significant proportion of the local retail lending.
As mentioned above, JSH is 84% owned by Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd. (JARD), tying the two close in business and share price relations. That said, JSH offers a more direct exposure to the various companies under its portfolio.
This includes Hongkong Land Holdings (number 10 on this list), Dairy Farm International Holdings , Mandarin Oriental International, Jardine Cycle & Carriage and Astra International. The diverse set of constituents meant exposure sprawling Southeast Asia, China and other parts of the world.
Having most of the stakes being in Asia, however, would mean prices being affected to a greater extent by how the region performs, particularly that in Indonesia with Astra taking a lion’s share of the revenue for JSH.
WLIL is one of Asia’s largest agribusiness group headquartered in Singapore. Compared to the other members of this list, WLIL had a relatively shorter history having been founded in 1991 though with pre-history of flour mills businesses.
Approximately 50% of the company’s revenue arrives from China, making it susceptible to the demand fluctuations. The company is in the works of listing in China as of mid-2020, with guidance on the expected listing approval into H2. Fortune 500 company, Unilever , counts itself as one of the largest customers of WLIL.
Key factors affecting WLIL’s prices including the key component of crude palm oil prices for palm refining margins and the abovementioned Chinese demand particularly for animal feed. Currency fluctuations play a part for WLIL’s business.
