What Are Altcoins and Why Are There Over 5,000 of Them?
According to crypto market capitalization aggregators, there are more than 5,000 cryptocurrencies in existence today and over 20,000 different types of markets. BTC is the oldest and most known digital asset and most everything else has been typically referred to as an “altcoin.” The term refers to any of the thousands of prevalent cryptocurrencies that aim to work alongside bitcoin and each other, or are competing for ultimate domination.
Satoshi’s creation has been around for over 11 years now and there are 5,098 alternative cryptocurrencies (altcoins) that exist next to the creator’s invention. Cryptocurrency historians widely consider the Namecoin network as the very first altcoin and the term ‘altcoin’ was allegedly first described by the developer Andrew Chow.
Namecoin is not depicted in this picture but NMC is considered the first altcoin, launched in April 2011. LTC came out in October 2011 and many other digital currencies followed year after year.
Namecoin was launched on April 18, 2011, and the project aims to decentralize domain registration. Between 2011 and 2014 — before the 2015 blockchain hype — the rate of Altcoin launches started to grow exponentially. Following namecoin, bitcoiners witnessed the birth of ripple, litecoin, peercoin, feathercoin, mastercoin, counterparty, and unobtainium. There are now thousands of digital currencies that used the BTC codebase and developers have changed a few minor details with coins like einsteinium, litecoin, dash, zcash, and novacoin. There are also forks of Ethereum ( ETH ) with networks like ubiq, ethereum classic, and wanchain. Bytecoin has a unique codebase and also has a plethora of forks including monero, boolberry, and electroneum.
Today there are roughly 5,098 altcoins in existence. If you are interested in checking out all the digital currencies and markets check out markets.bitcoin.com for an aggregated list of coin market caps .
Ripple has the fork stellar and NXT has forks like nem, ardor, and burst. When you travel further down the rabbit hole, you will also find tokens created by networks like Tron, Bitcoin Cash and Ethereum using the TRC20, SLP or ERC20 token standards. Some forks were born directly from the codebase hosted on sites like Github and some forks are created by a blockchain diverging into two different chains. If a group of people tweak the original code and run the software differently than the main consensus rules, they will fork off into a new blockchain scheme.
While some digital currencies are created by copying directly from a coin like BTC ’s codebase, other coins have been created by changing the consensus rules and therefore splitting off into a new network.
A Number of Cryptocurrencies Are Dead, But That’s Not Stopping Developers from Creating a Better Bitcoin
Today, the thousands of digital assets in existence are tallied together on market valuation websites like coinmarketcap.com, markets.bitcoin.com , and messari.io. Out of all the cryptocurrencies traded on the open market, the valuation of all 5000+ coins in existence is around $285 billion today. The BTC network captures around 63% of the overall market capitalization with its net value at $183 billion. A December, 2013 historical snapshot from coinmarketcap.com shows that the top ten cryptocurrency market caps were a lot different than they are today. BTC only had a valuation of around $13 billion in December 2013 and the altcoins beneath it were totally different coins than today’s top ten list. The top ten during the last month of 2013 included BTC , LTC , XRP , PPC, NMC, MEC, FTC, WDC, XPM, FRC, and NVC. The top ten list today, in February 2019 includes BTC , ETH , XRP , BCH , BSV , LTC , EOS , USDT , BNB , and XTZ .
Besides BTC , LTC , and XRP the entire top ten list of cryptocurrency market caps has changed. Did you know you can buy and trade many of these digital assets on Exchange.Bitcoin.com ? Did you also know you can buy and sell BCH privately using our noncustodial, peer-to-peer Local Bitcoin Cash trading platform? Check out Bitcoin.com’s services today.
If Satoshi Nakamoto was a genius, people probably wonder why there are thousands of digital tokens in the cryptoconomy . A few people know what they are and where they came from but often think about why altcoins exist. There are lots of reasons why altcoins exist and its mainly because people can do what they want in this permissionless environment. But also, some individuals, groups, and developers believe they can create a cryptocurrency project that outpaces BTC or they’ve created a coin to offer compatibility, but also different features than BTC .
There are many reasons why altcoins exist and the main reason is that anyone can create one in a permissionless fashion. Other people have created altcoins to compete with bitcoin and the projects claim to offer better privacy, more decentralization, or they focus on something that bitcoin cannot do. Out of the thousands of altcoins today, all of the creators will tell you exactly why they believe there’s a need for another cryptocurrency.
Some projects claim to offer better anonymity and some coins aim to tackle a specific industry like entertainment . There are digital assets that provide people with the ability to create their own tokens and develop smart contracts as well. Altcoins exist because Satoshi not only unveiled the Bitcoin network, but the anonymous creator also opened a kind of Pandora’s box in the worlds of tech and finance. Now that the box is open, there’s no going back and it doesn’t seem like the rate of altcoin issuance is slowing down any time soon.
What do you think about the thousands of altcoins in existence? Why do you think there are so many cryptocurrencies in existence today? Let us know what you think about this topic in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Did you know you can buy and sell BCH privately using our noncustodial, peer-to-peer Local Bitcoin Cash trading platform? The local.Bitcoin.com marketplace has thousands of participants from all around the world trading BCH right now. And if you need a bitcoin wallet to securely store your coins, you can download one from us here .
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
The bitcoin ASIC mining rig manufacturer, Ebang International Holdings, was recently listed on Nasdaq last Friday on June 26. Ebang is now the second mining rig manufacturer to have a U.S. initial public offering (IPO) by selling company shares. Since ... read more.
A number of cryptocurrency proponents have been discussing the stablecoin DAI this week, as the DAI allegedly held on the Compound platform is much larger than what is recorded in circulation. At press time, Compound statistics show there’s $523 million ... read more.
A Russian district court has dismissed bitcoin theft as a crime since cryptocurrency is not regulated in Russia and there is no legal status for bitcoin. The accused were found guilty, sentenced to prison, and ordered to return only the ... read more.
The UK is denying Nicolas Maduro access to Venezuela's gold worth about $1 billion, stored at the Bank of England. The UK High Court has ruled that the country does not recognize Maduro as president of Venezuela, blocking him from ... read more.
Arcane Crypto, a Norway-based investment company, said Thursday that it is planning to go public through a reverse takeover by Vertical Ventures, a publicly traded Swedish firm. Vertical Ventures will buy Arcane Crypto for $33 million by issuing over 6.6 ... read more.
According to a number of crypto prediction markets and futures, Trump will still win the election in 123 days, but his chances have lessened a great deal. No matter who wins, however, the large sums of money flowing into these ... read more.
Crypto Use-Cases in Africa on the Rise, According to Luno
Twitter and Square CEO, Jack Dorsey recently said “Africa will define the future (especially the Bitcoin one!)” But was he right? Crypto in Africa on the Rise Sad to be leaving the continent…for now. Africa will define the future (especially ... read more.
The United States tax agency has published a request for information pertaining to privacy-centric cryptocurrencies and technologies that obfuscate crypto transactions. The IRS-CI Cyber Crimes Unit request is also asking for information in relation to “layer two offchain protocol networks, ... read more.
A global bitcoin scam has reportedly leaked personal data of about 250,000 people from more than 20 countries. The majority of the compromised data were of people in the U.K., Australia, South Africa, and the U.S. This bitcoin scam operates ... read more.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has a new president as Germany took over the presidency from China. The intergovernmental organization also highlighted the need for more guidance on cryptocurrencies as many countries have not yet fully implemented its revised ... read more.
More than 2,500 merchants in Austria can accept three types of cryptocurrencies via the payment processor Salamantex. The company explained that the system was tested with a number of select A1 5Gi network shops. Since the Covid-19 outbreak, contactless payments ... read more.
Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome ... read more.
