Who are the distributors, traders and dealers of Cryptocurrency Market?
"Cryptocurrency Market Size, Share and COVID-19 Impact Industry Analysis, By Component (Hardware, Software), By Type (Bitcoin, Ether, Litecoin, Ripple, Ether Classic, Others), By End-use (Trading, E-commerce and Retail, Peer-to-Peer Payment, and Remittance), and Regional Forecast, 2020 – 2027 "
The global cryptocurrency market to gain from increasing Internet penetration worldwide. Recently Fortune Business Insights has announced a report titled, “ Cryptocurrency ” Market Size, Share and Global Trend by Component (Software, Services), Process (Transaction, Mining), Type (Bitcoin, Etherum, Litecoin, Ripple, Dashcoin), End User, and Geography Forecast till 2025.” As per the report North America was leading the global cryptocurrency market in 2017. The growth witnessed is attributable to high adoption of digital currency in the region. The trend is unlikely to change and North America may lead the global cryptocurrency market through the forecast period.
Request a Sample Copy of the Global Market Research Report: https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/enquiry/sample/Cryptocurrency-market-100149
The rising demand for online financial services in the region is likely to contribute the growth of the market in North America. Besides this, North America holds 27% participants, 39% of wallets, 18% transactions, and 19% of cryptocurrency paymen companies. This is a primary reason behind the high demand witnessed in the region. It also facilitates the higher adoption of cryptocurrency. The cryptocurrency market in Asia pacific is anticipated to expand at a relatively higher CAGR. The growth witnessed is attributable to increasing number of cryptocurrency transactions taking place in the region. Japan is known for major investments in cryptocurrency. Rising investments cryptocurrency have resulted in the formation of new laws for legalization of cryptocurrency under financial service agency. This is a major step taken by Japan and is expected to boost the Asia Pacific cryptocurrency market.
Market Landscape and Market Scenario Includes:
Europe is also amongst the leading regions in the global cryptocurrency market. The growth witnessed is attributable to high adoption of e-financial services in the region. Moreover, Germany issued a statement to consider cryptocurrency as private currency without any payable taxes, unless held for a year or more. Tax and other benefits from cryptocurrency is expected to fuel the demand for cryptocurrency and increase the number of owners globally.
