Lukasz Tomicki of LRT Capital Management likes healthcare stocks and shares of Russian natural gas companies as the crucial election year 2020 gets underway — an election he expects will culminate with President Donald Trump winning a second term.
Tomicki, who started Austin, Tex.-based hedge fund in 2012, joined the Contrarian Investor Podcast last month to discuss these and other ideas.
Central to his investing perspective is a simple tenet: the world is unfair. “There are better businesses and there are worse businesses,” Tomicki says. “Most businesses are donkeys. There are a couple out there that are thoroughbreds.” To find the thoroughbreds, LRT Capital seeks three characteristics from portfolio companies: a sustainable, competitive advantage; businesses that can grow and reinvest within these competitive advantages; and management teams that can link business value and shareholder value.
Competitive advantage, in turn, can be sourced from four categories: intangible advantages (brands, assets, etc) that raise the barrier to entry for competitors; network effects that arise when the product or service becomes more valuable and market share grows; switching costs that lead to longterm customer relations and pricing power; and scale, which afford cost advantages.
This has led LRT to avoid certain segments of the market, specifically ones that are commoditized. While investing in natural resources in not one area of the firm’s expertise, energy companies have been beaten up recently. Some of the largest oil and gas companies in the world are in Russia. Their costs are in rubles but they sell on the US dollar-denominated gas and oil markets. “A lot of these companies are incredibly cheap,” Tomicki says.
Investors should also be looking at healthcare. This is likely to be a crucial issue in the 2020 election and there is sure to be volatility around who might win. “Of course, the reality of the candidate to actually deliver on these promises is quite limited” making the ultimate impact to healthcare companies relatively small by comparison. For longer-term investors this will create buying opportunities. LRT Capital likes UnitedHealth Group Inc. and other insurers.
MIAMI, FLORIDA - JANUARY 03: President Donald Trump speaks during a 'Evangelicals for Trump' ... [+] campaign event held at the King Jesus International Ministry on January 03, 2020 in Miami, Florida. The rally was announced after a December editorial published in Christianity Today called for the President Trump's removal from office. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images)
On the question of the political outcome of this year’s election, Tomicki is very sanguine in handicapping a victory for President Trump. “The historical record is that incumbent presidents tend to get reelected,” he says. “More to the point, if there is no recession in the election year, incumbent presidents generally speaking are elected with 100% probability.”
Tomicki has done his homework here, citing 17 presidents who have run for reelection in the last 150 years. Twelve of the 17 ran when there was no recession in their reelection year. All 12 were reelected. The five who ran during recessions all lost. “I don’t care who you support politically but I think you should be mindful of the base rates,” which suggest that Trump will be reelected.
For more on LRT Capital, visit the firm's website .
I am a New York-based financial writer. Over the past two decades I have written and edited various business and financial trade publications for Bloomberg News, The
I am a New York-based financial writer. Over the past two decades I have written and edited various business and financial trade publications for Bloomberg News, The Deal, and Institutional Investor, among others. My focus has always been to find and interview the hedge fund managers, traders, and portfolio managers, who could locate and exploit niche investment opportunities. Recently returned from a two-year stint in Hong Kong, I am currently contributing to various publications, including this one, and recently launched my own podcast called the Contrarian Investor. Its tagline is “giving voice to those who challenge the prevailing narrative in global financial markets.”
