By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime.
A valid email address is required.
Please select at least one newsletter.
"I expect to see an increased level of scrutiny of proposals for new gas in the context of announced climate goals, both at state level and at the utility level," Mark Dyson, electricity principal at RMI and one of the report's authors, told Utility Dive.
Duke has said that shortening the timeline for its payoff those investments is one potential path forward to avoid stranded asset risks. And Dominion recently suspended a request for proposals on 1,500 MW of peak natural gas capacity in its Virginia territory following reporting that the utility had been over-forecasting demand for years to justify its spending on infrastructure for the resource.
"I think the bigger picture thing for us is we are hoping that we see a trend toward more sustainable solutions to reducing carbon emissions. We see a lot of subsidies and gas bans that are honestly quite disruptive to the functioning of the market."
Environmentalists say part of their 2020 strategy will be to fight these buildouts.
The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) "has been devoting quite a bit of resources to fight back when utilities say that they need to build many new gigawatts of natural gas capacity … that they say are necessary to replace coal," Amanda Levin, policy analyst for the NRDC's Climate and Clean Energy Program, told Utility Dive. "We really want [utilities] to prove that there isn't a cleaner alternative available."
Dyson also expects questions to grow around who is absorbing the risks of these investments.
Minnesota regulators in September rejected Xcel Energy's proposal to purchase a 720 MW natural gas plant over concerns that the plant may close early and leave customers to pay the brunt of the bill. The plant will still be built, but through a utility subsidiary that ensures the cost of a facility isn't incorporated into regulated rates.
"The outcome was that the dereg[ulated] arm of the utility would be taking that risk instead," marking a shift in how investment risks related to gas are assessed and managed, said Dyson.
How will natural gas be valued?
Ultimately, the most policy and regulatory action on natural gas will likely come from states and markets, said stakeholders.
Wholesale power markets are in the midst of a resource tug-of-war based in part on state leadership frustrations with how power sources are prioritized and dispatched in power markets. That tension will continue in 2020, say stakeholders, as gas ultimately continues to make up a substantial portion of the country's electric power mix while demand for lower-emitting power rises.
"I think the bigger picture thing for us is we are hoping that we see a trend toward more sustainable solutions to reducing carbon emissions," said Jagtiani. "We see a lot of subsidies and gas bans that are honestly quite disruptive to the functioning of the market."
"The entire community in the natural gas value chain, from wellhead to burner tip … [has] been surprised at the speed at which the decarbonization debate is occurring in many states. It's been a dramatic shift in a very short period of time."
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission handed fossil fuel interests a victory on that issue in December 2019, ruling in favor of the PJM Interconnection's proposed Minimum Offer Price Rule, which effectively raises the bid prices for all resources selling into the PJM market that receive a state-level subsidy. Though the gas industry sees the move as a win, those groups are still trying to parse through the long-term implications and believe the broader question of how to maintain a competitive power market will remain.
"We'll still continue to see that general issue, that tension between, ‘How do you mitigate state subsidies and maintain a competitive market?'" said Jagtiani.
Natural gas groups and analysts are keeping an eye on how market rules may be addressed in 2020.
For example, questions on resilience, largely kicked over to individual grid operators by FERC two years ago , will remain a key question that could impact the way resources are dispatched into power markets, said Jagtiani. And how those policies play out will have a major impact on infrastructure planning, including the necessity of building out mass pipelines.
National Grid placed a moratorium on natural gas hookups this year , in response to New York opposition to a pipeline buildout and officials in other states have disagreed with how federal regulators and markets are handling natural gas buildouts. Pipeline considerations may now be further complicated by a recent regulatory overhaul from the Trump Administration that removes words like "direct", "indirect" and "cumulative" from the federal environmental permitting language, which will likely lead to lengthy court battles over pipeline buildouts in 2020, according to clean energy advocates.
A dramatic change in resource demand is already underway with the significant decline in wind and solar prices. Once those prices begin to undercut the price of natural gas, utilities may see more demand for low-cost, zero-emission power, putting natural gas in a precarious spot, say stakeholders.
"The entire community in the natural gas value chain, from wellhead to burner tip … [has] been surprised at the speed at which the decarbonization debate is occurring in many states," said Eisenhower. "It's been a dramatic shift in a very short period of time."
Taking a hard look at these investments and these buildouts does not mean the fuel itself won't be needed in a high renewables future, said clean energy stakeholders, but rather that regulators and utilities should be more thoughtful in how they think about these investments. Natural gas is seen as a long-term decarbonization solution in a highly renewable grid, so investments should focus on getting to that higher penetration of renewables, rather than increasing the already-large share of gas on the grid, said Dyson.
"Most places, renewables still make a small fraction of the grid," he said. "Because of that, for the next five years, [investing in] renewables just make a lot more sense, and gas does not."
"Environmentalists and other advocates have broken from the tendency to go along with everything if they can get a coal plant shut down. I don't think settling for coal plant closures, no matter what the price, is on the table anymore."
Ultimately, natural gas interests want a larger role in discussions surrounding decarbonization goals in 2020, and how they can be included in the long-term strategy.
"I think what we're seeing with our [natural gas] clients is they want to be engaged in that dialogue with the policymakers," said Eisenhower. "The implication in 2020 is a very robust debate about policy and the structures required to help the natural gas industry complement what we're trying to do with our decarbonization goals."
For climate activists, coal retirements have remained the key target for a while, but that narrative has begun to shift as well — away from shutting down all the coal possible and toward ​a broader decarbonization strategy focused on replacing coal-fired power with less gas and more clean energy technologies.
"Environmentalists and other advocates have broken from the tendency to go along with everything if they can get a coal plant shut down," said Rábago. "I don't think settling for coal plant closures, no matter what the price, is on the table anymore."
The natural gas industry sees itself able to participate through longer-term technology solutions that likely won't mature this year, but that the sector continues to pursue. Those technologies include a transition toward biofuels and hydrogen , which would elongate the lifespan for some critical gas infrastructure.
"There's a lot of work to be done to analyze how you can utilize the existing infrastructure in the future and still meet decarbonization goals," said Eisenhower. "And that could include a number of current technologies and emerging technologies … but at the end of the day, it's important that we have the natural gas infrastructure for resiliency, security of supply, and how that ultimately fits with a lower-carbon energy system."
