SmallCapPower | April 8, 2020: A double whammy of COVID-19 and the Russia, Saudi Arabia production dispute has battered Canada’s oil patch. The economy, though, needs oil and gas and demand is expected to rebound with increased business and consumer activity following the easing of social distancing restrictions. Today we have drilled down and discovered three Canadian oil and gas stocks we think have the best upside from current levels.
*Returns are based on closing stock prices as of April 6, 2020
Leave this field empty if you're human:
MEG is an energy company focused on in situ thermal oil production in the southern Athabasca region of Alberta. The Company is actively developing enhanced oil recovery projects that utilize steam-assisted gravity drainage extraction methods to improve the economic recovery of oil. MEG Energy is somewhat protected by the fact that 55% of its 2020 production is hedged at a West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil price of $59 per barrel. With an expected normalization of the oil price during 2021, MEG could generate $700 million of free cash flow on 33 years of proved reserves.
% Fall From 52-Week High: 66%
NuVista Energy is an oil and natural gas company actively engaged in the exploration for, and the development and production of, oil and natural gas reserves in Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin. NuVista’s primary focus is on the scalable and repeatable condensate-rich Montney formation in the Wapiti area of the Alberta Deep Basin. The Company has 36% of its liquids hedged at C$76 per barrel and an additional 24% at an $11 barrel premium to the WTI price. Full-year 2019 production was a record 50,803 Boe/d, or 26% greater than 2018, while NuVista Energy reduced total annual operating expenses for the year to $9.61/Boe and achieved annual net G&A expenses of $0.91/Boe.
% Fall From 52-Week High: 85%
Crescent Point Energy is North American oil producer focused on the development of high-return resource plays in Saskatchewan and North Dakota. The Company currently has more than $2.5 billion of cash and unutilized credit capacity and over 50% of its oil production is hedged for 2020 at a weighted average price of more than C$76 per barrel. Crescent Point reduced its net debt by approximately $1.25 billion in 2019 in addition to more than $170 million of annual internal cost efficiencies.
% Fall From 52-Week High: 78%
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
