SmallCapPower | March 30, 2020: Canada’s oil patch has been hit hardest during this current COVID-19 stock market selloff. This was made worst by the production dispute between Saudi Arabia and Russia. WTI crude oil is currently hovering just above US$21 a barrel, while Western Canadian Select has plunged below US$5. Many energy companies have already cut its dividend, but there are some businesses that are better able to withstand a potentially lower-for-longer energy price environment. Today we have identified three Canadian energy stocks best positioned to maintain the same level of payout to its investors.
*Returns are based on closing stock prices as of March 27, 2020
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Birchcliff Energy is an intermediate oil and natural gas company with operations concentrated within its one core area, the Peace River Arch of Alberta. Natural gas prices have held up better relative to oil and Birchcliff is about 78% weighed in natural gas production. The Company has increased production at a compound annual growth rate of 29% since 2005, while operating and cash costs have decreased by 70% and 41%, respectively, since 2008. Birchcliff Energy’s 2019 cash flow per share was $1.26, as a result of higher liquids production and lower overall costs. Its debt to cash flow is less than two times. Birchcliff had a book value of $6.38 per share at the end of 2019 along with a net asset value of $11.96 per share.
% Fall From 52-Week High: 84%
Tourmaline Oil is a crude oil and natural gas exploration and production company focused on exploration, development, production and acquisitions in the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin and is the largest natural gas producer in Canada. The Company generated record Free Cash Flow of $144.9 million during 2019, a 27% increase over 2018. Its debt to cash flow for 2020 is projected to be 1.2 times. At the end of 2019, Tourmaline Oil had a book value of $29.40 per share and the Company has a strong balance sheet of $1.6 billion of debt versus $8 billion of equity. Tourmaline’s CEO owns 16.9 million TOU shares.
% Fall From 52-Week High: 66%
TC Energy has a network of natural gas and crude oil pipelines in Canada, the U.S., and Mexico, along with power generation, natural gas fired power plants, and storage facilities. The Company currently has more than $20 billion worth of projects under development. In February 2020, TC Energy increased its dividend by 8%, its 20th consecutive annual increase, and expects annual dividend growth of 8% to 10% in 2021 with 5% to 7% yearly thereafter. TRP investors have enjoyed 14% average annual shareholder returns since 2000.
% Fall From 52-Week High: 24%
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
