Natural-gas prices are in the midst of a slump of historic proportions, and shares of companies that explore for and produce the commodity are falling hard. But investors can still profit from the increasing use of natural gas, one analyst argues. The key is to buy the stocks of natural-gas utilities that distribute gas for heating and should benefit as it becomes more ubiquitous.
Natural-gas futures are down 52% since hitting 52-week highs in November, falling to $2.30 per million BTUs on Monday. Earlier this month, futures snapped a 12-session losing streak, the worst such streak in at least 19 years. There’s a supply glut that may only be getting worse .
Meanwhile, companies that produce natural gas are suffering, with Range Resources (ticker: RRC) down 64% this year, and EQT (EQT) down 49%.
Maxim analyst Tate Sullivan sees opportunity in other stocks, however.
Natural-gas utilities, which distribute natural gas to homes via 6-inch pipes, are able to pass price changes along to consumers. Their fortunes rise and fall based on the number of customers they serve, so if more people switch to natural gas as prices fall, these utilities should benefit Distributors depend on regulators and can also grow earnings if they get approval for new projects.
Natural gas competes with oil and electricity as a source of heat. While investors worry that natural gas could be displaced by cleaner sources of energy because of climate-change regulations, Sullivan thinks that it remains a better option than competitors.
Most electricity is still produced using fossil fuels, including coal, and contributes more carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, he argues. It’s also more expensive than gas. And oil heat costs 35% more than gas heat, even at $50 oil prices, he says. “There’s no cheaper and cleaner source of heat than natural gas,” Sullivan said in an interview.
With that in mind, Sullivan likes Chesapeake Utilities (CPK), Northwest Natural Holding (NWN), and South Jersey Industries (SJI), all of which count on natural gas for the bulk of their revenue. All three have risen between 13% and 17% this year. Chesapeake’s dividend yield is 1.7%, Northwest’s is 2.9%, and South Jersey’s is 3.5%.
Asked if those dividends are safe, Sullivan said “absolutely.” Chesapeake in particular has been growing customers at a rate of more than 3% a year.
The distributors are dependent on regulators, however, and larger natural-gas pipelines that bring the commodity across state lines have received some pushback in recent years. National Grid has stopped allowing new gas hookups in parts of New York City and Con Edison (ED) put a moratorium on new gas hookups in a section of Westchester County because of New York State’s rejection of the Williams Pipeline, which was expected to take gas from Pennsylvania to New York.
Sullivan thinks liquefied natural gas storage facilities can help natural-gas distributors get around regulatory risk.
“These LNG storage facilities, or commonly called redundancy projects, can mitigate risks from regional environmental challenges against new natural gas pipelines or potential natural gas supply constraints,” he writes. “We believe announcements from larger utilities that they are not accepting new natural gas customers are isolated instances and are not pertinent events for CPK, NWN and SJI.”
Natural-gas prices are in the midst of a slump of historic proportions, and shares of companies that explore for and produce the commodity are falling hard.
