Next on the Top Buy list is Pinnace West Capital Corp, a holding company whose principle subsidiary is Arizona Public Service, a regulated electric utility. The company is vertically integrated and provides service to 1.3 million customers over a 35,000 square mile service territory in Arizona, including the city of Phoenix. Our AI technology has assigned factor scores of C in Technical, A in Growth, B in Momentum Volatility and C in Quality Value to the stock that has lost 8.01% year-to-date. After breaking above the 50dma, it may be a good time to build a position in the stock according to our deep learning algorithms.
In the asset management industry within financial services is a newcomer to our Top Buy list in Federated Hermes Inc.
With stock markets recovering overall, it is a great time to buy asset managers and this company managed about $576 billion in assets. Our AI system has identified factor scores of B in Technical, B in Growth, B in Momentum Volatility and A in Quality Value for the company. The stock has lost 20.61% this year, making for a compelling value purchase at these levels.
, an electric and natural gas utility company headquartered in Spokane, Washington. The company primarily operates in the Pacific Northwest of the US and operates in two segments. The first is Avista Utilities, which transmits and distributes electricity and natural gas, and the second is AEL&P, which provides electric services in Juneau, Alaska. Our deep learning algorithms have identified factor scores of D in Technical, B in Growth, A in Momentum Volatility and C in Quality Value for the stock that has lost 16.13% for the year.
Our final Top Buy today is Ennis Inc, the manufacturer and supplier of print products for wholesale trade. There will be many ways to generate revenue for the company during a new wave of pandemic-future businesses, and our AI has identified factor scores of B in Technical, B in Growth, A in Momentum Volatility and A in Quality Value for the company. The stock has lost 9.81% for the year, but our deep learning algorithms thinks the worst may be over and to buy the stock at these levels.
