Despite up-front costs, switching from propane to natural gas could lead to significant savings on energy costs.
Despite up-front costs, switching from propane to natural gas could lead to significant savings on energy costs.  
Check out this story on lcsun-news.com: https://www.lcsun-news.com/story/news/local/community/2019/12/14/switch-natural-gas-could-save-homeowners-energy-costs/2645710001/
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Welcome to our new and improved comments, which are for subscribers only.
                                            This is a test to see whether we can improve the experience for you.
                                            You do not need a Facebook profile to participate.
You will need to register before adding a comment.
                                            Typed comments will be lost if you are not logged in.
                                            It's OK to disagree with someone's ideas, but personal attacks, insults, threats, hate speech, advocating violence and other violations can result in a ban.
                                            If you see comments in violation of our community guidelines , please report them.
Cassie McClure and Suzanne Michaels, Utilities Connection Published 10:08 a.m. MT Dec. 14, 2019
A worker from Las Cruces Utilities installs a main line for natural gas.
LAS CRUCES - One of the main utility services provided by Las Cruces Utilities is supplying safe, dependable natural gas services to its residential customers.
“We have many customers who come to us asking for a natural gas connection to their home, because, after initial costs, it is much less expensive than propane,” explains Lucio M. Garcia, LCU deputy director Gas.
“LCU is in the process of extending gas lines to the East Mesa and north of the city, but it takes time,” Garcia continues. “We’ve brought in contractors to speed up the process of extending main gas lines; over the past year we’ve extended lines and are now providing new gas service to more than 700 additional homes.”
Once a main gas line has been extended to a neighborhood and gas is available from the street, homeowners have the option to switch from propane to natural gas. It is completely voluntary; there is no charge to homeowners who do not connect. But for homeowners who do connect to gas, it is to their advantage to do so within three months because of a $1,400 subsidy that will help cover costs. To start the process, call Customer Central at 575-541-2111 and ask for new connections.
Installing gas is a joint effort: LCU constructs the main gas line, installs a gas meter at the home, and runs a service line from the main line to the gas meter. Distance from the street to the gas meter and the Btu (British thermal unit) capacity of the gas meter determine the cost of installation. On average, this fee is approximately $387.
Workers install new yellow poly service lines that will bring natural gas to homes in a Las Cruces neighborhood.
From the gas meter into the home, the homeowner must contract with a plumber. (LCU will provide a list of local plumbers certified to work with natural gas.) The plumber brings the gas line inside the home and retrofits the appliance orifices for gas instead of propane. The plumbing fee is determined by the number of appliances (usually hot water heater, dryer, stove, and furnace) that will be retrofitted. For typical 1,400 to 1,800 square-foot homes, the plumbing fee is $300-$400.
“The real savings in switching to natural gas comes in the lower yearly cost of paying for the fuel,” says Garcia, who, with the help of the LCU analysts, calculated the comparison.
In 2018, for a 1,500 square-foot home, the yearly cost for propane based on actual prices was $1,813.19. The cost for the same amount of natural gas for 2018 was $253.44. The savings for switching from propane to gas is substantial: more than $1,500 saved annually.
“Yes, there are start-up costs to switch to natural gas, but the long-term savings for a family can really add up,” notes Garcia.
If you’re interested in finding out if your neighborhood already has a natural gas mainline, or if it might be coming in the near future as LCU expands services, please call Customer Central at 575-541-2111.
You can reach Las Cruces Utilities at 575-528-3500 from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday. Las Cruces Utilities provides GAS – WATER – WASTEWATER – SOLID WASTE services to approximately 100,000 Las Cruces residents and businesses.
