Today's Column - The AI Eye - Watching stock news, deal tracker and advancements in artificial intelligence
Hitachi, Ltd. ( OTC:HTHIY ) has announced a collaboration with biotech firm ThinkCyte, Inc. to develop an artificial intelligence (AI)-driven cell analysis and sorting system. This will, according to the press release, involve a combination of "ThinkCyte's high-throughput and high-content label-free single cell sorting technology and Hitachi's know-how and capability [of] producing stably operative instruments on a large scale." The fruit of this collaboration will be for the two firms to "develop a novel reliable system to enable high-speed label-free cell isolation with high accuracy, which has been difficult to achieve with the existing cell sorting techniques, and to realize stable, low-cost and large-scale production of cells for regenerative medicine and cell therapy."
Transformative artificial intelligence solutions provider Loop Insights Inc. ( TSXV:MTRX ) has announced the launch of "Loop Cloud", an Application Programming Interface (API) cloud software product. Loop CSO David Salisbury explained:
"Brick and mortar retailers struggle to make sense of their data and Loop solves this problem. Not only that, we provide an automated tool that creates actionable strategies for curating a better shopper experience and increasing operational efficiencies."
Loop Cloud's release deliberately coincides with Covid-19 government restart plans in Canada, with the aim to "continue to attract large-scale venues and business operators searching for turnkey solutions as they reopen their doors."
A report from Verified Market Research finds that the global Enterprise AI market will grow from $1.27 billion in 2018 to $25 billion by 2026 with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 44.9 percent in the forecast period 2019-2026. Enterprise AI is defined by the report as "the ability to implant AI methodology, which combines the human capacities for learning, perception, and interaction all at a level of complexity that will help the enterprises to predict business outcomes." An excerpt from the report's description outlines trends observed in the market:
Over the last few years, the demand for AI technology from various businesses has increased owing to the benefits. The new development & innovation across industries and deployment of cloud-based solutions that offer low operational and maintenance costs, and more scalability are some of the factors that are expected to propel the growth of the market over the forecast period. However, the lack of expert personnel, concerns related to data piracy, and the slow digitization rate affecting the adoption of enterprise AI solutions in the emerging economies are also expected to affect the growth of the market. Moreover, growing demand for AI-based solutions and platforms from various industries such as financial services, manufacturing, automotive, and advertising creating opportunities for the market to grow.
About Investorideas.com - News that Inspires Big Investing Ideas Investorideas.com is a recognized news source publishing third party news, research and original financial content. Learn about investing in stocks and sector trends with our news alerts, articles, podcasts and videos, looking at cannabis, crypto, AI and IoT, mining, sports biotech, water, renewable energy and more. Investor Idea's original branded content includes the following podcasts and columns: Crypto Corner , Play by Play sports and stock news column, Investor Ideas Potcasts Cannabis News and Stocks on the Move podcast and column, Cleantech and Climate Change , Exploring Mining the AI Eye .
The Investorideas.com podcasts are also available on iTunes, Spotify, Tunein, Stitcher, Spreaker.com, iHeartRadio and Google Play Music.
Visit the Podcast page at Investorideas.com:
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
The AI Eye - Watching stock news, deal tracker and  advancements in artificial intelligence is an original content brand of Investorideas.com
