AI Eye Episode 381: CoreLogic (NYSE: $CLGX) Announces AI-Driven Real Estate Platform OneHome and IDOL from Micro Focus (NYSE: $MFGP) Named Leader in AI-Based Text Analytics
Point Roberts, WA and Vancouver, BC - July 2, 2020 (Investorideas.com Newswire) Investorideas.com ( www.investorideas.com ), a global investor news source covering Artificial Intelligence (AI) brings you today's edition of The AI Eye - watching stock news, deal tracker and advancements in artificial intelligence.
AI Eye Episode 381: CoreLogic (NYSE: $CLGX) Announces AI-Driven Real Estate Platform OneHome and IDOL from Micro Focus (NYSE: $MFGP) Named Leader in AI-Based Text Analytics
Today's Column - The AI Eye - Watching stock news, deal tracker and advancements in artificial intelligence
CoreLogic, Inc. ( NYSE:CLGX ) has announced OneHome, an AI-driven platform described as "a virtual, collaborative platform for real estate agents and their clients looking to buy, sell or make improvements to a home." Features of the platform include: "a digital collaboration platform for real estate agents and their clients, artificial intelligence-enabled search to find the right home, an intuitive guide for the homebuyer and agent throughout the process and a virtual marketplace that seamlessly connects homebuyers to mortgage, property and casualty insurance and home improvement options." Frank Martell, President and CEO of CoreLogic, said:
"We believe that the OneHome tool is a major step forward in providing millions of home buyers with a richer and more efficient experience when buying and owning a home, and we are thrilled to continue to enable real estate professionals and other participants around the U.S. to make the dream of homeownership a reality every day."
Micro Focus International plc ( NYSE:MFGP ) has been named a leader in the 2020 Forrester AI-Based Text Analytics Platforms Wave Report for IDOL, its unified AI-based platform. Rick Carlson, VP of Product Management, Information Management & Governance, Micro Focus, explained:
"With hundreds of advanced analytics functions, as well as an open and scalable architecture for third-party integration, IDOL lends itself to supporting a broad spectrum of diverse AI use cases. Customers of IDOL have long recognized its ability to serve as a single platform that comprehensively addresses all of their unstructured data analytics needs, and we believe its proven performance has earned it recognition as a Leader from Forrester."
A report from Technavio finds that the global AI-based Cybersecurity market will grow by $16.53 billion from 2020-2024 while decelerating with compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of around 24 percent. An excerpt from the report snapshot outlines some key drivers and trends observed in the market:
The increasing adoption of cloud-based services is one of the major factors driving the market growth. Enterprises are adopting cloud-based services for several applications such as authentication processes, video management, biometric information storage, and big data computing. Cloud-based solutions cater to the varying need of customers owing to their flexibility and scalability in services. Industries such as financial services, healthcare, and investigation firms generate vast volumes of data that is stored on a cloud platform. SMEs are steadily adopting cloud-based services to ensure the utmost security and maintain end-user trust. Sectors such as BFSI, government, and healthcare, are majorly susceptible to cybercrimes as they produce and store sensitive customer information. Although the growth momentum will decelerate, the artificial intelligence-based cybersecurity market will continue to register a CAGR of about 24% throughout the forecast period.
About Investorideas.com - News that Inspires Big Investing Ideas Investorideas.com is a recognized news source publishing third party news, research and original financial content. Learn about investing in stocks and sector trends with our news alerts, articles, podcasts and videos, looking at cannabis, crypto, AI and IoT, mining, sports biotech, water, renewable energy and more. Investor Idea's original branded content includes the following podcasts and columns: Crypto Corner , Play by Play sports and stock news column, Investor Ideas Potcasts Cannabis News and Stocks on the Move podcast and column, Cleantech and Climate Change , Exploring Mining the AI Eye .
The Investorideas.com podcasts are also available on iTunes, Spotify, Tunein, Stitcher, Spreaker.com, iHeartRadio and Google Play Music.
Visit the Podcast page at Investorideas.com:
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
The AI Eye - Watching stock news, deal tracker and  advancements in artificial intelligence is an original content brand of Investorideas.com
