Short-term loss of demand runs counter to decades of growth.
Short-term loss of demand runs counter to decades of growth.  
Check out this story on reporternews.com: https://www.reporternews.com/story/money/business/local/2020/06/06/alex-mills-natural-gas-oversupply-results-exceptionally-low-prices/3147975001/
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Welcome to our new and improved comments, which are for subscribers only.
                                            This is a test to see whether we can improve the experience for you.
                                            You do not need a Facebook profile to participate.
You will need to register before adding a comment.
                                            Typed comments will be lost if you are not logged in.
                                            It's OK to disagree with someone's ideas, but personal attacks, insults, threats, hate speech, advocating violence and other violations can result in a ban.
                                            If you see comments in violation of our community guidelines , please report them.
Alex Mills Published 5:00 p.m. CT June 6, 2020
Natural gas, the nation’s largest source of electricity, has been in a growth mode during the last 40 years.
“Demand for natural gas has been growing more than any other fuel in absolute terms,” Dr. Scott Tinker, director of the Bureau of Economic Geology at the University of Texas at Austin, said in the May issue of the American Oil and Gas Reporter. “Over the past 40 years, gas use has increased more than 500 percent globally. That is a remarkable growth rate.”
Even though overall demand has increased during the last four decades, current demand is declining because of decreased economic activity created by the global pandemic coronavirus.
Bloomberg reported this week the “global gas market remains extraordinarily oversupplied,” and some analysts expect demand to fall further and storage capacity could reach capacity this summer.
The Energy Information Administration reports natural gas deliveries to U.S. facilities producing liquefied natural gas (LNG) for export, called “LNG feedgas”, declined to 5.6 billion cubic feet per day (Bcf/d) on May 24 and averaged 6.7 Bcf/d from May 1-26, according to data by IHS Markit.
Lower levels of U.S. LNG exports are expected to continue through the summer as buyers have cancelled as many as 20 cargoes for June delivery and up to 45 cargoes for July delivery, which could result in LNG export reductions of an estimated 2.3 Bcf/d in June and more than 5 Bcf/d in July, according to EIA.
Strong demand in Europe and Asia allowed U.S. LNG feedgas and exports to set a record in December averaging 8.3 Bcf/d. In January, 74 LNG export cargoes were loaded in the United States, the highest monthly volume to date, according to EIA.
EIA estimates 40 cargoes were loaded between May 1-24, which delivered to an estimated 5.8 Bcf/d of LNG exports compared to 7 Bcf/d during the same period in April.
S&P Global Platts Analytics reported that LNG from the U.S. is losing market share in Europe, especially in key trading hubs in France, Spain, Italy, Belgium, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. The U.S. had 23.6 percent of the market in April but decline to 15.6 percent in May.
