Shares In Chesapeake Energy Set For Delisting, As Historic Bankruptcy Is Finally Official
A study released in December of last year by Monitoring Analytics notes that Exelon and its five nuclear plants in the state would stand to receive millions of dollars in subsidies under this bill in the form of Zero Emissions Credits (ZECs) that would be rolled into the rates paid by utility customers. As noted by the Illinois State Chamber of Commerce , which opposes the CEJA, “ prices would increase $414.4 million” as a result of this legislation during 2021 and 2022.
This kind of tinkering in energy markets seems to always end up in an effort to determine winners and losers, based on who has the most powerful lobbying team. It’s fair to note that this bill continues to work its way through the legislative process in Illinois despite the existence of a grand jury investigation announced in December, involving both the FBI and the SEC.
As reported by Utility Dive , “The U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of Illinois is reportedly pursuing evidence pertaining to interactions between multiple ComEd and Exelon lobbyists and executives, and a range of Chicago and state level public officials.” One of the bill’s sponsors, Democrat Rep. Ann Williams, promised the bill would move forward, stating that "Any inappropriate, unethical or even illegal behavior will not impact our efforts. The utilities' role may be less, due to these ongoing headline issues, but the Clean Jobs Coalition and other groups pushing for renewables will drive this."
But the bill’s tilting of the playing field in favor of Exelon’s nuclear fleet would disadvantage not only natural gas facilities, but also wind, solar and other forms of renewable power generation. And the effort by legislators to pick winners and losers by intervening into energy markets with the costly ZECs will be paid for by utility customers, who always end up footing the bills for this sort of market-distorting effort.
For natural gas, the legislation - like so many other similar efforts all over the country - represents an attempt to deny market share to the form of power generation that has played the major role in decreasing U.S. emissions by displacing retiring coal plants. In markets not distorted by the efforts of policymakers, combined cycle natural gas plants are highly-competitive with nuclear and renewables. It’s only in artifically subsidized markets that that edge is lost.
Natural gas is a commodity at the end of the day, one that can’t afford to be consistently on the losing end of market-distorting public policies like the CEJA. Yet, it always seems to end up there.
David Blackmon is an independent energy analyst/consultant based in Mansfield, TX. David has enjoyed a 39-year career in the oil and gas industry, the last 23 years of
David Blackmon is an independent energy analyst/consultant based in Mansfield, TX. David has enjoyed a 39-year career in the oil and gas industry, the last 23 years of which were spent in the public policy arena, managing regulatory and legislative issues for various companies, including Burlington Resources, Shell, El Paso Corporation, FTI Consulting and LINN Energy. During this time, David has led numerous industry-wide efforts to address a variety of issues at the local, state and federal level, and from April 2010 through June 2012, he served as the Texas State Lead for America’s Natural Gas Alliance. In addition to client-related work, David also maintains a growing media communications practice. He is currently Associate Editor for Shale Magazine (www.shalemag.com), a contributor on energy-related matters at Forbes.com, and a feature writer for World Oil Magazine. He is the resident energy expert on the "In The Oil Patch" radio program, and executes frequent public speaking engagements around the state of Texas and at conferences. The text or links to all of David’s writings and podcasts can be found at www.dbdailyupdate.com. He attended Texas A&I University and The University of Texas, earning B.A. in accounting in 1979.
