Denver — Balance-of-winter gas prices at the US benchmark Henry Hub sank to a record low recently as an increasingly robust supply outlook for this season continues to drag on market sentiment.
Falling to just $2.45/MMBtu, the January, February and March 2020 contract-average settled November 27 at its lowest dating back to 2013, S&P Global Platts' most recently published M2MS forwards data show.
In the cash market, Henry Hub gas has also faced downward pressure in recent weeks. After climbing into the mid-$2.80s/MMBtu in early November, prices have since fallen by over 20%, to levels around $2.25/MMBtu in Monday trading, according to preliminary settlement data.
While short-term weather forecasts appear to be driving weakness in the cash market, lower balance-of-winter prices come as strong US production and robust storage levels promise to keep the US market well supplied over the longer haul.
Adding to the bearish winter-season outlook, though, are medium-term weather forecasts that now predict above-average temperatures will endure across much of the continental US this winter.
Over the past 12 months, US production has grown by about 5.2 Bcf/d to an average 92.5 Bcf/d in the past 30 days. Over the same period, US domestic and export demand is up about 4.1 Bcf/d - effectively padding the US market with an additional 1.1 Bcf/d in supply, compared to this time last year.
Current forecasts from S&P Global Platts Analytics show production levels continuing to rise through the winter season too, approaching 93 Bcf/d by late first-quarter 2020.
Higher year-on-year storage levels are also promising to keep US markets well supplied this winter.
On Wednesday, the US Energy Information Administration reported a 28 Bcf drawdown from storage, leaving inventories at 3.610 Tcf for the week ending November 22. The bearish withdrawal undershot the 2018 and five-year average draws by 42 Bcf and 29 Bcf, respectively.
Currently, gas inventories stand 548 Bcf or about 18% above their corresponding 2018 levels. Inventories are 31 Bcf, or less than 1%, below five-year average levels.
In a series of forecasts released in late November, the US National Weather Service added fuel to the bearish near-term outlook for gas prices, predicting significant upside risk for temperatures this winter.
In a month-ahead and three-month outlook, the agency predicted a 33% to 50% chance for warmer-than-normal weather in almost every US region, excluding portions of the Midwest and Plains.
With above-average temperatures expected in key US heating regions including the Northeast, and portions of the US Midwest, residential-commercial heating demand could be expected to underperform.
In the Northeast, which faces a bigger risk for milder weather this winter, just a 2-degree upside temperature deviation in December could see heating demand underperform by over 1 Bcf/d, according to a demand-sensitivity analysis from Platts Analytics.
-- Edited by Rocco Canonica, newsdesk@spglobal.com
To continue reading you must login or register with us.
It’s free and easy to do. Please use the button below and we will bring you back here when complete.
