Photo: James Durbin / The Oilfield Phot/The Oilfield Photographer, Inc.
Crude prices have climbed back to nearly $40 a barrel. Energy demand is rebounding as vehicles return to the road and airplanes to the sky.
Energy analysts say this is all good news. But they urge caution.
“We’re not out of the woods yet,” said Chris Midgley, global head of analytics at S&P Global Platts during an online press briefing last week. “There’s real uncertainty around this recovery.”
While there is a V-shaped recovery in gasoline and a U-shaped recovery in jet fuel demand as flights resume, “the biggest concern is a secondary wave of infections,” he said. He also cited the wave of infections in Southeast Asia, Africa, South America and developing countries without extensive lockdowns or access to health care.
“There’s (also) a terrible situation around the world with the protests and riots bringing people together in massive numbers at a time when we least want that,” he said. “That’s raising the risk of a secondary wave of infections, and that means we’re revising down our oil demand forecast by 3 million barrels.”
The roughly 14.5 million barrels in production cuts by members or the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and allied countries was a good strategy, Midgley said.
“Other companies and nations outside of OPEC are likely to stick with those production cuts, companies like ConocoPhillips, Chevron, countries like Norway and Malaysia are committed to cuts,” he said.
Even if demand does return to near-normal numbers, not all of the curtailed production will come back, said Shin Kim, head of oil supply and production analytics.
In the U.S., 2.5 million barrels were shut in in March and April, and only 1.5 million barrels will be back by August, she said.
“Shale is still on a decline track and will fall through mid-2021 because drilling rigs have come down 65 percent, frac crews and completion crews have come down 85 percent,” she said. “We’ve lost so much activity in the U.S. it will take time and a lot of confidence to get companies to spend again and get production rates to flatten, let alone rise.”
What the company believes will happen with oil markets in the second half of 2020 into next year will depend on the actions of Saudi Arabia and other members of OPEC and Russia, she said. They can respond to market conditions much faster and in a bigger way than non-OPEC countries, she said.
They don’t want price levels so high they bring additional production back online, and more importantly, “they don’t want to overstimulate production, especially the U.S. shales, so we don’t get back into an oversupply situation,” Kim said.
The oil production cutbacks are having a marked impact on the natural gas market, especially the natural gas associated with crude oil production, said Midgley. He said 10 billion cubic feet of production has been lost.
“That’s going to tighten the gas market in the U.S. significantly as we move toward the end of the year into next year,” he said. “We have to balance the market by either bringing more production online, for which we need higher prices, or balance demand by switching from natural gas back to coal. I think coal may get a bit of support the end of this year and next year as coal moves back into the mix of power generation. We’ll need more coal production and less coal exports, which will mean higher coal prices.”
Ira Joseph, head of power analytics, agreed, saying the company’s outlook for natural gas is bullish.
“But it’s definitely been positive for coal, as well, at least temporarily. It’s an odd situation where, if natural gas prices get high enough, and we’re bullish on the price forecast, that opens the door for more coal burning, even if temporarily, during the November-March 2021 period. I don’t think coal producers are appreciating the potential upside, at least temporarily, for coal burning.”
Rick Joswick, head of oil pricing and trade flow analytics, said the world has seen an unprecedented buildup of crude, crude products and natural gas liquids stocks, to the tune of 1 billion barrels to date.
“We’ve never had that rapid, that large a buildup before,” he said. “We were concerned production wouldn’t slow quickly enough and stock levels would rise up to potential storage limits, which is 1.4 billion barrels. Luckily, people make the choice to cut back, they made the choice voluntarily. Even U.S. producers cut back voluntarily, even though prices were not at extremely low levels for the most part. We dodged the bullet there. We kept stocks lower than the limits, prices did not have to get forced down into single digit levels, which would have kept oil in the ground through price action.”
Now that recovery is beginning, “we’re starting to draw from storage, but it’s a relatively flat peak,” Joswick said. “We have a lot of stock hanging over the market for the next few months. We’re not so bullish on oil prices rising beyond where they are now.”
