Arizona lawmakers are advancing a measure that would protect the natural-gas industry by preventing municipalities from banning gas hookups for new buildings, which has been done in some states to address climate change.
Senate Bill 1222 from President Karen Fann, R-Prescott, and House Bill 2686 from Speaker Rusty Bowers, R-Mesa, would prevent municipalities from requiring new homes and commercial buildings to be built with all-electric hookups, preventing natural gas service.
No municipality in Arizona has tried that. But amid California's broad efforts to combat climate change, multiple cities there have essentially banned natural gas at new developments. Berkeley, California, was the first to do so last year.
Supporters of the identical bills say they are concerned that prohibiting natural gas in new buildings would raise utility costs on consumers and hurt businesses. Opponents argue the bills restrict options for addressing climate change.
The Arizona bills have support from a variety of homebuilders and utilities, including companies such as Southwest Gas Corp. and UNS Energy, which provide gas service in Arizona.
Opposing it are a variety of environmental organizations. The cities of Phoenix and Tucson also registered their opposition.
Democrats at the state Capitol voted against the bills as the measures moved through committees. The bills still face votes from the full chambers.
The League of Arizona Cities and Towns, which often opposes measures at the Legislature that take away the authority of municipalities to set local rules, is not signed in either for or against the bills. Some of the league's member cities, including Mesa and Page, run utilities.
The bills don't specifically mention natural gas, instead using broad language about municipalities' ability to deny building permits based on the utilities serving a building. But the bills' sponsors made their intentions clear.
Bowers noted the city of Berkeley's 2019 move to prohibit gas hookups, and said 20 other municipalities did the same and 42 others nationwide are contemplating such a measure.
Bowers' bill moved through a House natural resources committee on Tuesday on an 8-5 party-line vote.
Fann's bill similarly passed a Senate committee 4-3 along party lines on Wednesday.
Garrick Taylor, executive vice president of the Arizona Chamber of Commerce and Industry, said during a Tuesday hearing that a "broad swath of the business community" supports the measure to ensure municipalities can't ban new natural-gas hookups.
"There are efforts underway in other states, California, Washington state, Massachusetts, that are attempting to take away an individual's or business owner's ability to use natural gas, even if they are in an area where that service is available to them," Taylor said.
Some argued the bills are not needed.
“It’s incredibly hypothetical," Rep. Kirsten Engel, D-Tucson, said. "There seems to be no city in the state of Arizona that is thinking of doing this. This seems to be entirely the gas companies saying you know, we are going to protect our turf in the future from some hypothetical thing, the Berkleyization of Arizona."
Fann on Wednesday challenged the idea that the bill was not needed. She asked rhetorically what would happen if a city like Tucson not only voted to ban natural-gas connections but also to prevent gas lines from passing through the area, which could cut off other parts of the state from gas service.
"Are we jeopardizing their ability to have natural gas?" Fann said.
Keeping utilities affordable is important to some of the bills' supporters, including Cynthia Zwick, executive director of the low-income advocacy group Wildfire.
She said banning natural-gas hookups "very likely means an increases in electric bills and other costs to bring homes up to new standards, which will be difficult if not impossible for far too many customers to afford."
"We recognize we are dealing with a climate crisis,” Zwick said, but she added that any solution must not harm low-income people.
Retail prices for natural gas are generally cheaper than electricity per unit of energy. Households that use natural gas for heating, cooking and clothes drying save an average of $874 per year compared with homes using electricity for those applications, according to the industry group the American Gas Association.
But that figure essentially only pertains to cold-weather homes, as few homes in the Arizona desert have gas heating.
Desert homes, which spend much more on summer cooling than winter space heating, primarily use gas where it is available for water heating and cooking, while relying on electricity for heating and cooling.
All-electric homes are gaining popularity, and not just in places where cities have begun requiring them. According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, 25% of homes in the country are all electric, and that figure has increased in the past decade.
The Rocky Mountain Institute, a clean-energy think tank, produced a paper in 2018 that found in some instances, particularly new construction, all-electric buildings were cheaper over their lifetime than those with fossil-fuel appliances.
But for homes currently heated with natural gas, "electrification will increase costs at today’s prices," the institute reported.
Similarly, the Electric Power Research Institute reports that electric heat pump water heaters can be more cost efficient to operate in some markets compared with natural-gas water heaters, but it depends on the cost of electricity and gas in the market.
