MELBOURNE (Reuters) - Eastern Australia is expected to have an ample supply of natural gas in 2020; however, prices for businesses and industry have not fallen as much as would be expected, Australia’s competition watchdog said on Tuesday.
Supply in 2020 is now expected to be 2,025 petajoules (PJ), or 1.9 trillion cubic feet, while demand is forecast at 1,831 PJ, thanks to increased supply into the domestic market from liquefied natural gas (LNG) exporters, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission said in its latest gas market report.
The commission began scrutinizing the market in 2017 after gas prices more than doubled and concerns rose about supply shortfalls as three LNG export plants in eastern Australia, run by Royal Dutch Shell, ConocoPhillips and Santos, started sucking gas out of the domestic market.
The government put pressure on the LNG producers in 2017 to hold some supply for the local market by threatening to impose export caps.
LNG producers now expect to supply 209 PJ to the domestic market in 2020, which is more than the 202 PJ they expect to export, the commission said.
The global LNG supply glut has driven down LNG prices, which has driven down gas prices in Australia; however, the commission raised concerns that gas contract prices offered to commercial and industrial buyers have not fallen as much as LNG netback prices, the price of LNG in Asia minus shipping and pipeline costs from the main hub in Queensland.
It said average producer price offers in Queensland over the 12 months to April 2019 were roughly in line with LNG netback prices, but by August, offers were almost 25% above LNG netback prices, a disparity it plans to examine in 2020.
However, in a separate report, the Australian Energy Regulator on Monday gave a rosier picture for gas buyers, saying spot wholesale gas prices fell in the December quarter to below A$8 ($5.35) per gigajoule.
With spot Asian LNG prices having dropped further since then to a record low, the outlook is even better for Australian gas buyers.
“In the near term it appears that the decrease in Asian LNG spot prices relative to oil prices is likely to place significant pressure on LNG export term contract prices too,” the regulator said.
