If you change your mind about a trade, aftermarket trading gives you an opportunity to make a correction or act on late-breaking market news. But the aftermarket generally has lower trade volume than the premarket — making it as risky as penny stocks .
There have been no price changes in this timeframe.
Jul 2, 2020 4:00 pm – Jul 2, 2020 7:59 pm
Why Invest in Natural Gas ETFs?
Consider these reasons to consider natural gas ETFs:
Versatility: ETFs give you the benefits of mutual funds , but you trade them like stocks. Some funds offer options and allow short sales.
Dividends: All ETFs give investors 100% of the dividends from stocks in funds’ portfolios.
Convertibility: Natural gas ETFs aren’t exactly cash equivalents. However, you can easily sell these securities — under normal market conditions.
Assets under management (AUM) is an accurate standard to compare ETFs. It indicates the total market value of assets under management by a person or a firm. The primary goal of most ETFs is to increase its AUM. It gives the fund more clout and it attracts new investors. Using this standard of measure, here are 3 of the best natural gas ETFs according to AUM.
With an AUM of $456.6 million, UGAZ attracts a large pool of investors who align with this fund’s approach. It is a 3x leveraged exchange-traded note (ETN). It seeks to triplicate the performance of the S&P GSCI Natural Gas Excess Return Index. The major gains from this fund potentially come in the long term.
Be aware that potential oversized gains from 3x leveraging come with significant tail risks. Tail risk describes when a portfolio’s assets make a significant shift away from the normal risk estimate. It can wreck a portfolio. Also, UGAZ has a steep expense ratio (ER) of 1.65%; he expense ratio reflects the cost of managing and maintaining the fund.
Due to the recent free-fall drop in natural gas prices, many investors prefer to make money by shorting UGAZ — some investors hold UGAZ shares in anticipation of big returns from an energy sector recovery.
