Penny stocks trade outside the top market exchanges. A lot of speculation and high risk is associated with these small-cap stocks. The specific definition of penny stocks varies among different countries. In the western market, penny stocks are stocks that trade below $5 .
They are classified as micro-cap stocks because their market capitalization is less than $300 million. Just like other stocks, penny stocks offer an opportunity for potential investment.
Penny stocks have the following traits:
Information related to penny stocks is never readily available to the public.
Most penny stocks lack history regarding assets, revenues, operations, and products.
They do not have minimum standards.
The oil and gas industry is experiencing 2 global disasters: the COVID-19 pandemic and the oil price wars. This caused oil and gas stock prices to drop. With many people implementing social distancing, motor vehicles were not in use. Despite the panic of the oil industry, it’s evident that oil stocks are bouncing back.
With oil stocks on the upswing, the stock market has a lot of opportunities for investors. There have been global output cuts of crude oil due to the low demand for oil in many countries. Also, the strained relationship between the U.S. and China is closely being monitored by investors. If the friction leads to the erosion of the Phase 1 trade agreement, this will affect the oil prices negatively. More uncertainty in the U.S. financial markets has been fueled by the recent violent unrest in major U.S. cities.
Despite having high risks, oil penny stocks have a possibility of yielding very high returns from low investment. Oil penny stocks are regulated at a national level by a stock exchange. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has its own definition of penny stocks. These stocks have the following features:
Shares of a small company trade below $5; shares of private companies lack an active trading market.
Trading shares are done over the counter but they can be listed on both local and foreign securities exchanges.
Pricing of shares is difficult due to a lack of price quotations.
Penny stocks are placed in their independent category known as a trade-to-trade basket. This is because of the high risk associated with them. Penny stocks can be traded both in and outside the stock exchange. Transactions are done on a gross basis.
It’s important to understand all the risks associated with oil penny stocks. Although these small caps offer a wonderful investing opportunity with plenty in the market, you need to know which ones to avoid and which ones to trade. You can use a stock screener, which is a smart trading program. A stock screener helps you identify exciting oil penny stocks.
To be a pro at trading oil penny stocks, you need to come up with trading strategies. Following these trading strategies could help you make money in the short, medium and long term.
Below is our list of best online brokers to use when you want to trade in oil penny stocks.
