Yesterday’s signing of a domestic gas sale agreement between Chevron and BHP Nickel West for the delivery of natural gas from the Wheatstone project highlights the important role of the State’s reliable and affordable gas supply in powering local businesses throughout Western Australia.
From next month, Chevron will supply BHP Nickel West with a total of 22 Petajoules of equity domestic gas until the end of 2023.
The Chamber of Minerals and Energy of WA’s (CME) Chief Executive Paul Everingham said access to reliable and affordable energy would help support WA’s economic growth, which was essential following the devastating impact of COVID-19.
“The commencement of domestic gas deliveries from Chevron’s natural gas facilities in the Pilbara has significantly benefited Western Australian households and businesses, as it provides a cost-effective supply of energy for decades,” he said.
“Western Australia enjoys a solid reputation for its secure domestic gas supply and this latest agreement will further strengthen our global standing.
“Thanks to WA’s strong LNG market, local businesses and industry are fortunate to access an affordable and consistent supply of energy well into the future.”
Help us keep up the good work Why?
Well, unlike many news organisations, we have no sponsors, no corporate or ideological interests. We don't put up a paywall – we believe in free access to information of public interest.
Media ownership in Australia is one of the most concentrated in the world ( Learn more ). Since the trend of consolidation is and has historically been upward, fewer and fewer individuals or organizations control increasing shares of the mass media in our country. According to independent assessment, about 98% of the media sector is held by three conglomerates. This tendency is not only totally unacceptable, but also to a degree frightening). Learn more here
We endeavour to provide the community with real-time access to true unfiltered news firsthand from primary sources. 
It is a bumpy road with all sorties of difficulties.
We can only achieve this goal together. Our website is open to any citizen journalists and organizations who want to contribute, publish high-quality insights or send media releases to improve public access to impartial information. You and we have the right to know, learn, read, hear what and how we deem appropriate.
Your support is greatly appreciated.
All donations are kept completely private and confidential.
