The Clean Energy online Cost Calculator that makes it easy to compare costs of fueling vehicles with natural gas vs. diesel. (Graphic: Business Wire)
NEWPORT BEACH, Calif.--( BUSINESS WIRE )-- Clean Energy Fuels Corp . (Nasdaq: CLNE ) today launched an online Cost Calculator that makes it quick and easy to estimate the cost of transitioning an individual vehicle or entire fleet from diesel fuel to natural gas, including the estimated carbon emissions reduction.
“There’s a false assumption that natural gas vehicles are more costly because they meet such high environmental standards, but that’s simply not the case,” said Chad Lindholm. “Our natural gas vehicle Cost Calculator demonstrates the economic value of running a fleet on natural gas, and we believe users want to learn how sustainable and cost effective it can be to run a clean fleet.”
Clean Energy’s Cost Calculator can be customized for specific types of natural gas vehicles, including heavy-duty trucks, shuttle and transit buses, waste vehicles, and more. It compares the annual cost of running a diesel vehicle with a natural gas vehicle, and also shows the estimated annual fuel cost, savings per year, savings over five years and savings per mile of operating a natural gas vehicle.
Rounding out a trio of Clean Energy productivity tools, the Cost Calculator needs only minimal user input such as annual miles, base vehicle price and desired range to provide a comprehensive cost comparison with diesel vehicles.
Clean Energy also offers an Emissions Calculator that demonstrates the environmental advantages of switching from diesel to natural gas, and a Grant Finder that identifies available supplemental funding for clean vehicles according to state.
Clean Energy Fuels Corp. is North America’s leading provider of the cleanest fuel for the transportation market. Through its sales of Redeem™ renewable natural gas (RNG), which is derived from capturing biogenic methane produced from decomposing organic waste, Clean Energy allows thousands of vehicle fleets, from airport shuttles to city buses to waste and heavy-duty trucks, to reduce their amount of climate-harming greenhouse gas by at least 80% and even up to 300% depending on the source of the RNG. Clean Energy can deliver Redeem through compressed natural gas (CNG) and liquified natural gas (LNG) to its network of approximately 540 fueling stations across the U.S. and Canada. Clean Energy builds and operates CNG and LNG fueling stations for the transportation market, owns natural gas liquefication facilities in California and Texas, and transports bulk CNG and LNG to non-transportation customers around the U.S. For more information, visit www.CleanEnergyFuels.com .
