Home Topics Company News Coalition defends Pa. gas industry, regulators from grand jury report
The Marcellus Shale Coalition has soundly criticized Pennsylvania Attorney General Josh Shapiro and defended the state’s shale drilling industry and state agencies, Kallanish Energy reports.
That occurred in a seven-page letter to state legislators from David Spigelmyer, president of the Marcellus Shale Coalition, a pro-drilling industry trade group.
The letter follows a June 25 grand jury report released by Shapiro that attacked the natural gas industry and two state agencies: Department of Environmental Protection and the Department of Health for failing to protect Pennsylvania from Marcellus Shale natural gas drilling over the last 10 years.
“The sheer breadth of factual inaccuracies, misrepresentations, legal omissions, and unsubstantiated allegations compel my response on behalf of tens of thousands of Pennsylvanians – your constituents – who take pride in working safely and responsibly develop the commonwealth’s natural gas resources for all of us,” Spigelmyer wrote in the letter that was released on Tuesday.
He added that Shapiro’s report “exhibits a jarring lack of reality as to how shale gas development occurs in Pennsylvania,” the letter said.
That report also “exhibits an equally disturbing ignorance as to the laws and regulations which govern shale gas development in the commonwealth,” he said.
“Much of the report conveys ‘evidence’ that simply relays anecdotal stories offered without proof, corroboration or attribution,” Spigelmyer said.
”The report fails to identify any specific instance that substantiates its claims of impacts, which conveniently means they cannot be directly refuted,” he said.
The grand jury called for extending the setback from wells from 500 to 2,500 feet. That would make it impossible to drill wells in much of the state and impact landowners with leases, Spigelmyer said.
Pennsylvania currently has the second farthest setback provision in the nation, he said.
Pennsylvania has also taken legislative actions over the years to toughen drilling regulations, he said.
It is, he said, “a report which ignores facts and science, is ignorant of current law, omits several dozen regulatory enhancements made over more than a decade, lobs unsubstantiated allegations of uncorroborated events, questions the integrity of state environmental regulators and seeks to sensationalize that which the attorney general clearly does not understand.”
The grand jury report is part of a two-year state investigation, Shapiro said.
It “uncovered systematic failure by government agencies in overseeing the fracking industry and fulfilling their responsibility to protect Pennsylvanians from the inherent risk of industry operations,” he said in a statement.
The grand jury also made eight recommendations to tighten state rules on fracking to protect drinking water, air quality, and public health.
Pennsylvania suffers from what Shapiro called a “culture of inadequate oversight” and political pressure was used to protect shale drilling over the years, he said.
The grand jury documented cases of well water being contaminated, dead livestock, air pollution, and mysterious health problem in children and adults. Other issues included heavy truck traffic, around-the-clock fracking, and waste impoundments. There are continuing investigations of childhood cancers near drilling sites in southwest Pennsylvania.
The report was released after Shapiro filed criminal charges against Range Resources and Cabot Oil & Gas, two of the biggest players in the Marcellus Shale.
Range has pleaded no contest to seven criminal charges of negligent oversight in connection to two environmental cases in Washington County in southwest Pennsylvania. The company will pay $50,000 in fines and $100,000 in charitable contributions to a local watershed group.
The grand jury has charged Cabot Oil & Gas in connection with 15 environmental crimes in northeast Pennsylvania. The company was charged with seven counts of prohibition against discharge of industrial wastes, seven counts of prohibition against other pollutions, and one count of unlawful conduct under the state’s Clean Streams Law. The violations took place in Susquehanna County in northeast Pennsylvania.
A similar report defending DEP and knocking Shapiro and the grand jury has been released by Michael Krancer, secretary of DEP from 2011-2013.
“It would be inappropriate for me as their former secretary to sit idly while 3,000 DEP personnel are attacked with a broad brush. I know that the people at DEP never wavered from the law, never turned a blind eye to wrongdoing and always kept the safety of Pennsylvania’s citizens paramount,” he said in an eight-page statement.
“Were we perfect? Of course not and we never claimed to be,” Krancer said. “Did we make mistakes? Yes, we never claimed we didn’t. No government, much less any organization, is ever perfect. But to besmirch the entire agency and all 3,000 employees as is done here is unfair.”
To view the response of the DEP to Shapiro grand jury report, you can view the court filing here .
