Crypto Corner Episode 420: Pundi X Adds PayPal (NASDAQ: $PYPL) Support to POS Device, BIGG (CSE: $BIGG.C) Launches BCH on QLUE Product and DMG (TSXV: $DMGI) Installs and Energizes 1,000 Miners
Point Roberts, WA and Delta, BC - July 1, 2020 (Investorideas.com Newswire) Investorideas.com, a leader in crypto and blockchain investing news brings you today's edition of the Crypto Corner podcast and commentary on what's driving cryptocurrency stocks and the crypto market.
Listen to today's Crypto Corner Podcast:
Crypto Corner Episode 420: Pundi X Adds PayPal (NASDAQ: $PYPL) Support to POS Device, BIGG (CSE: $BIGG.C) Launches BCH on QLUE Product and DMG (TSXV: $DMGI) Installs and Energizes 1,000 Miners
Pundi X, a Singapore-based blockchain developer, has announced that its blockchain-based point-of-sale device, the XPOS, now supports PayPal ( NasdaqGS:PYPL ). This follows a company Twitter poll, wherein Pundi X asked followers to vote for their preferred mobile payment application for XPOS support. PayPal received a decisive 70 percent of the vote. Pundi X CEO and co-founder Zac Cheah commented:
"This is definitely exciting for us. To be able to support a leading online payment provider in our XPOS devices can give people more confidence in using them, and can move usage of blockchain technology closer to the mainstream."
BIGG Digital Assets Inc. ( CSE:BIGG ) has launched Bitcoin Cash ( BCH ) as part of QLUE Release v1.16. QLUE (Qualitative Law Enforcement Unified Edge), is a product of BIGG subsidiary Blockchain Intelligence Group (BIG), and according to the press release "is used by Law Enforcement, Banks, Exchanges, ATM Operators to perform due diligence and blockchain security investigations at greater forensic depth by exploring where the related funds are coming from and going to, and the profiles of the entities involved." Lance Morginn, President of BIG, commented:
"QLUE&rade; is being touted by the industry as having the most user friendly interface which makes it a lot easier to onboard new law enforcement or compliance officers. The addition of BCH makes QLUE&rade; even more valuable to our current and prospective customers for investigations thus expanding our revenue potential and market share of the crypto forensics market globally."
DMG Blockchain Solutions Inc. ( TSXV:DMGI ) has installed and energized the previously announced purchase of 1,000 Micro BT M30 miners. At the time the purchase was announced, DMG CEO, Dan Reitzik, explained:
"Our stated goal for self-mining in 2020 is 500 petahash of [the] latest ASIC mining technology. This deployment will add approximately 90 petahash to our existing fleet. We will continue to deploy more self-mining as opportunities arise. The new fleet is expected to be energized by mid-June 2020. The recent volatility in Bitcoin ("BTC") prices demonstrate why industrial miners need to constantly deploy the most efficient technologies. Our newest miners are very efficient, even at the current depressed BTC price."
According to today's press release, "DMG's current self-mining has now increased to 110 petahash."
For investors following the sector Investor Ideas has a comprehensive Bitcoin, Blockchain and Digital Currency Stocks Directory
About Investorideas.com - News that Inspires Big Investing Ideas Investorideas.com is a recognized news source publishing third party news, research and original financial content. Learn about investing in stocks and sector trends with our news alerts, articles, podcasts and videos, looking at cannabis, crypto, AI and IoT, mining, sports biotech, water, renewable energy and more. Investor Idea's original branded content includes the following podcasts and columns: Crypto Corner , Play by Play sports and stock news column, Investor Ideas Potcasts Cannabis News and Stocks on the Move podcast and column, Cleantech and Climate Change , Exploring Mining the AI Eye .
The Investorideas.com podcasts are also available on iTunes, Spotify, Tunein, Stitcher, Spreaker.com, iHeartRadio and Google Play Music.
Visit the Podcast page at Investorideas.com:
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
Investorideas.com news content is not meant to be a solicitation to buy or sell cryptocurrencies and Investorideas.com does not directly sell cryptocurrencies; but acts as a news and research resource for interested investors following the blockchain sector.
