The revised domestic natural gas prices as per the New Domestic Gas Policy 2014 will remain operational from October 1, 2019 till March 31, 2020.
Select fertiliser shares gained smartly on Tuesday in early deal after the government on Monday cut domestic natural gas prices for the first time in two-and-a-half years.
However, some of the stocks which opened on a positive note and gained further, could not hold on to the gains. Shares of Chambal Fertilisers & Chemicals, which touched a high of ₹162.9 in early trade, closed 0.39 per cent higher at ₹154.45 on the BSE. Other gainers include Deepak Fertilisers (1.64 per cent), Nagarjuna Fertlizers & Chemicals (3.66 per cent), Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers (3.14 per cent), Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers (0.93 per cent) and Madras Fertilizers (0.46 per cent).
Some even slid into the negative territory. Among these are Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers & Chemicals (down 1.31 per cent), GSFC (down 1.67 per cent), Coromandel International (down 0.23 per cent) and Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancore (down 0.25 per cent)
The Centre has revised domestic natural gas prices as per the New Domestic Gas Policy 2014. The revised price will remain operational from October 1, 2019 till March 31, 2020, ie, H2-FY20.
The gas price for locally-produced fields has been revised to $3.23/mmBtu from $3.69/mmBtu, resulting in a 12.5 per cent decrease, and the ceiling price for gas to be produced from difficult fields has also fallen to $8.43/mmBtu from $9.32/mmBtu, resulting in a 9.5 per cent decrease.
However, rates for gas produced from difficult fields such as Reliance Industries under-development fields in KG-D6 block will remain at almost the same level.
CARE Research in a report said a 12.5 per cent fall in natural gas prices augurs well for natural gas end-users as it decreases the cost of manufacturing of urea and petrochemicals where natural gas is used as feedstock.
According to analysts, active monsoon across India bodes well for the sector as a whole. According to official estimates, the June-September period this year was the wettest since 1994. With most States receiving excess rainfall (wettest September in more than a century), there is good chance of a bumper Kharif season. Also, because of high soil moisture after the late surge in rainfall, even the Rabi season may start on a good note.
The coronavirus crisis has changed the world completely in the last few months. All of us have been locked into our homes, economic activity has come to a near standstill.
In these difficult times, we, at BusinessLine, are trying our best to ensure the newspaper reaches your hands every day. You can also access BusinessLine in the e-paper format – just as it appears in print. Our website and apps too, are updated every minute.
But all this comes at a heavy cost. As you are aware, the lockdowns have wiped out almost all our entire revenue stream. That we have managed so far is thanks to your support. I thank all our subscribers – print and digital – for your support.
I appeal to all our readers to help us navigate these challenging times and help sustain one of the truly independent and credible voices in the world of Indian journalism. You can help us by subscribing to our digital or e-paper editions. We offer several affordable subscription plans for our website, which includes Portfolio, our investment advisory section.
Our subscriptions start as low as Rs 199/- per month. A yearly package costs just Rs. 999 – a mere Rs 2.75 per day, less than a third the price of a cup of roadside chai..
A little help from you can make a huge difference to the cause of quality journalism!
