‘Desperate’ To Get Natural Gas Out Of Appalachia, Pipeline Builders Face Long Battle Even After Supreme Court Victory
The view west along the Appalachian Trail at Cedar Cliffs, where the Atlantic Coast Pipeline would ... [+] be tunneled under the historic trail and the Blue Ridge Parkway. The view west is where the pipeline would tunnel under the Appalachian Trail and Blue Ridge Parkway. In the far background is Shenandoah Mountain, on the west side of the Shenandoah Valley which the pipeline would also traverse. (Photo by Norm Shafer/ For The Washington Post via Getty Images).
In picturesque Tioga County, Pennsylvania, a truck loaded with super-cooled liquefied natural gas pulls away from an oil and gas well and makes for the highway, on its way to New England.
In most circumstances, this would be a highly unusual arrangement. It’s much faster and cheaper to transport natural gas—the odorless, colorless stuff that is burned in power stations to produce one-third of the nation’s electricity—by pipeline rather than by truck.
But in Pennsylvania, West Virginia and parts of New York and Ohio, home to the natural gas-rich Marcellus Shale basin, there are simply not enough pipelines to transport all the natural gas to other parts of the country. So some producers are resorting to long-haul trucking to sell it to areas of higher demand along the East Coast, in the Midwest and the Southeast. If that’s not feasible, they sometimes simply burn it off into the atmosphere.
Oil and gas companies spy a juicy opportunity if they can unlock the natural gas that is stranded inside the Marcellus Shale region. Unless firms manage to mobilize an army of natural gas-carrying trucks—which would probably be uneconomical—that means one thing: building more pipelines.
Shares In Chesapeake Energy Set For Delisting, As Historic Bankruptcy Is Finally Official
Several companies are doing just that. Yet despite years of effort, the support of the Trump administration and, as of Monday, a Supreme Court victory, they still face a wall of legal challenges and growing local opposition, experts say.
The key to understanding their urgency starts with the massive oversupply of natural gas inside the Marcellus region. A sharp divergence in the price of natural gas in and outside the region is telling: natural gas sells for around $1.30 per million British thermal units (or Btu, a standard industry measure) inside the Marcellus region, and a much steeper $1.75 per btu at Henry Hub, Louisiana, where national prices are determined. (One cubic foot of natural gas contains 1,037 btus .)
“There is much more supply than demand within the Marcellus Shale region, so prices are depressed compared to the national price,” said James Van Nostrand, a professor at West Virginia University College of Law. “Producers desperately want to complete [more pipelines] to eliminate that spread and get access to the broader national markets (and therefore receive the higher national prices).”
For pipeline companies, it might have seemed like a major victory on Monday when the Supreme Court used its heft to clear the way for a critical section of the 604-mile Atlantic Coast Pipeline, which would transport 1.5 billion cubic feet per day of natural gas from West Virginia to North Carolina. Initial construction of the Atlantic Coast Pipeline ran aground more than a year ago when lawsuits claimed the Forest Service lacked the authority to grant it a right-of-way permit to cross the Appalachian Trail. But in a 7-to-2 ruling for the majority by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court dismissed those lawsuits, saying that the Forest Service’s permit was valid because the pipeline crossed several hundred feet beneath the Appalachian Trail—not over or near its surface—and therefore remained within the remit of the Forest Service.
“Today’s decision is an affirmation for the Atlantic Coast Pipeline and communities across our region that are depending on it for jobs, economic growth and clean energy,” said Dominion Energy and Duke Energy, the project's lead backers.
They shouldn’t speak too soon.
The dispute over the Appalachian Trail is but one of several challenges the pipeline faces. Another, for example, was raised only recently when a federal judge in Montana ruled that a key permit on which companies rely heavily to build pipelines, called Nationwide Permit 12, is not valid because the US Army Corps of Engineers did not consult properly with the Fish and Wildlife Service when it reissued that permit in 2017 in the final days of the Obama administration. The Atlantic Coast Pipeline also still needs to obtain a biological opinion as well as an incidental take statement from the Fish and Wildlife Service.
“There are undoubtedly a lot of lawsuits involving this particular pipeline,” said Cale Jaffe, a professor at the University of Virginia. The Supreme Court ruling may resolve one of them, he said, but it doesn’t help Dominion or Duke with the others.
Opponents of oil and gas pipelines highlight the damage they can do to the environment and local economies. In an amicus brief that Jaffe submitted to the Supreme Court as part of the case decided Monday, he highlighted how local economies that depend on the Appalachian Trail could be harmed.
The Atlantic Coast Pipeline is not the only pipeline vying to add to the region's export capacity. In fact, one other is much closer to coming online. The $5.4 billion, 303-mile Mountain Valley Pipeline is more than 92% complete, according to its joint-venture partners EQM Midstream Partners, NextEra Capital Holdings, Con Edison Transmission, WGL Midstream and RGC Midstream. Once finished, the 42-inch pipeline would send around two billion cubic feet of gas per day from northwestern West Virginia to southern Virginia. The company says it expects the Mountain Valley pipeline to start operating in early 2021.
But even that timetable is not assured. Mountain Valley still needs to obtain permits to cross four miles of the Jefferson National Forest and Appalachian Trail, as well as some water bodies. The decision invalidating Nationwide Permit 12 is among the issues that could delay its progress.
The Atlantic Coast and Mountain Valley pipelines will not be the first to ship natural gas from the region. A handful of others are already in operation, although several of them exit the region to the west rather than to the east or are expansions of infrastructure that already existed.
Still, if either succumbs to regulatory or legal hurdles — a scenario that seems more plausible for the Atlantic Coast Pipeline — it wouldn't be the first in the region to hit a dead end. The Constitution Pipeline, which would have crossed New York's Catskill Mountains, was cancelled this February after years of legal battles and opposition from environmentalists.
Pipeline companies might be struggling to win today’s legal battles. But as long as they keep long-run forecasts firmly in view, they are probably willing to absorb a few setbacks.
Despite the strong growth that renewables have enjoyed in recent years and the momentum they have picked up during the Covid 19-induced economic crisis, forecasts suggest that the U.S. will depend heavily on natural gas for decades to come.
According to a 2019 report by BP, U.S. demand for natural gas is expected to rise around 24% by 2040. Even in the European Union, which aims to be carbon neutral by 2050, natural gas consumption is still expected to be about the same in 20 years as it is today.
Demand from industrial sources and from power stations will drive most of the growth in natural gas demand, according to BP’s outlook .
Experts urge caution in evaluating such long-term predictions. For example, many East Coast states have recently adopted some of the most aggressive clean energy policies in the country and renewable energy has picked up momentum during the economic crisis. Few forecasts have yet incorporated all the new dynamics into their long-term forecasts.
Nevertheless, as long as prices of natural gas outside Appalachia remain comfortably higher than inside it, companies will be willing to fight hard to put pipelines in place to get the gas out.
Correction: An earlier version of this article said that one btu, or British thermal unit, is equal to roughly 1,000 cubic feet of natural gas. In fact, the opposite is true: one cubic foot of natural gas contains around 1,000 btus.
I cover the energy industry, with a focus on fossil fuels. Formerly I covered oil markets in Africa, the Mediterranean and the Mideast Gulf for commodities publication
I cover the energy industry, with a focus on fossil fuels. Formerly I covered oil markets in Africa, the Mediterranean and the Mideast Gulf for commodities publication Argus Media in London. I graduated from the London School of Economics with a masters degree in 2017. Contact me at scott.carpenter.freelance@gmail.com .
