The Nikkei share average ended down 0.12 per cent at 20,366.48 points, a day after it hit a two-month high.
Toyota Motor, the biggest Japanese company by market cap, fell 2.0 per cent after the automaker warned its operating profit will fall almost 80 per cent in the current financial year.
TOKYO: Japan's Nikkei share average slipped from a two-month high on Tuesday as concerns about further waves of coronavirus infections undermined recent optimism on economic re-openings.
Toyota Motor, the biggest Japanese company by market cap, fell 2.0 per cent after the automaker warned its operating profit will fall almost 80 per cent in the current financial year.
The Nikkei share average ended down 0.12 per cent at 20,366.48 points, a day after it hit a two-month high. It has risen 18.7 per cent from a trough hit on March 19.
Investors' confidence has improved as more governments relax anti-virus measures and try to get economies back on their feet, but news of a rise infections in countries that had appeared to be containing the disease, such as China, South Korea and Germany, dented optimism.
Some market players noted the rally in the market has been based on expectations that the economy would quickly recover after a dismal April-June quarter, though many economists warn it could take much longer.
"When you think of earnings outlook and dire economic conditions, it is hard to expect the market to rise further from here," said Takuya Hozumi, global investment strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities.
Highlighting the magnitude of the damage from the pandemic, the president of Toyota Motor told reporters its impact would be bigger than the 2008 global financial crisis. Other cyclical shares were badly hit. Isetan Mitsukoshi Holdings fell 8.7 per cent after the department store operator posted a loss for the financial ended March.
Bridgestone slipped 4.0 per cent after the tyre maker posted a 65 per cent fall in net profit for January-March, compared with a year earlier, and withdrew its annual forecast.
Kawasaki Heavy Industries sank 5.7 per cent as the firm halved its annual dividend to save cash.
Invincible Investment fell 22.7 per cent, its daily limit, after the hotel REIT slashed its dividend by 98 per cent.
The TSE's REIT index dropped 2.2 per cent from two-month high touched a day earlier on worries other funds may follow suit.
On the other hand, semi-conductor related shares were among the best performers on expectations of increased internet traffic after the coronavirus.
Sumco Corp rose 3.3 per cent and Advantest Corp gained 2.3 per cent.
Semiconductor manufacturing equipment maker Tokyo Seimitsu rose 3.2 per cent on strong earnings.
Square Enix Holdings Co Ltd rose 4.8 per cent after the online entertainment company raised its profit estimate for the financial year ended March and hiked its dividend.
"I think the market is still retaining an uptrend," said Yuya Fukue, trader at Rheos Capital Works.
"At the same time, I expect the polarisation of the market to continue. The tech sector will flourish as it is becoming an important infrastructure for the society."
The broader Topix fell 0.26 per cent to 1,476.72.
