The pound has enjoyed its biggest surge in a decade as the City cheered predictions of a strong Conservative majority that would finally end the Brexit deadlock.
Investors piled into sterling after the exit poll suggested Boris Johnson would be given a majority strong enough to put to bed the uncertainty plaguing businesses and the economy.
After sinking during nervy trading in the run-up to the exit poll, the pound erased early losses to soar more than 3pc against the dollar in just half an hour, breaking past the $1.35 milestone to its highest level in 19 months. It broke above €1.20 against the euro, hitting its highest level since the aftermath of the EU referendum.
Top banks drafted in traders for a frantic night of dealing on currency markets with analysts predicting that sterling could build on its initial gains if the Tories secured their predicted majority.
Handover: exit polls to come very shortly!
My colleague Tom Rees is going to take over now, and will steer things throughout the night for the results of today’s election. Thank you for following along so far!
US stocks rallied today, to December record closes, on hopes that Washington and Beijing had finally struck a trade deal.
Two of the three main indexes closed with fresh highs:
The first exit poll expected at 10pm and results are to follow soon after.
The Telegraph’s final poll of the campaign estimates the final result is now "too close to call" and things are ready heating up on twitter.
— Tweet_Deck The Halls 🎄 (@Tweet_Dec) December 12, 2019
With 90 minutes to go until #exitpoll , anyone else is glued to the live charts of the value of Sterling??
Reuters has just reported that Boeing  has delayed plans to reach a record production rate of 57 737 jets per month next year,  according to industry sources, even before the US FAA announced a new delay in the 737 MAX return to service that raised uncertainty over production plans.
Sterling has recovered somewhat from its earlier plummet, although it is still slightly down against the dollar and the euro.
With everything about to kick off very soon (in an hour and an half's time) I'm sure this we'll see plenty more movement to come.
