A call option is a kind of agreement where one person pays for the right to buy a stock at a fixed price in the future. To do this, these people sign contracts with option sellers. Covered-call funds own stocks, so they’re in a position to sell these kinds of options to investors, generating a nice extra cash stream—and bolstering our dividend payouts—as they do.
There are three major covered-call CEFs on the market, and they hold the stocks in the three major US stock indexes: the Nuveen Dow 30 Dynamic Overwrite Fund (DIAX), which holds stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average; the Nuveen S&P 500 Dynamic Overwrite Fund (SPXX); and the Nuveen Nasdaq
These are all appealing dividend plays at first glance; DIAX’s yield is 8.1%; SPXX yields 7.8%; and QQQX yields 6.9%. But which one should you buy now?
First, let’s look at their pricing.
Two Bargains … or are They?
As we can see, DIAX and SPXX trade at 10%+ discounts to net asset value (NAV, or what their underlying portfolios are worth), while QQQX looks less appealing with just a 1.1% discount. But the discount isn’t the entire story here. Let’s look at these funds’ total NAV returns—or the performance of the stocks they hold.
As we can see, QQQX’s NAV return is the breakaway winner. With tech fully recovered from the COVID-19 selloff in March, this is no surprise; and it seems that DIAX and SPXX have kept their discounts because their portfolios haven’t recovered quite as much as tech stocks have.
Part of the reason why is that these latter two funds (which, let’s remember, hold stocks in the Dow and S&P 500, respectively) own fewer tech stocks than QQQX.
Technically speaking, a bit over half of the Nasdaq 100 is in the tech sector, and many non-tech companies in the Nasdaq are better positioned to outperform in this pandemic-driven market. For one, the Nasdaq has a lot of biopharma companies, such as Alexion Pharmaceutical (ALXN) and Amgen
(AMGN), as well as firms that may not benefit as directly from the pandemic, but do have less risk of being seriously hurt by it.
Take, for instance, Visa (V), which is suffering due to the drop in consumer spending but is also benefiting from more e-commerce transactions from people in lockdown. But lockdowns have mostly ended, so is it time to ditch QQQX and go for the other covered-call funds?
With total coronavirus cases in the US surpassing 2.5 million, and daily new cases reaching a new record last week, there is more anticipation of another lockdown. That won’t necessarily mean we’ll have selloff after selloff, as we did for days on end in March, but it does mean the market will likely gravitate toward tech stocks as a safe harbor.
Having seen what happened with the last lockdown, there will be a lot of capital flowing into the stocks that worked best last time (such as those in the Nasdaq) and out of stocks that collapsed (such as materials, industrials and commodity producers, including many of the big Dow Jones companies). This means QQQX’s outperformance looks set to continue.
Plus, QQQX’s 6.9% dividend means you can buy into the tech sector and get an income stream while you wait out the coronavirus crisis. That big payout will entice a lot of income-hungry investors in a low-interest-rate environment, driving the fund’s price up further.
Michael Foster is the Lead Research Analyst for Contrarian Outlook . For more great income ideas, click here for our latest report “ Indestructible Income: 5 Bargain Funds with Safe 11% Dividends .”
I have worked as an equity analyst for a decade, focusing on fundamental analysis of businesses and portfolio allocation strategies. My reports are widely read by
I have worked as an equity analyst for a decade, focusing on fundamental analysis of businesses and portfolio allocation strategies. My reports are widely read by analysts and portfolio managers at some of the largest hedge funds and investment banks in the world, with trillions of dollars in assets under management. I've been traveling the world since 1999 and have no plans to stop. So far, I have lived in NYC, Hong Kong, London, Los Angeles, Seoul, Bangkok, Tokyo, and Kuala Lumpur. I received my Ph.D. in 2008 and continue to offer consulting services to institutional investors and ultra high net worth individuals.
