"One thing we know for a fact is that new all-time highs are NOT a common characteristic of a downtrend. And the Nasdaq100 $QQQ just went out at new all-time weekly closing highs."
Note that the rise in the NASDAQ 100 has not seen a bubble-like surge as it did during the dotcom bubble on the late 1990s. The returns are steady. The dotcom bust came after a monster-sized bubble in tech stocks. The current steady gains strongly suggest we are not in such a bubble and therefore we shouldn’t expect it to burst.
Investors are hoarding cash, and they are probably doing that out of fear that the market will crash further. Money market funds now hold $4.8 trillion dollars, according to a recent report from Barron’s magazine . The report also states that such cash holdings are a record level and far surpass the $3.8 trillion high of January 2009.
Such high cash balances are a contrary indicator. Eventually, much of that cash from the money-market accounts will be put back into the stock market and help push stocks higher once again. That’s what happened in 2009, and there is little reason to think we won’t see a repeat over the next few months.
When the majority of stocks in the market rally that is considered a bullish sign. It is known as market breadth, and more breadth indicates a more robust market. It means that the rally isn’t resting solely on a few large-cap stocks pulling up the index.
Art Hogan chief market strategist at National Securities Corporation explains the detail in a recent report:
"The month of June has ushered in more breadth in U.S. equities, a decidedly constructive concept. More than 97% of the stocks in the S&P 500 traded above their 50-day moving averages this month, a measure used to track momentum and breadth."
That 97% figure is double the reading seen in early May, he says, Or put another way, this market rally is broad-based and robust.
The current recession is clearly a deep one with millions of people making new claims for unemployment insurance each week. While the depth is a serious problem, the economic downturn isn’t likely to last long, according to the Economic Cycle Research Institute . ECRI has a phenomenal record in forecasting the beginning and end of recessions.
Lakshman Achuthan, cofounder of ECRI, says the recession will likely be over this summer, according to a report from Yahoo. Recessions end when the economy stops shrinking. How rapid the recovery will be is another matter. But the good news is that the end of the downturn is probably imminent.
Simon Constable | Author | Broadcaster | Journalist | Commentator | Speaker. Author of The Wall Street Journal's 'In Translation' column. Fellow at the Johns Hopkins
Simon Constable | Author | Broadcaster | Journalist | Commentator | Speaker. Author of The Wall Street Journal's 'In Translation' column. Fellow at the Johns Hopkins Institute for Applied Economics, Global Health and the Study of Business Enterprise. Former staffer for General Motors Treasurer's Office. MBA from Darden Graduate School of Business at The University of Virginia. MA New York University. MA (Hons) University of St. Andrews, Scotland. Co-author of the award-winning book The WSJ Guide to the 50 Economic Indicators that Really Matter. Have written for Middle East Eye, TheStreet.com, The South China Morning Post, Barron's, Dow Jones Newswires, MarketWatch.
