Copyright © 2020 InvestorPlace Media, LLC. All rights reserved. 9201 Corporate Blvd, Rockville, MD 20850.
By Eric Fry , Editor, Fry's Investment Report Jun 29, 2020, 2:23 pm EDT
“It’s ‘nervous time’ at the Fabulous Forum,” the legendary Los Angeles Lakers announcer Chick Hearn would often remark whenever the home team was trailing late in the fourth quarter.
A similar sort of “nervous time” is hanging over the stock market now that the major indices have rocketed 37%–45% from their March lows … even though the novel coronavirus pandemic is catching a second wind.
Investors are becoming increasingly concerned that the “easy” gains they reaped from the March lows might disappear just as quickly as they arrived. Already, many of the stocks that are most vulnerable to the coronavirus shock are rolling over and sliding back toward their recent lows.
A name like Howard Hughes (NYSE: HHC ) comes to mind. The Covid-19 pandemic dealt a severe blow to this multifaceted real estate and hospitality company. As a result, the stock tumbled in step with most other real estate and hospitality stocks.
However, like most of its peers, the stock bounced a spritely 75% off the March lows. But the stock is sliding again — this time because of a particularly pernicious setback from Covid-19. The second wave of the pandemic, because it is flaring up in the Houston area, is making a direct hit on the heart of Howard Hughes’ operations.
The Houston area is home to the company’s largest residential and commercial projects. The Las Vegas area represents another big chunk of the company’s operations. So the scary regional and national headlines that are starting to pop up about rising Covid-19 infections are no help to these operations either.
Probably, these headlines are creating a good buying opportunity for the stock. Short term, the headlines could continue hammering away at the company’s share price. But longer term, Howard Hughes could actually benefit from the Covid-19 crisis.
That’s because the company’s larger residential and commercial projects are near Houston, but not in it. Likewise, its Las Vegas projects are in Summerlin, which is near Las Vegas, not in it.
According to the company, the Covid-19 crisis might trigger a flight from centralized urban-center housing and offices out to the leafier and more spacious suburban properties Howard Hughes operates.
But the road from short-term challenges to long-term prosperity could be a rocky one.
Meanwhile, a handful of stocks and sectors are breezing through the fears of a second Covid-19 wave … at least so far.
Let’s check out a few.
Near the top of that list we find the leading companies of the video-gaming industry, like Electronic Arts (NASDAQ: EA ) and Activision Blizzard (NASDAQ: ATVI ), which both recently hit new highs.
I first told you about Activision on April 25. It’s up 14% since then.
The specific play in this sector that I recommended three months back to Fry’s Investment Report subscribers has chalked up 35.7% gains — and hit a new all-time high. (To find out how to join us at the Investment Report, click here .)
Nearby on the winners list, we find leading companies from the world of mobile apps and mobile gaming, like Tencent Holdings (OTCMKTS: TCEHY ). That Chinese internet company is trading at a new all-time high, as is a similar stock in the sector that I recommended to my subscribers.
Online retailers also rank among the list of standout performers. The shares of Amazon (NASDAQ: AMZN ), the titan of online retailing, continue to power higher and higher, no matter what news crosses the wires. As a result, Amazon’s stock is trading near an all-time high.
But many “lesser lights” in the online retailing sector are also enjoying boomtime conditions, which is causing their stocks to soar to all-time highs. That list includes names like Pinduoduo (NASDAQ: PDD ), Ocado Group PLC (OTCMKTS: OCDGF ), MercadoLibre (NASDAQ: MELI ), Shopify (NYSE: SHOP ) and JD.com (NASDAQ: JD ).
Every single one of these stocks just hit a new all-time high. And thanks to those gains, another of my portfolio recommendations is also hitting record levels: Amplify International Online Retail ETF (NYSEARCA: XBUY ).
