This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Here Are the 10 Best-Performing Tech Stocks in the First Half. At Least 1 Has Gone Too Far.
Remember Marc Andreessen’s line about software eating the world? The legendary venture investor wrote those words in a Wall Street Journal column in August 2011 . Andreessen argued that many new internet companies—he referred to Facebook and Twitter specifically—were building “real, high-growth, high-margin, highly defensible businesses.” And he pushed back on the idea that a new tech bubble was forming, insisting that investors should stop worrying about the valuations of software companies and focus more on how they were reshaping the future.
Prescient advice. The tech-rich Nasdaq 100 has since quintupled, and many new software companies have gone public, richly rewarding investors.
Now software isn’t simply eating the world. Software is saving the world—and buoying portfolios like no other sector of the economy. During the first half of 2020, the Nasdaq 100 rallied almost 17%, sprinting past the S&P 500 index, which fell 4%. The numbers look even better for a broader basket of tech companies. I ran a screen on tech stocks with market values of more than $5 billion—a group of 200 such companies—and found an average first-half return of nearly 26%.
The numbers are skewed a bit by the biggest winners, but the screen showed 100 tech stocks with first-half gains of 10% or more, amid the worst downturn since the Great Depression.
Tech stocks were the best place to hide during the market’s Covid-19 turmoil. Here are the year’s best performing U.S. tech stocks with a market value of at least $5 billion.
Some clear themes emerge from the list, beyond the cloud and stay-at-home trends that we’ve frequently addressed in this column :
The Big Get Bigger: As last week drew to a close, Alphabet (ticker: GOOGL) rallied past the $1 trillion market value level, joining Apple (AAPL), Microsoft (MSFT), and Amazon.com (AMZN) in the 13-digit club. Together, the four giants are worth about $5.6 trillion. That’s roughly equal to the next 19 largest U.S. companies combined: Facebook, Berkshire Hathaway, Visa, Johnson & Johnson, Walmart, Mastercard, Procter & Gamble, JPMorgan Chase, UnitedHealth, Home Depot, Intel, Nvidia, Verizon Communications, Netflix, AT&T, Adobe , PayPal, Tesla, and Walt Disney. If you had to choose the four or the 19, which would you pick? Diversification argues for the larger group, but given their sheer market muscle, I’d make the case for betting on the trillionaires.
Shop Till You Drop: Consumers have adopted online shopping at an accelerated pace, and you can see it in stock prices. Amazon shares rose 49% in the first half. Etsy (ETSY) became a global marketplace for handcrafted face masks , and the stock soared almost 140%. Wayfair (W) shares more than doubled, as the home furnishings retailer attracted customers unable to shop in physical stores . Both Square (SQ) and PayPal (PYPL) rallied more than 60%, as adoption of digital payments expanded.
The Picks and Shovels Play: The market has bid up internet infrastructure players—shares of Zscaler (ZS), Datadog (DDOG), Twilio (TWLO), Cloudflare (NET), Wix (WIX), and CrowdStrike (CRWD) have all more than doubled. The best-performing tech stock has been Fastly (FSLY), a San Francisco–based content delivery network, or CDN, which helps websites—in particular e-commerce companies—reach their audiences securely and efficiently.
The stock was at $28 when Fastly reported March quarter results on May 6. Two months later, the stock has more than tripled to $86. In an earnings day interview , CEO Joshua Bixby told me that Fastly was seeing demand growth from cloud, social-networking, and retail customers, including Slack Technologies (WORK), Shopify (SHOP), Pinterest (PINS), and Reddit. With the rally, Fastly has joined the ranks of pricey work-from home stocks. It’s valued at more than 31 times current year estimated sales.
Late to the Game: The switch to cloud computing continues to crush shares of legacy tech players. Oracle (ORCL), IBM (IBM), Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPQ), HP Inc. (HPQ), and Seagate (STX) are transforming their businesses to focus on cloud offerings, but investors are wary. IBM is down 10%, HP Inc. is off 15%, Seagate is down 19%, and HP Enterprise is down 30%. Xerox (XRX) shares have tumbled 58%. There’s no need for office printers with no one in the office.
A weekly guide to our best stories on technology, disruption, and the people and stocks in the middle of it all.
One of the year’s biggest winners is Shopify, the Ottawa-based e-commerce software provider. I find the math on this one a head-scratcher. Last week, Barron’s included CEO Tobias Lütke on our list of the 25 best CEOs . Shopify is shining as retailers snap up tools to move online, but the stock trades for close to 60 times current year sales, making it the most richly valued large-cap company outside of biotech. It fetches 2,000 times estimated current year profits of 50 cents a share. And Shopify’s growth is decelerating. Wall Street forecasts top-line growth of 38% this year, down from 49% last year, 56% in 2018, and 71% in 2017.
In a recent report, Grand View Research projected that the global e-commerce software market would grow about 16% a year through 2027, to $20.6 billion. Let’s say the market is $20 billion by 2025. If true, then Shopify, which sports a market value of $115 billion, is trading for close to six times the entire addressable market five years out. But it won’t have the entire market. In 2019, Shopify had “gross merchandise value” of $61.1 billion; Adobe’s Magento e-commerce platform grossed $53.5 billion. And there are other players, including Salesforce.com’s Demandware, SAP Commerce Cloud, and venture-backed Big Commerce.
We are all buying more online, and that helps Shopify. But Shopify now sports a market value $8 billion higher than IBM, which is forecast to generate 35 times the sales of Shopify this year.
And Shopify is valued roughly in line with Target, Walgreens, and Kroger—combined. The three retailers together should have $350 billion in sales this year, versus a little over $2 billion for Shopify.
Shopify is a fast-growing company providing a useful service. But if there’s a good argument that it deserves to be the most expensive stock on Earth, I have yet to hear it.
Here Are the 10 Best-Performing Tech Stocks in the First Half. At Least 1 Has Gone Too Far.
Remember Marc Andreessen’s line about software eating the world? The legendary venture investor wrote those words in a Wall Street Journal column in August 2011.
