NEW YORK, Sept. 17, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- KWEB achieved a one-year track record in August 2014 and was the best performing Technology ETF and China Region ETF in the United States. KWEB's one-year total return was 49.82% as of August 31, 2014 vs the Dow Jones US Technology Index1 at 34.95% and the Nasdaq 100 Index2 at 34.67%
"KWEB offers investors direct access to one of the fastest growing sectors in the world: China Internet and e-commerce," said Jonathan Krane, CEO of KraneShares," and KWEB will be among the first ETFs to include Alibaba (NYSE: BABA ) which is fast-tracked for inclusion 11 days after the IPO."
Brendan Ahern - KraneShares Managing Director added, "China's demographics support continued outperformance. According to the China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC), as of June 2014, China had 632 million Internet users equivalent to only 47% of the population. This is compared with 270 million users or approximately 81% of the US population. In a rapidly urbanizing country of over 1.3 billion people, that can translate into tremendous room for growth for companies in the sector and KWEB."
"We believe that the China Internet sector is a very attractive investment opportunity right now. This is reflected in KWEB's one year total return numbers. We believe KWEB will continue its strong performance after Alibaba's IPO." said Jonathan Krane.
About KraneShares: KraneShares, a product of Krane Funds Advisors, is focused on serving global investors with ETFs for the next-wave of China's development. Founded in 2011, our New York based firm offers proprietary ETFs constructed to give US and Global investors broad, diverse and quality exposure to China's historic growth story.
Data as of month end: 08/31/2014
Total Annual Fund Operating Expense: 0.68%
The performance data quoted represents past performance. Past performance does not guarantee future results. The investment return and principal value of an investment will fluctuate so that an investor's shares, when sold or redeemed, may be worth more or less than their original cost and current performance may be lower or higher than the performance quoted. Please visit www.kraneshares.com or call 1-855-857-2638 for most recent performance a given time period.
There is no guarantee that any security, including Alibaba, will be added to an index or a Fund.
Carefully consider the Funds' investment objectives, risk factors, charges and expenses before investing. This and additional information can be found in the Funds' summary or full prospectus, which may be obtained by visiting http://kraneshares.com/resources/kraneshares_kweb_prospectus_2014.pdf . Read the prospectus carefully before investing.
For current holdings of KWEB, visit www.kraneshares.com/kweb
Investing involves risk, including possible loss of principal. There can be no assurance that a Fund will achieve its stated objective. The Funds focus their investments primarily with Chinese issuers and issuers with economic ties to China. The Funds are subject to political, social or economic instability within China which may cause decline in value. Fluctuations in currency of foreign countries may have an adverse effect on domestic currency values. Emerging markets involve heightened risk related to the same factors as well as increase volatility and lower trading volume. Current and future holdings are subject to risk.
Narrowly focused investments typically exhibit higher volatility. Internet companies are subject to rapid changes in technology, worldwide competition, rapid obsolescence of products and services, loss of patent protections, evolving industry standards and frequent new product productions. Such changes may have an adverse impact on performance.
The KraneShares ETFs are distributed by SEI Investments Distribution Company, which is not affiliated with Krane Funds Advisors, LLC, the Investment Adviser for the Fund.
The  Dow Jones U.S. Technology Index measure the stock performance of U.S. companies in the Technology sector.
The NASDAQ100 Index represents the largest non-financial domestic and international securities listed on The NASDAQ Stock Market based on market capitalization.
