The Nasdaq 100 bull trend remains seen as highly overextended following its move to and above its ‘typical’ extreme – 15% above the 200-day average – now at 9855. Although economists at Credit Suisse expect a consolidation phase to emerge, they also note the probability of a ‘bubble’ environment in the Tech sector.
“We remain of the view the market is highly overstretched and look for a consolidation/correction to emerge. Weakness though will be seen as a corrective mover lower and there remains a real possibility we may be in a ‘bubble’ environment.”
“Supports for a setback are seen at 9704 initially, then 9499/89, with a break below here now needed to set a (small) top. Support would then be seen at 9357 initially, ahead of 9182, before 8863.”
“A close above 10155/230 and then 10400 would suggest there is a real possibility the Tech sector is entering ‘bubble’ territory and further parabolic strength may emerge, with resistance seem at 10610/710 next.”
“96% of Nasdaq 100 stocks are above their medium-term average and whilst this points to strong market breadth, it also speaks further to the current highly overextended state of the rally. Furthermore, 74% of Nasdaq 100 stocks are above their long-term 200-day average.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
