There’s an upbeat tone on Thursday with hopes boosted by news of another successful vaccine trial. European shares are up in the region of 1% in early trade following a positive day on Wall Street that saw the Nasdaq 100 set a new record high. The US dollar has rolled over amid the improved sentiment and a failed upside break to multi-week highs yesterday. Gold prices collapsed $30 yesterday but finished well off the lows, now around $1770 per oz. Oil is at a 1-week high.
The US unemployment report will be the last hurrah for US markets, which are closed tomorrow for the long Independence Day weekend. Expectations are for 3 million jobs to have been created in June, up from the 2.5 million in May.
As a reminder, last month the unemployment rate unexpectedly fell to 13.3% when expectations had been for it to rise close to 20%. Unemployment claims had risen by millions each week so this caused fair bit of head-scratching (and rapid buying from investors) as investors reacted to a quicker economic turnaround than expected. The explanation, in part comes from the classification of workers who were recorded as ‘employed but absent from work due to "other reasons." If these people have not returned, they will be reclassified – adding the potential for a big downward shock.
Tesla just became the biggest car company by market capitalisation after the shares rose 5%, overtaking Toyota for the first time. Shareholders aren’t listening to Elon Musk who said the shares are too high in May. The Tesla valuation doesn’t tally with earnings or car production- both of which are well below Toyota. Tesla is the most straightforward way to play the thematic investing idea of electric vehicles and investors are inspired by Musk’s vision.
The Nasdaq 100 just reached an intraday record high as well as record close. It follows a successful hold of the February peak at 9750.
This information has been prepared by London Capital Group Ltd (LCG). The material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. LCG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Spread betting and CFD trading carry a high level of risk to your capital and can result in losses that exceed your initial deposit. They may not be suitable for everyone, so please ensure that you fully understand the risks involved.
