The updated Nissan Kicks SUV will be powered by HR13 DDT 1.3-litre four-cylinder turbocharged petrol engine that can churn out 156 PS of power and 254 Nm of torque.
The Nissan KICKS CVT is claimed to be offering the best-performing automatic transmission in its class, when paired with the new Nissan X-Tronic CVT. (Representational image)
New Delhi: Nissan Motor India on Wednesday informed that its Kicks SUV will be launched soon in the country, and it will feature the most powerful engine in its class, the Nissan Turbo and Nissan’s widely-acclaimed X-Tronic CVT.
According to Nissan, the HR13 DDT 1.3-litre four-cylinder, turbocharged petrol engine, which can deliver 156 PS of power and 254 Nm of torque.
The HR13 DDT engine also uses the cylinder coating technology, which is borrowed from the Nissan GT-R’s engine. This technology boosts the efficiency of the engine and offers higher fuel efficiency and performance, as claimed by the automaker.
Rakesh Srivastava, Managing Director, Nissan Motor India, said, “The all-new Nissan KICKS 2020 is built with Japanese engineering and technology and has high build quality with purposeful and intelligent technology with class-leading premium-ness. The New Nissan KICKS is powered by best-in-class turbo engine and best-in-class X-Tronic CVT offering higher fuel economy and acceleration.”
As per the automaker, the Nissan Kicks CVT also offers the best-performing automatic transmission in its class, when paired with the new Nissan X-Tronic CVT.
The X-Tronic CVT offers an eight-step M mode which provides manual transmission-like experience at choice. The next-generation Nissan X-Tronic CVT offers 40 percent less friction contributing to higher fuel economy and acceleration response.
The model will be a complete vehicle package with an exceptional combination of intelligent technology and class-leading premiumness, the company informed.
How did you hear about us?
Plan to launch EV in India by 2022 but ecosystem is a must: Renault
While the month of June cleared the way for light at the end of the tunnel, it also resulted in an equal rejoicing for SUV makers in the country. Two out of the top five passenger vehicle (PV) models sold in June 2020 are the India-specific SUVs.
Hyundai Creta received more than 14,000 bookings in less than 15 days of the launch.
New Delhi: Reeling under the constant economic stress of job losses, coronavirus contagion and the limited need to commute, auto enthusiasts are forced to wonder if it is safe to say that Sports Utility Vehicles (SUVs) have been making history in today’s times, like no other.
What comes as a pleasant surprise is that carvings for these fierce SUVs which can cost upto Rs 10 lakh, are still alive and consumers are readily spending on high-ticket items amidst the falling economy and talks of personalised mobility with small cars.
Top 10 PVs sold in June 2020:
While Kia Motors is comparatively a new entrant in the market, Hyundai Motor India Limited (HMIL) might be seen as sailing on its already established brand value and wider sales network, coupled with a competitive diesel model of the SUV.
The first-generation Creta was launched in July 2015 and the second-generation model hit the markets in March 2020. New Creta SUV came under the 10-lakh bracket, at a starting price of Rs 9.99 lakh which can go upto Rs 17.20 lakh (all prices ex-showroom, Delhi).
As per Hyundai, Creta received more than 14,000 bookings in less than 15 days of the launch. Again, by mid-June, the automaker reported around 30,000 bookings for the compact SUV, with 50 percent of all these bookings for its diesel variants.
It must also be noted that Hyundai’s beasty model garnered headlines even in the month of May 2020, when it sold 3,212 units and defined history by replacing a hatchback to tag itself as the bestseller in the country, that too in the times of lockdown restrictions and diminishing sales.
However, the winning feat in May 2020 was being seen as an exception and a result of the booking backlog due to the sudden announcement of the country-wide lockdown in March.
Avik Chattopadhyay, an Independent Auto Consultant also noted, “We must remember that the average consumer for these SUVs is an entrepreneur. And since these are wholesale figures, they can also be accounted to the dealer bookings made before the country-wide lockdown, whose shipments are taking place now.”
It was the success of the SUV Seltos which helped the South Korean Kia to move ahead of the age-old Honda and Toyota in gaining its market share in India.
On the other hand, Kia Seltos, launched in India in August 2019 comes at a price range of Rs 9.69 lakh - Rs 15.99 lakh (ex-showroom). It was also the success of the SUV Seltos which helped the South Korean Kia to move ahead of the age-old Honda and Toyota in gaining its market share in India.
Maruti Brezza too, gaining the sixth spot clearly defines comfort with affordability. For the petrol variant, the SUV is available at Rs 7.34 lakh (ex-showroom Delhi).
Another gainer for Hyundai comes from its SUV Venue which also makes it to the top 10 PV list for June 2020, bagging the ninth spot. Launched in May 2019, the sub-compact SUV comes at a price tag of Rs 6.50 lakh (ex-showroom, India).
