A major CNY beer distributor closes, sells brand lines to competitors
Miller Lite is one of the brands carried by the now-closed Spirit & Sanzone Distributors that have been acquired by Onondaga Beverage Co. of Liverpool.Charlie Miller
East Syracuse, N.Y. — Spirit & Sanzone, one of Central New York’s oldest and largest beer distributors, has closed after selling its lineup of brands to competitors.
The East Syracuse-based distributor , which also dealt in wines, liquors and other beverages, sold the Onondaga and Cortland county rights to most of its brands to Onondaga Beverage Co. of Liverpool. Further to the east, in Utica, Rome and into the Mohawk Valley and the Adirondacks, the brand rights were sold to McCraith Beverage of New York Mills in Oneida County.
Spirit & Sanzone, founded 100 years ago, closed its plant and warehouse at 6495 Fly Road in East Syracuse and laid off 64 employees, according to a layoff notice sent to the New York State Department of Labor. The transactions took effect on June 1. It also had a location in Marcy, Oneida County.
Brands that are being transferred to Onondaga Beverage include “mainstream” products from Miller, Genesee and Molson, along with imports like Asahi, Speckled Hen, Paulaner and Warsteiner, and craft brands like 21st Amendment and Uinta.
Upstate New York craft brands transferring to Onondaga Beverage include Three Heads of Rochester, Sackets Harbor Brewing and McKenzie’s Hard Cider near Buffalo.
Several wines, spirits, soda and sparkling water brands are also moving to Onondaga Beverage.
Onondaga Beverage’s acquisition of the new beer lines will boost its share of the local market from 58% to nearly 70%, the company said. Its portfolio in Onondaga County already included such brands as Constellation (Corona etc.), Mark Anthony (White Claw hard seltzer etc.), Yuengling, Heineken and Pabst.
Beer distributors work in a system in which they acquire exclusive rights to market and sell beers in specific geographic regions. Sometimes a distributor may sell a brand in certain counties, while a competitor handles the same brand in other counties.
Onondaga Beverage Co., at 7655 Edgecomb Drive in Liverpool, is a division of A.L. George Distributing operating in Onondaga and Cortland counties. (It goes by the name A.L. George in other parts of Central New York, the Finger Lakes and the Southern Tier).
The other large distributor located in Onondaga County is T.J. Sheehan of Liverpool, whose portfolio includes Anheuser-Busch InBev (Budweiser, Bud Light etc.), plus big brands like Guinness and Bass and many craft brewers.
There are several other local distributors who specialize mostly in craft beers.
