New York state continues to roll on with its four phase reopening of the state during the coronavirus pandemic . However, large performance venues will be one of the last to open and many have canceled their entire entertainment seasons. Broadway announced it will be closed until at least September and venues across the country are taking their lead, leaving cast, crew, and production staff out of work.
We caught up with professional actors who are Central New York natives to find out how the great intermission is affecting them and how they are occupying this time.
Swings for The SpongeBob musical tour Teddy Gales, CNY native Mary Nickson, and John Cardenas.Provided photo | syracuse.com
Mary Nickson, a Fayetteville Manlius graduate, worked in regional theaters around CNY before attending college for theater and moving to Manhattan to pursue a career as an actor.
Eight months after moving, she booked a national tour of “The Spongebob Musical” which went on the road in September. The tour was about halfway complete when the coronavirus pandemic brought it to a screeching halt.
The cast was in Denver, Colorado, ready to perform for two weeks before making their biggest stop of the tour — Los Angeles and the Nickelodeon Studios Headquarters — when everything was shut down.
“We had been working to get to that point for the entire tour,” Nickson said.
The city of Denver shut the production down. Tour managers told cast members that they would be sending everyone home, but that they would be back in two weeks to go to L.A. and to leave their things at the theater.
The cast and crew were sent home on March 16, and by March 21 they were told the tour was closing completely. Meanwhile, all of their personal belongings from makeup to musical instruments from the pit were still in the trucks waiting for them on the road. Three months later, belongings had not yet been returned.
“All of our musicians have all of their instruments on the trucks. One of my best friends is the guitarist and she has two $3,000 guitars sitting on the trucks that are apparently in Canada,” she said.
Nickson is now home with her family after quarantining herself for two weeks after tour ended. It is a move that some of her friends still in Manhattan are thinking of making. With no work to be had in the theater world until possibly September, with no guarantee, paying New York City rent is causing some to consider other options.
One of her goals with this national tour was to work towards gaining membership in the Actor’s Equity Union . This would give her access to different kinds of auditions, roles, and union benefits. Now that half of the tour has been canceled, the trajectory she had planned is looking uncertain.
For now, Nickson is helping her little sister with her schoolwork, writing music, collaborating with friends online, and keeping up to date on things that are happening in the industry.
She feels it’s time to put more concrete measures to keep cast and crew safe on the road. As someone with asthma, Nickson said that leaving things to the honor system like cleaning and sanitizing is not enough.
“I feel like it’s never been more important to actually have bonafide rules that we triple, quadruple check instead of just letting people say they did it,” she said.
Andrea Dotto , Manlius native, made her Broadway debut in 2017 with “Bandstand.” She has traveled the country with national tours and has done both regional and Central New York local theater. She is currently a teacher, coach, and still works in professional theater.
When the pandemic shut down performance houses, Dotto and her fiancé Brendan Malafronte were cast in a production of “All Shook Up." That production and the rest of the season she planned to work in were canceled.
Dotto moved back up to Manlius with Malafronte and they plan on staying until August or September while they wait for theaters to reopen. Dotto then spent five weeks trying to speak with a person about unemployment.
“It’s so unnerving. All people in this time want to feel purposeful and like we’re working towards a goal. With something just as simple as unemployment, when you call and you can’t hear from a human, you just feel like, how can I progress? How can I move forward? A lot of people have been feeling helpless. That’s where the stress comes from. It’s because there’s just so much inactivity and that’s been a challenge, especially as a type A person. I have had to create goals from a different perspective,” Dotto said.
On top of struggles with unemployment, Dotto is worried about health insurance. Equity actors are covered by health insurance based on the weeks they worked. She had enough weeks of work to guarantee a year’s worth of health insurance, but since those jobs are not happening, neither is her earning of health insurance. She said the unions she is a part of are trying to work with legislators to resolve this issue.
“It’s a hardship for a lot of people, especially in a time when you’re trying to stay healthy” she said.
Her union also operates from working dues which have dried up since no one is working. They have given actors until November to pay their union dues and are working with members to get smaller payments in the upcoming months.
In the meantime, Dotto has taken her coaching and teaching to the virtual realm. While she has kept busy with all of her projects, she admits instruction on Zoom is not without its challenges for teaching in the arts.
When one of the theaters she had been working with reached out and asked her to record herself reading a bedtime story, Dotto had an idea. In addition to being a working actor, Malafronte works as a professor at Pace University teaching in puppetry. She combined their talents and she was joined on video with his character of a dog named Dusty. The response was positive with adults liking the videos just as much as their intended kid audience.
“That fulfills me in a way that theater does, that we can bring generations together,” Dotto said.
“Something has come out of this that would have never happened if we weren’t in Manlius, because we would have been too busy,” Dotto said.
Syracuse native Carrie Manolakos released her debut album, "Echo," on April 3, 2012. Here she peforms at the CD release party on April 2 at (le) poisson rouge in New York City.Kevin Thomas Garcia | Provided photo
Manlius Pebble Hill alum Carrie Manolakos has been a working actor for most of her life. She has done several national tours including playing Elphaba in “Wicked,” and Sophie “Mamma Mia!" She has also played Sophie in the Broadway company of the ABBA musical. Her voice has been part of the virtual community chorus in Broadway’s “Dear Evan Hansen" and she has sung on movie soundtracks including “The Greatest Showman” and “Incredibles 2."
Before the pandemic shutdown, Manolakos was coming off a Carnegie Hall debut with the New York Pops. When performance halls went on the great intermission, she had lots of concerts be canceled.
“From Carnegie Hall to quarantine,” she said.
Manolakos had been living in Los Angeles for two years and was planning for her next move when the pandemic hit. She took the opportunity to move back to the East Coast and currently calls Hudson, NY, home.
She has been thinking about what the performance industry will look like when it comes back. She said she foresees a lot of changes, hopefully for the better, but one concern is when the work does come back, how much of it will there be and what will the pay look like.
“People will really have to look in the mirror and ask themselves is this really what I am committed to because it takes a lot, especially with all these changes. Being adaptable and open to considering other things is going to be important,” she said.
Manolakos said her voice is on a soundtrack for a Broadway show and while theaters are closed, even the payments for that have been suspended. They won’t get paid until the show comes back.
“So many people are affected by this that aren’t even the people on stage,” she said.
This time away from the busy entertainment world has also allowed her space to launch two professional projects.
Manolakos started a virtual concert series which features her original works. Her tenth “Unplugged and Online” concert will take place on June 11 at 8 p.m. EST. Tickets can be purchased at carriemanolakos.com .
Carrie U , her new business, debuted this month with classes for aspiring singers and those looking to hone their craft. Manolakos said she feels it is important for artists to pass on the knowledge they have gained to the next generation and she hopes to do that with these classes. Registration is now open on carrieu.com for the Vocal Technique Masterclass.
Manolakos is also working on personal goals like reading books, creating a garden, learning how to cook, and urges others to use this time for themselves.
“Really connect on a deeper level in general now that we don’t have to necessarily be on all of this stuff all of the time. It’s that connection with myself and everything that’s bigger, so take time for that and go on those walks,” she said.
Jordan Westfall is a Syracuse native working in theater in New York City. When the state shutdown came, all of his jobs came to a halt.Provided photo | syracuse.com
For Jordan Westfall, a Syracuse native living in New York City, the coronavirus pandemic has put a halt to his work as an actor and at his restaurant job.
Any chance for future work means submitting video auditions and hoping the production will happen at some point. This has left him with a lot of time on his hands.
“It may seem futile, but I believe this is the time we as artists have been given to recoup—to learn those monologues we’ve been putting off for months; to write that script we’ve been dreaming of for years; to revamp our songbooks like we should have done yesterday,” Westfall said. “Now we have the time. The time to rest, the time to write, to learn, and to remember how exactly we are human, and more so, why we are artists. Performing is a demulcent craft, after all.”
Westfall has spent years working around the country in a myriad of professional theaters. For now, he is working on learning new songs and monologues and creating a director’s portfolio with hopes to direct his dream musical, “35mm” by Ryan Scott Oliver someday.
“I’m adapting and learning as much as humanly possible, and anxiously awaiting the theatre’s swift return,” he said.
