The Shanghai & Shenzhen were 0.0% and +0.64% as volumes collapsed 12% day over day and well off the 1 year average. Breadth was moderate 2,325 advancers and 1,149 decliners as mid and small caps outperformed large caps by ~50bps. The mainland stocks within the MSCI China All Shares Index gained +0.59% led higher by tech +1.14%, healthcare +1.14%, communication +1.06%, staples +1.03%, and real estate +0.78%. Utilities was the only down sector off -0.23%. Northbound Connect volumes were light, though buyers were active as Shenzhen Connect volumes and buying exceeded Shanghai Connect. Foreign investors purchased a total of $302mm of mainland stocks today.
Baidu (BIDU) reported Q3 earnings after the NY close yesterday. The company’s press release placed a heavy emphasis on quarter over quarter (QoQ) results, which were strong, rather than year over year (YoY), which were weak. The company’s net income was off due to its stake in Trip.com (formerly Ctrip.com), which it took after the sale of its online travel business Qunar to its rival back in 2015. The company used an exchange rate as of Sept 30 which was RMB 7.1477/US $ so the RMB’s appreciation versus the dollar would have improved results. The best thing Baidu has going for it is beating very low expectations as many sell-side reports note that virtually every element of bad news is baked into the stock price. We create a short squeeze though the company’s fundamentals are very inexpensive while sales of their smart home speaker (akin to Amazon’s Alexa) are strong. Revenues slightly down YoY to $3.929B (RMB 28.080B) from RMB 28.203B despite the company noting QoQ revenue grew 7%.
Online entertainment/video company and Baidu spin out iQIYI (IQ) reported earnings after the US close yesterday. Top line growth grew along with users but losses ballooned both QoQ and YoY. The issue is not China’s macro environment, but rather ByteDance’s TikTok, which is rapidly amassing market share but more importantly advertisers and their ad dollars. Publicly traded online video companies such IQ, HUYA and YY are feeling the effects of TikTok’s growth on their bottom lines. The sell side chatter is that a lot of the bad news is reflected in the stock.
After yesterday’s close, Trip.com (TCOM), formerly Ctrip.com (CTRP), announced a partnership with TripAdvisor (TRIP). Trip.com will buy 6.95mm shares of TripAdvisor worth $317mm and own 60% of TripAdvisor China. The idea is that the two companies will leverage their geographic footprints, which makes a ton of sense to me.
Takeaway: I might be the only person who noticed that this was released. It seems to only be news when it is falling.
RMB/USD 6.976 versus 6.9987 Yesterday; 31 basis points appreciation! Wow!
RMB/EUR 7.72 versus 7.76 Yesterday; 34 basis points appreciation!
Commodities on the Shanghai & Dalian exchanges were lower with Dr. Copper off -0.42%.
Krane Funds Advisors, LLC is the investment manager for KraneShares ETFs . Our suite of China focused ETFs provide investors with solutions to capture China’s importance as an essential element of a well-designed investment portfolio. We strive to provide innovative, first to market strategies that have been developed based on our strong partnerships and our deep knowledge of investing. We help investors stay up to date on global market trends and aim to provide meaningful diversification. Krane Funds Advisors, LLC is majority owned by China International Capital Corporation (CICC).
I am the Chief Investment Officer of KraneShares, a China-focused provider of exchange-traded funds (ETFs). As a pioneer within the ETF industry I experienced the surge
I am the Chief Investment Officer of KraneShares, a China-focused provider of exchange-traded funds (ETFs). As a pioneer within the ETF industry I experienced the surge in popularity of ETFs firsthand, helping an industry-leading global ETF provider grow AUM from a few million to over $1.5 trillion. Leveraging my experience working in capital markets, voracious appetite for global financial news and a touch of humor, I aim to provide readers with an informative daily roundup of key headlines and data from China’s financial markets. In addition to contributing to Forbes, I am often interviewed on and quoted in Bloomberg, CNBC and The Wall Street Journal on matters surrounding Chinese markets.
