The internationalization of the RMB has been going on for about a decade now. The global financial crisis undermined confidence in the dollar-based international system, in China and elsewhere. China’s central bank governor, Zhou Xiaochuan, wrote an article in 2009 criticizing the world’s dependence on the dollar and calling for reform of the international monetary system. This launched a period in which China actively promoted the internationalization of its currency.
RMB’s share as a world payments currency, 2012-February 2018:
Initially there was a steady and rapid increase in measures of internationalization, such as the RMB’s share in global payments (see figure). However, the growth came to an end in the middle of 2015, and since then China’s share has declined. China launched the internationalization of its currency during a period in which the currency was still modestly under-valued and appreciating gradually against the dollar. As long as there was an expectation that the Chinese currency would continue to gradually appreciate, that by itself created incentive for businesses and households to be willing to accept RMB. However, in the middle of 2015, the central bank carried out a mini-devaluation of its currency and indicated that in the future there would be two-way fluctuation. Once the expectation of appreciation disappeared, there was not much attraction to holding RMB and the currency’s share of global payments stalled and even declined.
Once the expectation of appreciation was gone, the question simply became whether it is convenient to take payment in RMB rather than in dollars or another hard currency. If a firm knows that it is going to be buying a lot from China right away, then having RMB is convenient. But, if one wants to hold the asset for a while, and then perhaps buy from another country, then holding RMB is awkward. China’s capital markets are under-developed and the ability to switch among currencies is restricted.
In order to make its currency attractive for payments, China will need to liberalize its financial markets and its capital account. In practice this means allowing foreigners to easily buy Chinese stocks and bonds and to move money in and out of the country as needed.  Given the large debt overhang that has developed in China, opening its capital account quickly would in fact be risky and we are not advocating it—just pointing out that as long as the capital account is closed, holding RMB is not very attractive.
