By Louis Harkell May 11, 2020   10:28 BST
Zhanjiang Guolian Aquatic Products' new crayfish plant in Yiyang, Hunan province. Credit: Seafood Guide
China’s largest shrimp company, Zhanjiang Guolian Aquatic Products, has revised upwards full-year losses to CNY 480 million ($68m), after taking a huge impairment loss due to the coronavirus outbreak.
According to the firm, a collapse in demand in the first quarter of 2020 hit the net realizable value of raw materials and finished products, which were included in 2019's financial figures.
Guolian, which has been expanding rapidly in China, opening two new processing factories last year, including a shrimp ‘mega-factory’ in Guangdong, previously announced preliminary full-year losses of CNY 81m back in January.
The impairment also saw the firm revise down full-year group revenues 17% to CNY 4.69bn, from CNY 5.62bn originally.
Guolian is based in the shrimp producing county of Zhanjiang, Guangdong province. It owns US seafood importer Sunnyvale Seafood.
According to the firm, demand from B-2-B clients was “stagnant” in the period covered by the report. Some large-sized products for foodservice buyers had to be repackaged for consumers into smaller packages.
In a later report, Guolian said the US-China trade war also impacted its short-term financing capacity last year; the US is Guolian's largest export market.
Coronavirus outbreak: Conxemar to make decision next week on 2020 Vigo show, 2021 Brussels expansion
Guolian said it had made further provisions for impairment losses given the global spread of the pandemic and slow recovery in China’s foodservice sector.
“Considering that the global epidemic situation will continue to spread and the recovery in the domestic foodservice channel is slow, the net realizable value of products near their shelf life end will decline, and the provision for inventory impairment will be increased,” it said in a filing to the Shenzhen stock exchange.
“The company did not anticipate the spread of the epidemic in the world and the impact on the overall economy when it released its initial performance report. The company's board of directors sincerely apologizes to the investors for this amendment,” it added.
Shenzhen stock exchange authorities requested more details about the impairment. It also criticized the firm for not alerting shareholders sooner, according to a May 5 company filing.
