Dana Balter talks with reporters after voting in the 24th Congressional District Democratic primary election at the Spiritual Renewal Center, Lancaster Avenue, Syracuse, N.Y., Tuesday June 23, 2020. Scott Schild | sschild@syracuse.com
A surge of absentee ballots in Tuesday’s Democratic primary election in the 24th Congressional District has led to the highest voter turnout for a Central New York congressional primary in 38 years.
All told, 47,189 Democratic voters have cast ballots in the election between Dana Balter and Francis Conole, about 31% of all eligible primary voters in the district, according to unofficial election returns.
That’s the highest turnout for a Central New York congressional primary dating back to 1982, after redistricting reduced the number of House members representing Syracuse from two to one.
“What we’re seeing has been playing out across the nation” said Dustin Czarny, Onondaga County’s Democratic elections commissioner. “At its base, despite the pandemic and no real presidential primary race, Democratic voters are going to the polls.”
The 31% turnout in this year’s election tops the 1988 Democratic congressional primary, when 21% of eligible voters cast ballots as Rosemary Pooler defeated Stephen Bowman.
In 2016, about 9% of eligible Democratic voters made it to the polls for a three-way primary in the district won by Colleen Deacon over Eric Kingson and Steve Williams.
In that race, 13,068 of the district's 140,065 Democratic voters showed up at the polls or voted by absentee ballot, according to state Board of Elections records
Central New Yorkers had more options to submit a ballot this year than in the past. All eligible New York primary voters were given the option to vote by mail with absentee ballots because of the coronavirus pandemic.
Voters also had the option to vote in person Tuesday and during a 10-day early voting period as part of a state law enacted last year.
On Tuesday, 16,938 Democrats voted at polling places in the four-county 24th District, according to the state Board of Election.
With 100% of the vote at the polls counted, Balter leads Conole 62-34% , the unofficial returns show.
But the winner won’t be known for more than a week because almost twice as many people decided to vote by mail than at the polls.
As of Wednesday, 30,268 mail-in ballots for the election had been received, according to figures supplied by election officials in Onondaga, Cayuga, Oswego and Wayne counties.
The mail-in ballot total could continue to grow. More than 44,000 voters requested mail-in ballots for the congressional primary. Those ballots will be considered valid if they’re postmarked by Tuesday and received by June 30. None of the ballots will be counted until the beginning of July.
All eligible primary voters in the state were mailed absentee ballot applications with a pre-paid envelope, an exception made because of the coronavirus pandemic.
Gov. Andrew Cuomo has not said whether he will continue to ease the absentee ballot restrictions for the November election.
