"Seinfeld: A Cultural History" is a new book by author Paul Arras, of Dewitt, NY.Provided photos | syracuse.com
It’s been over 20 years since the final episode of “Seinfeld” aired on NBC and yet remnants of the pop culture hit are still around today in our vernacular like Festivus , “shrinkage”, muffin tops , the soup nazi and yada yada yada. Now, a Central New York author has launched a new book about the ’90s sitcom.
Paul Arras ’ new book “Seinfeld: A Cultural History” is one of a series of books called “The Cultural History of Television” which includes shows like “Friends," “The Simpsons,” “Gilmore Girls,” “Mad Men,” “Breaking Bad,” “Cheers,” “Star Trek,” and “Fraiser.”
Arras, of Dewitt, is a Syracuse University graduate with a Ph.D. in history and has a focus on history in television and pop culture. He currently teaches communication studies at SUNY Cortland. This is his second published work.
His graduate research on ’90s television turned into his first book, “The Lonely Nineties” which has a chapter on “Seinfeld” among other TV shows such as “Friends,” “Law & Order,” and “The Simpsons.”
His new explores the show’s history with a look at the show’s legendary co-creators, its supporters (and skeptics) at NBC, and its award-winning cast. By all the traditional rules of television, Seinfeld never should have made it to the air.
“It’s probably the show I know the best and probably my favorite show too,” Arras said.
He said he watched the entire series while in grad school at SU as part of his research for his first book. While watching the show he would write lots of notes and blurbs about each episode. He has watched the series multiple times and made sure to watch it again for writing this book. He said one of the advantages to researching this series is that there are multiple transcriptions of each episode online, so it was easy to look up pieces of dialogue.
Arras calls it one of the last “water cooler” TV series in that a new episode would come out and you would have a week to dissect it and build anticipation for the next one.
In doing research for this new book, one of the things that surprised him were the relationships between the main cast members. He said he always thought of them as four really good friends, but he really should think about them as really good workplace friends.
“It was a good place to work, but they weren’t necessarily friends off the set. You had four people in very different points of their lives. Jerry Seinfeld was a popular bachelor in the tabloids in the 90s, Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Jason Alexander were raising young families, and Michael Richards was divorced with an older kid when the show came around,” Arras said.
He said the book contains not only his musings and analysis about the show, but also a detailed history of the show and connections to the TV shows that inspired “Seinfeld” and the shows that were inspired by the 90s hit series. The book also includes a ranking of each episode and he said fans are welcome to debate with him about the list.
When asked which “Seinfeld” character he most identified with, he answered:
“I’d probably be Kramer. I’m a little bit taller and little bit more happy-go-lucky. He’s also the most likable out of the four. I wouldn’t want to compare myself to the other three after having watched and re-watched them and all their flaws. Kramer’s not perfect, but he’s the most decent. I’d like to try to be as decent as him.”
An homage to 'Seinfeld' character Kramer's "Fusilli Jerry" pasta sculpture, Mary LaFramboise of Manlius created "Penne Paul" for Dewitt author Paul Arras who recently launched his new book "Seinfeld: A Cultural History."Provided photo | syracuse.com
Looking ahead to the future, Arras said he is sticking with the ’90s era, but beginning to do some research into radio with the show “Coast to Coast AM” with Art Bell .
