Community Foundation commits $1 million to help CNY black-led groups, spur dialogue, combat racism
People with Last Chance for Change marched through Syracuse's Strathmore and Near West Side neighborhoods on Sunday, June 7, to protest police brutality.Teri Weaver | tweaver@syracuse.com
Syracuse, N.Y. — The Central New York Community Foundation will invest $1 million toward racial equity in the Syracuse area, following weeks of protests here and nationally against police violence and systemic racism.
The money will go to black-led nonprofit organizations to help them promote racial equity. It will also go to grants that will “deal with systemic racism” and encourage more dialogue on these topics, said Peter Dunn, the foundation’s president and CEO.
“Here we are, 50 years since the foundational work that was done in the 1960s around civil rights, and we’re still having these conversations,” Dunn said. “So it was important to put a stake down.”
The foundation has prioritized projects in the past that are indirectly tied to solving problems that most affect black Americans: lead poisoning, lack of early childhood education and the new coronavirus pandemic. But recent turmoil over the alleged murder of George Floyd by police officers got the foundation considering a more direct approach, Dunn said.
The foundation, which announced the effort today, is asking organizations that want to weigh in or receive funding to submit a letter of interest on the foundation’s website.
How the $1 million will be spent is still being determined. Foundation leaders will spend several months listening to residents, leaders and others about how best to invest the money, Dunn said. The foundation expects the process of listening, selecting organizations and investing the money will occur over the next few years.
The $1 million will primarily come from existing donations, Dunn said, though the foundation is accepting donations toward the fund. The foundation also recently established a fund of more than $1.6 million that has helped Central New York survive the coronavirus pandemic.
The Community Foundation is a charity established in 1927 that collects contributions from donors, manages the money and then distributes it to local charities. It is the largest charitable foundation in Central New York with assets of nearly $260 million.
Syracuse already had among the highest rates in the country of concentrated poverty for black people before the pandemic. In recent weeks, the unemployment rate here has soared to 16.3 percent . In the meantime, daily protests are occurring here calling for reform of the criminal justice system and an end to police misconduct against black people.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
