Chinese Yuan and US dollar banknotes are seen in this illustration taken February 10, 2020. REUTERS/Dado Ruvic/Illustration
the first COVID-19 stimulus debate in late March, the US Congress discussed
speed of stimulus payments to US households. Senior Congressional leaders
access to banks for direct deposit and check cashing purposes. While Congress
did not end up doing this, the growing discussion around it is a noteworthy
development for the future of digital currencies. Implanting a digital dollar
follow in the footsteps of the US Federal Reserve. They would most likely
America’s status as the current and future world economic leader.
around the world to mark their economic might, especially in times of crisis.
hold onto this hard-earned authority. In an era of globalized trade and
increasing interconnectedness, this authority is challenged by China, who seeks
inflection points in the battle to preserve confidence in its performance, it
has managed to retain its position, currently holding 61 percent of all known
up only 2 percent of global payments and reserves.
rates fluctuate and currencies experience periods of large-scale depreciation.
community to switch to an alternative global currency; however, as Kori
aspects of the US economy. Those shortcomings, coupled with this new digital
waiting for a recovery. If we wait too long, the Chinese will become dominant
in this space before the United States has a chance to do so.
the course of the past five years, China has been in the developmental stages
of rolling out their own automated payment system called DCEP, or Digital
Currency Electronic Payment, which is expected to be introduced this year. In
Digital Currency. With its recent test pilot launching a digital currency,
China seeks to promote the internationalization of the renminbi, which has
in cross border payments without going through banking intermediaries,
effectively avoiding the US financial system and leverage of US sanctions.
a bank before a transaction is settled. In this new system, the digital yuan
between the central bank and other parties in a far more efficient process.
wide ranging and begin to hint at the potential uses of AI in implementation,
prepared for such a change. This shift could hold great international
global significance of the greenback and US sanctions power.
is incredibly important to note China’s desire to connect to mobile devices, whereas, debates in US Congress have shown some push to integrate
FedAccounts capabilities at postal retail facilities. Which is the more viable,
far-sighted approach? Though it may leave out some portions of the population,
China’s thinking is very forward, and they appear to have developed structures
that we are only in the beginnings of defining. While the United States has
currency so it can address improvements in the future. A key indicator for
companies like Tencent and Ant Financial outside of China, who already have
more than a billion users each for their digital wallets.
order to implement effective technological change. Unfortunately, these
relationships have been few and far between in the recent past, and the US
government may struggle to manufacture an effective, secure infrastructure for
the Digital Dollar in coming years without them. Though some may be skeptical
of a digital currency future, the rise of China as an economic power and its
world to a basket of currencies will likely influence US action.
cash payments to be made primarily through direct deposit means, and then as a
period. The most recent contribution to this project to build a digital dollar,
discussed in Congress. As a part of the latter bill’s proposal, lawmakers in
dollar wallets will soon be issued, firmly indicating a deadline of January
into physical currency at any automated teller machine in the country, the
shift to a digital financial system seems to be gaining traction.
appearance of more initiatives in Congress, noting the growing necessity of
reaching the 63 million “unbanked” in times of financial crisis, hints at the
recognized potential of the digital dollar’s future. Even as there is an
wallets to US citizens, there is still much to be thought through. As stated by
infrastructure in order to improve our future capabilities and resiliency, but
critical emergency funds using existing channels during this crisis. While the
crisis underscores the importance of upgrading our financial infrastructure,
consideration when developing a functioning program. In the ABC Act, lawmakers
Digital Dollar Project—an initiative to inform policy decisions, and
identify key players in the race for a viable CBDC option in the United States.
Research Institute of Digital Currency referenced earlier, founded to explore
the utility and viability of a CBDC in China.
pegged to the performance of the dollar, the international influence of US
ideals will be pegged to its continued prosperity. In the wake of this crisis,
a thorough examination of the current tumultuous global economic environment,
the traditionally unmatched authority of the dollar, Chinese competition, and
global standing and economic strength in years to come. A digitalized monetary
to date systems for effective implementation. It is critical to note that the
research. In a further show of urgency, on April 20, the Digital Currency
will only be tested in four cities in the near future, the PBoC has
acknowledged the trial partially as preparation for the 2022 Winter Olympics.
creation, deployment, and operation of new technology on a large scale, the United
and preferred alternative to the dollar, and ultimately attempt to level with
the United States as a practical economic power.
is synchronous with US democratic values and freedom, the United States must
evolution of currency and the economy. If it fails to acknowledge the
dollar, it may risk its hard-earned, historical economic superiority. In these
need to be more dynamic, adaptive, and preemptive in its responses to global
the leader in this transition.
Michael B. Greenwald is director at Tiedemann Advisors. He is a fellow at Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs and a senior adviser to Atlantic Council President and Chief Executive Officer Frederick Kempe. From 2015-2017, Greenwald served as the US Treasury attaché to Qatar and Kuwait.
The post-COVID19 race will be an epic contest among the world’s most significant economies, with generational and geopolitical consequences. Being first out the gate will be significant, and that is likely to be China. Yet history has taught the United States that it’s victory will be longest lasting if it is achieved alongside partners and allies.
