Due to the variation in economic conditions in different countries which produce the currencies being traded, some of the high-impact news releases listed above may be more important in one country and less important in another.
Furthermore, some news releases tend to affect just more than one currency. For instance, GDP and manufacturing data out of China tend to affect the Australian Dollar, as the Australian economy depends on a lot of exports of raw materials to China’s industries.
It should also be noted that what may constitute low or medium impact news for one currency, can actually be of high impact with regards to another currency. Therefore, it is best to search the Economic Calendar to see just which high-impact news are listed for a particular currency pair.
The price information of currency pairs is displayed on the charts. Currencies can, therefore, be analyzed using technical analysis. Technical analysis involves the use of patterns, candlesticks, wave patterns and indicators, all in a bid to forecast future price action and to make timely trade entries.
In order to ensure that traders can afford to set up forex trades with far less money, the concept of leverage was introduced. Leverage is a mechanism that allows traders to perform trades of a higher amount than their capital can ordinarily carry. In forex leverage, the trader contributes a small portion of the required capital to collateralize the trade. This is known as the margin. The broker provides the rest of the capital.
Leverage in forex stretches from 1:2 and is capped at 1:20 for FX minors and 1:30 for FX majors on the trading platforms of UK and EU platforms. Australian brokers still offer a leverage cap of 1:500. Brokers in other parts of the world offer varying caps on leverage, with the most popular being 1:500.
Currency movements are very small, usually in the order of 4 or 5 decimal places. So a change in value in a currency pair is usually in the order of 1 pip, or 0.0001 points. If a currency pair were to change the value by 25 pips, this would only be a move of 0.0025 points, which is very small indeed.
In order to magnify the monetary value of the change in the exchange rate, large volumes of trade must be performed. In forex, trade volumes are measured in lots, with a Standard Lot being equivalent to $100,000. If you were to use $100,000 to trade a change in 25 pips, this would equate to a change of 100,000 X 0.0025 = $250. The question is: how many retail traders can afford to $100,000 to trade a typical forex position? There are not many who can afford this.
To use our previous example, a leverage of 1:30 will mean that the trade only requires 100,000/30 or $3,333 to trade a Standard Lot. For a mini-lot which is 1/10th of a Standard Lot, the requirement is only $333. Even with leverage, the full value of any profit or loss for a trade is settled on the trader’s account.
Forex trades on retail trading platforms do not attract commissions. Rather, each trade is charged a spread once the position is opened, which is the difference between the bid and ask prices in a currency quote. Forex trades on institutional trading platforms, or on ECN/non-dealing desk platforms are charged both spreads and commissions. Commissions are usually charged as a flat rate per Standard Lot on both the trade entry and exit.
Forex exchange rates are quoted in pairs. A price quote has a price on the left, known as the Bid price, and a price on the right known as the Ask or offer price. Long trades are fulfilled at the asking price, and short trades are fulfilled at the bid price.
If GBP/USD is quoted at 1.30220/1.30231, the bid price is on the left (1.30220) and the asking price is on the right (1.30231).
Sizes of forex positions are measured in lots. A Standard Lot is worth $100,000. It is the standard reference for position sizing in the forex. 1 lot can be subdivided into mini-lots (0.1 to 0.99 lots), and micro-lots (0.01 to 0.099 lots).
A PIP stands for Percentage Interest Point. This is the smallest unit of measurement of a change in exchange rates for a currency pair. The monetary value of a Standard Lot of a currency pair is $10 per pip. How is this calculated?
1 pip = 0.0001 points.
1 Standard Lot = 100,000 units of a currency.
Monetary value per pip = 100,000 X 0.0001 = 10 units.
Using the same calculation, 1 mini-lot is worth $1 per pip, and 1 micro-lot is worth 10 cents per pip.
As defined above, forex trading is the buying or selling of one currency against another, in an attempt to profit from the change in the initial rate at which the two currencies were exchanged. This is the reason for currencies being traded in pairs. Profiting from forex can occur from price movements in both directions. If you are buying, you profit when prices go up. If you are selling your profit when currency rates drop. This is how both trading scenarios work.
A forex trader profits from an increase in the exchange rate if the base currency (i.e. the currency which is listed on the left side in a currency pair) is bought.
In other words, if the trader is buying the GBP/USD, or going long on the GBP/USD, a profit will be made if the rate at which the transaction occurred goes up and the trade is exited at the new price.
For example, if Trader Kobe feels that the exchange rate on the GBP/USD will go up, he would have to buy or “go long” on the GBP/USD. He buys 2,500 British Pounds at an exchange rate of 1.3000. He will, therefore, spend $3,250 to acquire 2,500 GBP.
In the forex trading world, this trade would be to go long on the GBP/USD at 1.3000.
In a few hours, the rate rises from 1.3000 to 1.3120. To get a profit, Kobe closes the trade by selling his 2,500 British Pounds at the new rate, getting $3,280 back.
Kobe’s profit would be $3,280 – $3,250, which is $30.
In the real world of forex, trades are leveraged. If Kobe decides to use a leverage of 1:10 for this trade, this means he would only need a tenth of the total cost of the trade ($2,500). Therefore the cost to Kobe would be 1/100 of $2,500, which is $250. So Kobe would only need to put down $250 in margin for the trade.
A trader can also profit if exchange rates fall. To do this, the trader would have to sell or “go short” on the currency that the trader believes will weaken in value. Let us illustrate this using another trade by Kobe.
This time, Kobe feels that the US Dollar will weaken relative to the Japanese Yen and decides to sell S13,000 for Japanese Yen at a rate of 100 Yen to 1 US Dollar. He gets 1.3 million Yen in this transaction.
In 2 days, the exchange rate is now 98.20 Yen to the US Dollar. Kobe decides to use his Yen to re-acquire the US Dollar. He will get $13, 238 in return using this new exchange rate.
Kobe’s profit will be $13, 238 – $13,000 = $238.
This is how money is made in the forex market. You can buy an undervalued currency and gain from it when it increases in value, or you can sell an overvalued currency and profit when you reacquire it at an undervalued price.
Practical forex trading on a forex platform will have to account for the following:
A spread is paid to the broker for the currency pair being traded. Different currency pairs have different spreads.
The trader will have to choose from various leverage provisions.
The trader must use an appropriate trade volume, and this trade volume must conform to risk management principles.
Creating a forex trading account with eToro is easy. Start by completing the user profile by filling such personal information as your name, email, address.
Then verify the account by emailing eToro your photo and a copy of your government-issued identification document.
The broker will also test your day trading experience and ask questions about the amount of disposable income you have at hand.
To activate your account and trade the different Forex pairs on the platform, you will first need to fund your account.
The minimum initial deposit for any trading account is $50 and you can transfer these funds in in through bank wire, card or PayPal.
Forex trading on eToro is quite straightforward. You only need to click on the Trade Markets icon under Discover tab on your user dashboard.
This open up a window that in turn lists all the tradable assets on the platform, from cryptos to Forex pairs.
Click on your preferred forex pair to reveal the buy and sell options and start trading.
Use the eToro copy trading feature if you are a beginner, are a part time trader with not enough time to analyse the forex markets or simply want to boost your win-loss ratio.
This allows you to copy the trade entry, trade exit and risk management settings of the experienced traders  on the platform.
To copy Forex trades, Click on discover icon on your user dashboard and select Copy Trades. It will direct you to another window with a list of all the veteran Forex traders whose trades you are allowed to copy.
There are two categories of forex brokers in the forex market. You’ll find a more detailed explanation in our article Best Forex Brokers for 2020: Comparison of the Top 7 Forex Brokers .
a) Market Makers/Dealing Desk (DD) Brokers:
They operate the dealing desk model. This model generates prices and offers trade execution from the dealing desk department. This is where the bulk of retail forex trading is done. Market makers bridge the liquidity gap between retail traders and the interbank market. These brokers offer the popular MT4 and MT5 trading platforms, as well as other platforms that cater to the retail end of the market.
b) Non-Dealing Desk (NDD) Brokers:
This is the institutional-style brokerage model where pricing and execution of trades are handled by the liquidity providers in the interbank FX market. There is no dealing desk intervention. Liquidity needs mean that only traders with a lot of money to spare can open accounts with NDD brokers. These brokers offer complex trading platforms, most of which are proprietary in nature and have additional features that go beyond trading alone.
Access to forex markets can be achieved using a trading platform provided by a broker.
You sign up to an account and verify your identity by submitting an international passport, or drivers’ license depending on the country you live in, and often a utility bill or bank statement.
You must have a funded trading account. You will need trading capital with which to provide margin to conduct your forex trades. This requires access to a payment method that is acceptable to your broker
You must have some level of training to understand how to trade the forex market. Many brokers now offer introductory courses on forex trading for beginners.
You must have a secured connected terminal in the form of a Desktop, Tablet or Mobile in order to buy and sell currencies on the platform.
What are the Pros and Cons?
The forex market is a 24 hour market with well-defined periods of volatility that present trading opportunities.
The forex market is very liquid, which means there is no shortage of buyers and sellers at any time.
The forex market is amenable to being traded with automated trading systems.
Rapid and wide currency movements provide a lot of day trading opportunities.
News trades have a schedule. Therefore news trades can be planned beforehand.
The forex market is a virtual market. You can connect to this market from anywhere in the world using an internet-connected device.
Forex trades do not expire, so there is no fear of sudden liquidation of positions from contract expirations (as is the case in commodity markets).
There are various ways to trade forex. You can trade spot contracts, forwards and forex options.
The forex market is very risky and it is very easy to lose money if the trader does not know what he or she is doing.
Many retail traders are unable to afford to trade with the more transparent ECN models.
The forex market maker brokerage model presents significant conflicts of interest.
Is it Profitable to Trade Forex?
That is definitely a tough question.
The world forex market trades $5 trillion per day, at such volume, there are undoubtedly winners and losers. So the answer to the question is yes, it is profitable, the real question is how to trade on it to make money. If you want to give forex trading a try, you may want to take into consideration forex trading simulators first.
Here are a few tips to trade forex:
Make wise and thought out investments. We recommend making sure that you have a good basic knowledge of how the forex market works and if you are not familiar with something, do not trade with it. Try to carry out the appropriate amount of research before you place a trade and do not rush into anything.
Diversify your portfolio. Do not put all of your eggs in one basket. It is important that you diversify to minimize your losses as much as possible.
Develop a trading strategy. There are lots of trading strategies out there. Make sure you search and stick for the one you believe suits you best.
Use a stop-loss. What we mean by that is that you should have a set closing price on your trade. It will stop you from losing more than you expect.
Make sure you have forex trading signals to support your trades. These will help you track your trades so that you do not miss buying or selling opportunities and alert you whenever there is a decision to make.
Every currency can be abbreviated with 3 alphabets, according to the ISO Standard 4217.
This standard picks the first two letters in a currency acronym from the country of origin and the first letter from the currency name. There are few exceptions (such as the MXN, which is the Mexican Peso. Here, MX comes from Mexico, but the currency name is represented with an N).
Here is a list of currencies, their 3-letter acronyms, and their symbol.
