PUBLISHED 7:52 PM ET May. 07, 2020 PUBLISHED May 7, 2020 @7:52 PM
As healthcare workers continue to battle on the front lines, the Syracuse Chinese Community rallied behind them and donated over 40,000 of much needed supplies
Volunteers worked tirelessly to prepare for this day. Sprawled outside waiting to be picked up, boxes upon boxes filled with PPE supplies carrying things such as isolation gowns, and face masks.
“It definitely means so much for us. Because when they are protected, doctors and nurses, we feel safe as a community,” said Emily Qui, one of the organizers.
These donations were packed up and picked up by various hospitals. They were given to Upstate, Crouse Hospital and St. Joseph's. These gifts had come from various avenues.
“A lot of parents who are the parents of the Chinese students from SU, they are very supportive,” said Jian She.
The parents mentioned they knew what the situation was like in China, and they sent as much help as they could to Central New Yorkers. It was more than just about their kids’ safety; they really felt the weight of the communities’ trouble from a distance.
“[They’re] Not worried about their own children’s they care about the Syracuse community,” said Jing Lei, one of the donors.
“At a certain point it was difficult to ship large shipments to US,” said Lei.
Dozens of locals, including professors, had volunteered to receive small quantities and make this effort a reality.
“There was an opportunity to help- we tried our best to help,” said Lei.
Volunteers helped raise over $40,000 during the fundraiser.
“It took a lot of effort,” said another volunteer Wei Gao, “as far as I know we have been meeting, especially key members, a minimum of two hours each night.”
In total, PPE supplies donated to over 40 CNY organizations. Those on the receiving end couldn’t be more grateful.
“It has really made all of us feel so much better about what we are doing,” said the Director of Volunteer Programs at Upstate University, “we are not on front lines but being able to support our colleagues that are is really important to me.”
