K-HOUSE Karaoke Lounge & Suites in Ithaca is closed for karaoke, but is offering drive-in dinner parties with entertainment and food and drinks available for pick-up. Patrons are asked to stay in their cars and bring their masks to the event. If you want to join virtually, you can do so on Twitch or the K-HOUSE Facebook page .
When: June 27 from 6-9 p.m.
This drag brunch event, powered by Dining Inside Out, is in celebration of Pride Month. Guests will either pick up or have food delivered from the event location of their choice. They’ll receive an invitation to a live broadcast featuring live performances from six different CNY performers. In between performances, chefs will demo how to make the perfect eggs Benedict, a strawberry salad, and a flourless chocolate cake. All dishes are gluten-free. Options also include mimosa kits, bloody mary kits, bagel boxes and more.
When: June 28 from noon to 3 p.m., tickets must be purchased by June 25 at 8 p.m.
How much: $10 for virtual drag show only, pricing varies depending on food and drinks purchased, available on Eventbrite
The In My Fathers Kitchen (IMFK) annual 5k is going virtual and seeks to bring awareness as well as resources to individuals who are homeless living on the streets, in abandoned houses and under the bridges of our city. Since 2011 IMFK has assisted 191 individuals off the streets and into safe housing in the Syracuse community. The run will have prizes for top 3 finishers for men and women, for the largest team on the virtual platform, and for the largest amount of money raised.
When: Can be completed anytime from now until Aug. 30
Soak in the sun by Cazenovia Lake lakeside and start your morning with an hour long yoga class. Tickets include one complimentary mimosa or bloody mary. Bring your own mat if you have one, but some will be available. Make sure to bring water, sunscreen and a small towel.
When: June 28 from 9:30-10:30 a.m.
Support the Center for the Arts of Homer with a special drive-in concert at Dwyer Memorial Park in Preble. Featuring live music by Charley Orlando, Los Blancos and Digger Jones. Tickets must be purchased in advance and patrons are asked to please bring a mask to wear when six feet of distance is not possible. There will be a cap of 150 cars at the event.
Where: Dwyer Memorial Park, 6799 Little York Lake Rd, Preble, NY 13141
When: June 27 from 6-9 p.m.
Syracuse Fashion Week was postponed from April due to the coronavirus. Multiple shows have been canceled, but they will still be hosting Local Love 2020 at the Aloft Hotel in Syracuse’s Inner Harbor. The event will feature 10 local designers with limited seating and social distancing rules in place. If you purchased tickets to any of the other Syracuse Fashion Week shows, your tickets will be honored at Local Love.
Where: Aloft Hotel Syracuse Inner Harbor, 310 West Kirkpatrick St., Syracuse, NY 13204
When: June 27 from 7:30-9:30 p.m.
Redhouse Arts Center has presented a two-part play written specifically for Zoom. In the first part, “Waiting For The Host” which streamed last week, the rector of a small church on Long Island gathers a handful of parishioners via video conference when everything is shuttered during the modern plague. “Still Waiting” is the continuation of that story.
When: Streaming from June 25 at 7 p.m. to June 29 at 7 p.m.
The City of Auburn’s historic and cultural sites commission and partners celebrate LGBTQ+ Pride with several events both in person and online.
Hangar Theatre Company will be presenting several virtual plays and musical performances for children as part of its KIDDSTUFF programming. They will present “The Velveteen Rabbit” as their fourth KIDDSTUFF production on July 25. Hangar Theatre’s seasons have gone virtual with performances for both kids and adults.
When: June 25 at 10:30 a.m.
Over the past few weeks, these migratory birds have arrived back in our region after a perilous journey south and are now raising their young, who will make their own journey soon enough. Join naturalist Rand Michaels as he takes a closer look at this avian phenomenon, with help from the researchers at Onondaga Audubon.
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
