On October 1, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) included the renminbi (Chinese yuan, or CNY) to the basket of currencies that constitute the Special Drawing Right (SDR) the IMF lends out. Evidently, this was the fund’s way of letting the world know that from now on, they can consider the CNY as one of the five reserve currencies of the world: the US dollar, the EU euro, the Japanese yen, the British pound, and now the Chinese renminbi.
This, despite the fact that the CNY is not fully convertible — and that the Chinese authorities have plans for moving towards that goal of allowing a complete free float only by 2020. But, clearly, Washington has made up its mind that the door of high finance can be opened so that the Chinese could wriggle in.
The reason for this is clear. China owns $1.2 trillion worth of US treasury bonds, and has foreign exchange reserve that is in liquid cash mostly in dollars, worth $3.2 trillion as in July 2016. The move is clearly to counter Beijing’s incessant search for a parallel set of institutions that can challenge the Anglo-American combine’s inspired posse of international financial institutions that, incidentally, includes the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
Globalisation, till 2008, meant free flow of finance capital from the less economically well-off countries to the mature economies, even as the latter’s private financial institutions such as Lehman Brothers, Morgan Stanley and Merrill Lynch can get away behaving like modern-day robber barons. This meant there could not be any limits established on them through regulatory mechanisms by the target country.
On the other hand, this scenario also entailed a sort of deindustrialisation of these mature economies, as ailing public sector institutions are quartered and dismembered and transferred to the hands of the private sector, which can then sell these assets and make a profit out of the former’s collective misery. This also meant that while free trade remains a mantra, fair wages of labour were being challenged. Additionally, it amounted to make the World Trade Organisation’s (WTO) precepts of creating low-wage islands of manufacturing products that could then be sold in western markets at usurious rates.
The fact that the dollar did not go on a free fall after the 2008 dismantlement of financial excesses can be attributed to three reasons. One, the US Federal Reserve pumped in huge amounts of cash: ‘quantitative easing’ knowing fully well that till oil is traded in dollars, no one can really escape from this mousetrap.
Two, the mollycoddling of the Chinese by the international business managers so that the Chinese did not try to ‘do a George Soros’ to the dollar. And, three, painful decisions made in the West that allowed those toxic merchant banks to fail after all, even though they were earlier dubbed ‘too big to fail’.
Returning to the root of CNY being made a member of the elite basket of currencies is to try and lock China in a gilded cage. For, China does not enjoy enough share of voting rights in the IMF to shape its policies — or rather wean it away from the clasp of US treasury.
One has to see what Chinese premier Xi Jinping does under the circumstances. Will he continue to make the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the New Development Bank become the beacon of the developing world? Or won’t he?
DISCLAIMER : Views expressed above are the author's own.
Columns, in-depth analyses and the big-picture view on all contemporary issues having economic, financial and political ramification.
Quick takes, analyses and macro-level views on all contemporary economic, financial and political events.
Quick takes, analyses and macro-level views on all contemporary economic, financial and political events.
