Tom Nitti, left, and Sydney Irving, right, perform a cover of Lady Antebellum's "Compass" near Otisco Lake.  Photo by Jordan Dziekan, Jenk Media
Syracuse, N.Y. — Sydney Irving is a Marcellus High School junior who wanted to do something special for Class of 2020 seniors deprived of graduation ceremonies this summer.
So Irving and a group of musicians devised a plan. They recorded a song and put together a video to salute those seniors.
“We all came together and decided it would be a cool project to do to honor the seniors,” Irving said, “because it was definitely an unexpected thing that occurred their senior year.”
That unexpected thing, of course, is the coronavirus, which has forced school districts to become creative about plans to celebrate their seniors.
TO THE SENIOR CLASS OF 2020!
I am so thrilled to announce my cover of Lady Antebellum’s, Compass! This video goes out to not only the seniors at Marcellus HS, but the entire senior class worldwide. No one expected the school year to end like this, but times like these only make us stronger!please take a moment and share with a family that has a senior in their household!￼
Posted by Sydney Irving Music on Monday, June 1, 2020
Irving, 16, teamed with Tom Nitti, 28, to perform a cover of the Lady Antebellum song “Compass.” The singers, both managed by Brian Fagan of Grace Musicians Group, met at Laufer’s Pub in Yorkville a few weeks ago to lay down vocals that were eventually mixed by Eric Slifka, who plays the mandolin in the video. Jordan Dziekan of Jeck Media produced the piece, which was shot near Otisco Lake .
Luke Hart, on electric guitar, is a Marcellus High School freshman. Tom Finn and Joe D’Agostino play drums.
“We kind of put it in different spots, different locations, lip-synched, a little bit of acting going on and it just came together so well,” Nitti said.
Irving has been singing since she was 12, has put out a couple albums and is recording another she hopes will be available in the fall. Nitti served in the military and now works as a New York State trooper. Like Irving, he has been appearing at various local venues.
Nitti said the duo has performed at the same venue and occasionally lent vocal support during those shows. This is the first time they’ve collaborated on a song and video.
Both are singer-songwriters who also perform covers. They lean country and dabble in classic rock.
“I just hope to be able to sing my songs,” Irving said, “and hopefully people can connect with the songs and maybe I can make a career out of it.”
“Being a trooper was always my dream job,” said Nitti, a New Hartford native. “But being a singer and singing in front of people is my dream. If singing doesn’t work, at least I got a backup.”
