Pandemic economic fallout hits NY, creates uncertain future for CNY health org
The economic fallout of the coronavirus pandemic and uncertainty of state funding is causing some organizations like ACR Health to fear closure if the money doesn’t come soon. This would mean laying off all 156 of its employees and ending services to 16,000-18,000 people in need in Upstate New York.
ACR Health Executive Director Wil Murtaugh said 88% of its funding comes from government grants through the New York State Department of Health, AIDS Institute. Thus far he said the agency has not been paid for work it has done from January to April, a total quickly growing to over $1 million.
“We do the work first, then we voucher, then we get paid 30 days later,” Murtaugh said. “We’re always a little bit behind so when the funding stream stops, it does put a kink in things.”
He said federal streams of money are still coming in for some programs, but ACR Health needs cashflow from the state to survive, Murtaugh said.
New York however, is also in a money crunch due to waiting on funds from the federal government. The state sent an emailed statement indicating that the federal government will have to give New York funding to offset its revenue losses. If this does not happen, the state says it will have no choice but to cut billions of dollars in spending. About 90% of state funding supports schools, healthcare, local grants and services for the most vulnerable populations.
“We made payments on this contract on vouchers that were submitted earlier this year and prior to the onset of the pandemic,” the New York State Department of Health said. “The state is now contending with a cash crunch caused by a 14% drop in revenue due entirely to the pandemic and the federal decision to delay income tax payments to July from April."
Murtaugh said his organization has weathered budget cuts before and has already come up with plans depending on what those cuts might look like. However, he said he would rather have some funding come in from the state than no funding. As with many things during the pandemic, the inability to plan for an unknown future carries frustration.
ACR Health did get a grant from the Payroll Protection Program, but it is unclear how long that will last or if it will be enough to keep pace with the need for services.
The organization has been offering all the services it normally would during the pandemic to the nine counties it serves, even if some of them are happening virtually or over the phone. Since the beginning of March, Murtaugh said ACR Health has helped 1,300 people get health insurance after they lost their jobs due to the state shutdown.
“We’re one of 13 regional prevention and support service providers that cover all 62 counties of New York state. We were established in 1983-1984 by the first Governor Cuomo to address HIV/AIDS. Now we’re trying to still end the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the new Hep C epidemic because of injected drug use, sexually transmitted infection epidemic, and the opioid/substance abuse epidemic,” Murtaugh said.
ACR Health’s food pantry was used by an average of 20 to 30 families a month before the pandemic, but in May he said it serviced 300 families. The organization conducts diaper drop-offs at an average of 2,000 to 3,000 each month, in May it delivered more than 13,000 diapers to those in need.
Jumel packs a box for a family in need from the food pantry at ACR Health.
ACR Health also offers clean syringe exchange, medical assisted treatment to get off opioids, fentanyl test strips, Zoom Narcan trainings and at-home HIV testing.
In total, ACR Health serves between 16,000-18,000 people a year with its combined services, said Murtaugh.
“All of the services we offer are considered essential, yet we are not getting paid. That doesn’t make any sense to me,” he said.
One of his biggest concerns is the housing program ACR Health offers HIV positive people. The organization pays rent for 221 people in that program, but it has not yet been able to pay June rent for those enrolled. The potential of losing housing for those people or damaging the relationships the organization has built with the landlords concerns Murtaugh.
“Stable housing creates stable health,” he said. “Housing is healthcare."
The organization recently held its annual AIDS Walk/Run event virtually . Fundraising helps ACR Health to offer services to even more people, though it is still not enough to sustain the operation.
Volunteers are still helping them carry out some of their programs, often in socially distant ways. Opportunities to help are available on the ACR Health website .
