Pride Week is a series of events organized to encourage, empower and celebrate the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer community and their friends, families and supporters. This year as the coronavirus pandemic closes down venues and prohibited gatherings of any kind until recently, Pride events look a little different this year.
Wunderbar, recently reopened in phase three, is hosting several live events this week with new precautions. To encourage guests to stay at their tables while indoors, Wunderbar will move to cocktail service only for the time being, with servers wearing face shields. The first floor, including two bar areas, and black box theatre will be inhabited by 17 small-party tables, largely available by reservation only. Plush furniture has been replaced by practical tables and chairs, which are spaced further apart so it is easy to keep within social distancing requirements.
Outdoor seating at Wunderbar will be first come, first serve.
Other Pride events in Central New York have moved into the virtual realm. There will be no Pride parade this year, but Black Cuse Pride will be organizing a Pride March in solidarity with the Black Lives Matter movement.
Here are Pride Week events around the Central New York area. If you know of one that should be added to this list, please let us know at features@syracuse.com .
Runners approach the finish line of the CNY Gay 5k at Long Branch Park, Geddes, NY, Saturday June 15, 2019. 
Scott Schild | sschild@syracuse.com Scott Schild | sschild@syracuse.
The CNY Gay 5K is a community-run, family-friendly event designed to celebrate our Central New York community and raise funds for local LGBT non-profits. Run, walk, skip, dance or sashay this virtual 5k in a location you choose on a date you choose.
Do you know your Stonewall from your Compton Cafeteria? How deep is your Tom of Finland knowledge? Who won the first RuPaul’s Drag Race? Reserve your table for this trivia night.
When: Tues. June 16 from 7:30-9 p.m.
The Q Center will be hosting a Pride Flag Webinar to learn about the origin and meaning of several Pride flags and Queer history.
When: Wed. June 17 at 3:30 p.m.
Hosted by DustyBoxx, this show will feature local favorites and mystery guests for this post-quarantine drag show.
When: Wed. June 17 from 8:30-10 p.m.
This night is a to celebrate queer women in the Syracuse community. DJ Knoway will spin outdoors and there will be two seatings for the night to accommodate more guests.
When: Thurs. June 18 from 5-9:45 p.m. and 10:15 p.m.-2 a.m.
Comedian Poppy Champlin will be offering a livestream on her Facebook page . Champlin has opened for such comics as Ray Ramano, Denis Leary, Bill Maher, Bill Hicks and Rosie O’Donnell. She produces and tours with The Queer Queens of Qomedy and teaches a stand-up comedy class at The Courthouse Center for the Arts.
When: Fri. June 19 from 7-8 p.m.
This outdoor dance party will feature music from DJ Freq Array and roaming performances by go go dancers and drag queens.
When: Fri. June 19 from 5-9:45 p.m. and 10:15 p.m.-2 a.m.
New York State Fair Pride Day parade, Syracuse, NY, Friday August 25, 2017. 
Wunderbar will be transformed into an indoor/outdoor pride wonderland. There will be roaming performances, organizations with tables, and two outdoor DJs at this party. There will be three seatings at this event to accommodate more guests.
When: Sat. June 20 from 2-5:45 p.m., 6-9:45 p.m., and 10:15 p.m.-2 a.m.
Black Cuse Pride marches during the Pride Day parade at New York State Fair, Geddes, NY, Friday Aug. 23, 2019Scott Schild | sschild@syracuse.
Black Cuse Pride and CNY Pride will march together to Syracuse City Hall to raise the Pride flag at 1:30 p.m. and stand in solidarity with the voices of Black Lives Matter.
Where: Meeting outside of Trexx at 323 N Clinton St, Syracuse, NY 13202
When: Sat. June 20 at 1 p.m.
Samantha Vega performs during the Salt City Drag Battle at Syracuse Stage, Syracuse, NY, Saturday January 26, 2019. 
Scott Schild | sschild@syracuse.com Scott Schild | sschild@syracuse.
As its week of live events has been canceled for this year, CNY Pride will be hosting a Virtual Queer Cabaret, streaming via Zoom. Hosted by Samantha Vega, the event will have a series of performers who were scheduled for the original event. The CNY Pride website will be updated with the Zoom link on the day of the event.
When: Sat. June 20 from 7:30-9 p.m.
