Someday restaurants in CNY will reopen. What will that look like?
Inside the Arad Evans Inn, Fayetteville, December 2019. Restaurants across Central New York are now trying to figure out the best practices for reopening their dining rooms. (Jared Paventi | jaredpaventi@gmail.com)Jared Paventi | jaredpaventi@gma
The first thing you may notice when restaurants reopen for dining-in across Central New York is how clean they are.
“Nobody wanted to be closed like this,” said Michele Roesch, co-owner of The Brasserie Bar & Bistro in Camillus’ Township 5. “But there is something that came out of it. We tore our whole kitchen apart and put it back together, replaced the rugs, gave everything a really good cleaning. You don’t often get that opportunity when you’re open seven days a week.”
But that may be the only thing that’s clear about what to expect when restaurants emerge from the coronavirus -enforced shutdown that began in mid-March.
The big question, of course, is when it might happen. Under business restart guidelines offered by Gov. Andrew Cuomo , things would begin to reopen in phases, with manufacturing and construction leading the way.
Restaurants and bars, currently allowed only to offer food for takeout, would reopen for dining in a later phase.
The first phase of Cuomo’s plan could start in Central New York as soon as May 15, Onondaga County Executive Ryan McMahon has said. That would likely leave local restaurants waiting until June or beyond.
“The No. 1 thing is, ‘What’s the date?’” said Bud Loura, who runs a Central New York business consulting company called RestaurantQB . “It’s like working all week and waiting for Friday. But we don’t know when Friday is coming.”
And then, what will Friday look like?
“It won’t be a business-as-usual thing on Day 1,” Loura said. “I think that’s a pretty safe assumption.”
At first, there likely will be requirements for restaurants to limit the number of patrons inside to conform to social distancing guidelines. Servers (and perhaps customers) may be required to wear masks. Open condiment containers may be removed from tables.
And it’s likely, local restaurant operators say, that takeout will remain a big part of the business even after dining-in resumes.
“Whatever it is we do, it will be so we can be open for people as quickly as we can but in as safe a way as possible,” said David Hoyne, co-owner of Kitty Hoynes Irish Pub & Restaurant in Armory Square.
Hoyne has been named to a task force advising local officials in their response to the coronavirus. The group was assembled by the city of Syracuse, Onondaga County, CenterState CEO, and the Manufacturers Association of CNY. One of Hoyne’s goals is to help officials frame the guidelines for reopening.
“We don’t yet know what that looks like," he said. "But we’ve got to start somewhere.”
Here’s a look at some of the possibilities for restaurants when they reopen:
Restaurants are bracing for the possibility that they might be able to seat only 50% of their capacity at a time, or perhaps even less, like 25%. It might be hard to remember, but 50% of capacity was briefly the rule across the state in the days before the total dining room shutdown on March 16.
Such a requirement might make it difficult for some restaurants to turn a profit.
“You’d still have all your costs — labor, food and everything — with a limit on how many people you could serve,” said Jason Thomas, owner of the Arad Evans Inn and Papa Gallo restaurants in Fayetteville. “That would be tough on a lot of places.”
In the case of a restaurant like Arad Evans, however, enforcing distancing might a bit easier: It has three large dining rooms and a patio for the warmer weather. “But I realize not everyone has that luxury," Thomas said.
In a place with tighter quarters, it would be harder.
“I think it has to be at least 50%, and even then it would be difficult,” said Roesch about The Brasserie space.
And pushing tables apart is one thing. Limiting people at the bar, where patrons tend to sit or stand close together, is another.
“Five people at the bar can’t bring my bartenders back,” Roesch said. “They’d still be out of a job.”
At many places, like Kitty Hoynes, the bar is typically the most bustling — and profitable — part of any night.
“Not having that back the way it was, at least right away, that’s going to hurt,” Hoyne said. “But we’ll have to make the best of it.”
This is related to the need for social distancing: Extending existing patios, decks, sidewalks or other outdoor areas for diners could be an option for restaurants who have access to them.
In most cases, that would require a waiver from local agencies or landlords.
“It might help, since we’re coming into warmer weather, if we could get a waiver for some extended space for outdoor seating," Roesch said of her location at Township 5.
Dan Palladino, owner of Heritage Hill Brewhouse in Pompey, has pitched another idea to Onondaga County officials. He wants them to allow places that have the space to open their outdoor seating sooner, perhaps, than the more general reopening. He sent in a proposal for a careful reopening of outdoor seating at his place, a combination brewery, restaurant and farm store, starting May 15.
Responses from county officials to the early-opening part of that plan were not encouraging.
But Palladino is still pushing the idea. In a recent Facebook post, he wrote: “As I’ve been saying, being outside is healthy! Fresh air is good! We were taught this for years by our parents and grandparents. Open up the outside and let people spread out safely.”
The idea of requiring table servers, bartenders and other restaurant staff to wear masks, gloves or other protective gear is a real possibility, at least for the initial phase of restaurant re-opening.
“I think you might see us having to check the temperatures of staff when they come in, have them wear masks, gloves and so on — making everything as contactless as possible,” David Hoyne said.
That would be difficult, he said, but not as challenging as the potential of requiring customers to take precautions.
“It’s possible that you’d see customers come in with masks, and then at the table, we’d have some sort of container to put them in, so they’re not on the table,” Hoyne said. “These are all things we need to sort out.”
The idea of forcing patrons to wear masks strikes some restaurant operators as unacceptable,
“I think if customers and staff need to wear masks, then I’m not that interested in reopening like that,” said Adam Gold, owner of Funk 'N Waffles , restaurant/bar/entertainment venue in Armory Square. “The food industry really is a part of the entertainment industry, and I don’t know how you do that with masks. I don’t know why you’d open back up like that."
For many owners, it makes sense to keep the takeout model (pickup, delivery or both) a continuing part of the reopened restaurant business for a while.
“I think you’d have to have a continuing robust takeout business,” said Thomas at the Arad Evens Inn and Papa Gallo. “The reality is you’d have a lot of people who can’t wait to come back (to the dining rooms), but there will be a lot of people who just won’t be ready for that. So for those people you’d still want to offer the takeout option.”
Consultant Bud Loura says the extension of the takeout model might last 12 to 18 months after the initial reopening.
“It’s challenging, because whatever you think personally, we are sort of polarized right now,” he said. “There are the people who say, ‘You can’t make me wear a mask and I’m going where ever I want,’ and there are those who say, ‘I’m not coming back even if everyone is wearing a mask.’ So you need to be prepared for both."
Reopening restaurants for dining in won’t be an easy task, no matter what the exact details look like, the experts say.
Many point out the disruptions to the food supply chain during the pandemic, including such must-haves as meat.
“We’ve seen some major shortages recently in chicken and ground beef,” Thomas said of the kitchen at Papa Gallo. “Those are critical things for a Mexican restaurant.”
Clearly, any reopening plan would depend on getting suppliers back on track.
Equally, if not more concerning, is a shortage of labor. Restaurants were finding it difficult to maintain their staff levels even before the coronavirus hit, Loura said.
“Getting enough staff is one of the major concerns I’m hearing about,” he said.
That’s compounded by new unemployment rules, which include bonuses that in some cases can make it beneficial not to work in lower-paying jobs. At the same time, many restaurants have received federal Paycheck Protection Program loans. Those loans can be forgiven if the business that receives them uses 75% of the money on payroll after eight weeks.
Add in the fear and uncertainty that some workers have about returning to jobs that require contact with customers.
“I know there are people who are worried about the safety of coming into work," Thomas said. "But if you have a (PPP) loan, the clock is ticking to get people back on your payroll."
These issues just add to the overall uncertainty.
In Thomas’ case, they are among the reasons he’s recently reopened his restaurants for takeout after sitting it out for weeks.
“Doing takeout creates a little bit of revenue, of course,” he said. “But it also lets us get back into the swing — work out the kinks. You don’t just reopen from a standstill in June. It helps to have the wheels turning operationally at some level so we’re prepared when they say, ‘OK, you can open back up.’”
