Malaysian electricity company, TNB has revealed its latest Chinese New Year (CNY) ad, focusing on bringing families together even when they can’t be there physically.
The film, titled ‘Reality Not Virtual’ and directed by Quek Shio Chuan of Reservoir World, sees millennial Bryan receiving a care package from his mother as he is not sure about going home for CNY.
More and more, millennials are seen to not want to make the trip home for CNY, but this ad shows, in a quirky, humerous high tech way, how that could be possible, even if you can’t be there in person.
The ad begins with Bryan sitting at his work desk, taking a call from his mother. Unsure of whether or not he can make it home for the holidays, she has sent him a special package, a VR headset. He places the tech on his head and is quickly met by his Ma. As he is so busy, she has brought home to him in the form of virtual reality.
Throughout the ad, Bryan heads on a journey home through an emotional VR simulation that is simultaneously humourous as he navigates within the real-world. While virtually greeting family members and taking in traditions, he makes his way through his office, shaking hands with colleagues, talking to mops, eating paper and causing a ruckus throughout the office.
Ultimately Bryan sees that he misses his family and wishes to come home for the festivities with his loved ones. The ad's tagline “Celebrations are best experienced in real life”, perpetuates the strong family values that the season brings.
Kevin Le, executive creative director of Reprise said, “We wanted to reiterate how technology, while increasingly prevalent in our lives, cannot replace tradition. Youth today don’t favour spending time with family during festive occasions as they deem it boring or a tedious journey back home.
“When coming up with the idea, we thought, what if we could bring CNY to them? That’s how the VR simulation came about. Through this medium, we were able to bridge and collide these two worlds to take the viewer through a humourous journey together.”
Sutapa Bhattacharya, general manager – Corporate Strategic Communications at TNB added: “TNB is a strong proponent of family values, and these festive occasions are an important part of maintaining family bonds. This is our third CNY film with Reprise, and we are always looking at ways to keep the brand relatable to remain in step with the times. The team has managed to hit all the right notes in both the virtual and real worlds of Bryan, and effectively convey the positive essence of our brand.”
The ad is scheduled to air across TNB’s social media channels, with content across Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, YouTube and free-to-air TV networks.
In addition, the integrated campaign features a 360-video contest where users have to include their answers in the comments section which ties into TNB’s Energy Efficiency initiative. Viewers will discover Bryan’s VR world and will be asked to spot things they can do to conserve energy this CNY.
Vote for the campaign below in The Drum's Creative Works.
