Liverpool's Jennifer Sanford has been head coach of the UConn women's crew program since its inception in 1997.
Syracuse, N.Y. — Jennifer Sanford approached the month of June with a mindset bordering on defiance.
The coronavirus pandemic had already wiped out the spring season of the UConn women’s crew, a program that Sanford had run since its inception in 1997.
What could be worse than that? Sanford found out earlier this week, when the school announced budget constraints would force it to cut the team after the spring of 2021.
“I was like, ‘June, what are you going to hit me with?”' she said Thursday. “You joke about what’s coming next. This is what June brought. You don’t have a team anymore.”
The school’s decision, likely one of many similar ones across the college landscape in the upcoming months, is a wallop that’s felt all the way back in Central New York.
Sanford, 48, is a Liverpool and Syracuse grad whose father, Bill, was a long-time coach for the Orange. Jennifer has several local athletes in her program, including sophomore-to-be Alena Criss, senior Chloe Ludden and sophomore Erin Mordaunt (all from Baldwinsville) and senior Katherine Fletcher (CBA).
“We were definitely blindsided by it,” said Mordaunt, who said she will return to the school next season. “Yes, it’s heartbreaking. But we’re looking forward to the year we’re going to have.”
Women’s crew was sliced along with men’s swimming and diving, men’s cross country and men’s tennis as the school cut $10 million annually from its budget.
According to the Hartford Courant, UConn is facing an estimated $47 million to $129 million deficit due to coronavirus fallout. Sanford said her program’s budget is about $1.5 million annually, including $800,000 distributed through 14 scholarships.
Sanford said she had no idea this was coming. She knew the school’s athletic department was having some financial challenges but figured her program was safe. Tuesday, athletic director David Benedict let her know it was going to be eliminated. Sanford spoke at a public session of a Board of Trustees meeting on Wednesday, but that wasn’t going to change anything.
For the Huskies, it was a double blow. Not only did they lose their spring seasons, but their entire program will be tossed out as well.
“I’m obviously very frustrated at the decision,” she said. “What I will say is I would be feeling very differently if we had not been given next year. If we had not been given next year, then it’s over.
“You’re dealing with a team. You kind of go through that grief. You go through that whole gamut of emotion. I’m sure that’s what the team is going through.”
Sanford said she’s gotten through the past 36 hours with minimal sleep as she communicated with her team and responded to a non-stop flow of calls, texts and emails from alumni and other friends.
She’s also been checking in with incoming recruits, who will be allowed to immediately transfer to another school without penalty.
“I feel like when I’m talking to people I’m slurring my speech. I usually don’t slur my speech,” Sanford said of her fatigue. “At some point, I’ll crash. It’s hard to allow my mind to go to sleep.”
While she and her athletes will have the chance for one final season next year, she said she doesn’t know where her coaching career will look like after that.
“It’s been two days. Am I going to stay in coaching? I don’t know,” she said. “It’s something I’d like to do. It’s something I’ve done my whole life. I need to be in a role that I can have an impact on people, and I know there’s a lot of different roles I can do that in.”
College sports programs face an uncertain financial future because of the coronavirus pandemic. Do you know of a college program with CNY athletes that has been cut? We’d like know about. Email us at lkramer@syracuse.com .
