What the CNY curfew means: Going to work is OK, but no early-morning jogs or dog walks
Syracuse Mayor Ben Walsh speaks on Sunday, May 31, about the unrest following protests about police brutality.Teri Weaver | tweaver@syracuse.com
Syracuse, N.Y. — Onondaga County and Syracuse have declared a curfew that will run from 8 p.m. to 7 a.m. daily through Friday, according to orders signed by Mayor Ben Walsh and County Executive Ryan McMahon.
These emergency orders are meant to quell chaos and violence that broke out Saturday night amid protests about police brutality. They’re meant to keep people off the streets and out of public areas.
But what about late-night workers or early-morning dog walks?
Here’s what we know so far about how the curfew works:
What communities are covered by the curfew?
It is countywide, all of Onondaga County is under the curfew orders.
All emergency workers, such as police, firefighters and heath care workers. Journalists who are working at night are also exempt, Walsh said today.
“Anyone who is going to and from work is able to do so at any hour of the day,” he added.
If you work at night or in the early morning, you can still travel to get to and from your job between 8 p.m. and 7 a.m., Walsh said.
“We understand people need to get to and from work,” Walsh said. “They are not prohibited to do so under these emergency declarations.”
Transportation companies such as Uber and Lyft are allowed to operate during curfew hours, Syracuse spokesman Greg Loh said.
Centro, at the police department’s request, has decide to stop operations following the 7:40 p.m. Sunday lineup at the downtown hub and will resume service on Monday morning.
What about late-night dog walks or early morning jogs?
No. Those are not allowed, even in your own neighborhood, city and county spokesmen said this afternoon.
“Once we get to 8 p.m., you should be home,” Walsh said. “That’s not something that we take lightly. That’s so we can ensure the public safety” of the city and the entire county, he said.
What about any crowds protesting after 8 p.m.?
“They are breaking the law,” Walsh said.
Will those protesters be arrested?
Syracuse Police Chief Kenton Buckner will use his discretion, Walsh said. The police have the authority to do that, he said.
“In our experience, the vast majority of our community does the right thing,” the mayor said.
