DAO earnings call for the period ending December 31, 2019.
Good day and welcome to the Youdao 2019 fourth-quarter and fiscal-year earnings conference call. Today's conference is being recorded. At this time, I would like to turn the conference over to Pei Du, investor relations director of Youdao. Please go ahead.
Thank you, operator. Please note this discussion today will contain forward-looking statements relating to future performance of the company and are intended to qualify for the safe harbor from liability as established by the U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Such statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to certain risks and uncertainties, assumptions and other factors.
Some of the risks are beyond the company's control and could cause actual results to differ materially from those mentioned in today's press release and this discussion. A general discussion of the risk factors that could affect Youdao's business and financial results is included in certain filings of the company with the Securities of Exchange Committee, including its prospectus and associated amendment on the Form 424(b)(4) filed in conjunction with our recent IPO. The company doesn't undertake any obligation to update this forward-looking information, except as required by law. During today's call, management will also discuss certain non-GAAP financial measures for comparison purposes only.
For the definition of non-GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial results, please see the 2019 fourth-quarter and fiscal-year financial results news release issued earlier today. As a reminder, this conference is being recorded. Besides, a webcast replay of this conference will be available on Youdao's corporate website at ir.youdao.com. Joining us today on the call from Youdao's senior management is Dr.
Feng Zhou, our chief executive officer; Mr. Lei Jin, VP of operations; Mr. Peng Su, our VP of strategy and capital markets; and Mr. Wei Li, our VP of finance.
I will now turn the call over to Dr. Zhou to review some of our recent highlights and strategic direction.
Thank you, Du Pei, and thank you all for participating in today's call. Before we begin, I would like to remind everyone that all numbers are based on renminbi. We are happy to report Youdao's best quarter as we finished 2019. We generated revenue of RMB 410 million in Q4, up 78% year over year.
And for the full-year 2019, revenues were RMB 1.3 billion, also up 78% year over year. With six consecutive quarters of growth, Q4 gross billings for our online courses were up 211% year over year, accelerating faster than our growth in Q3 of 140% year over year. Yearly gross billings of online courses reached RMB 940 million, up 125% year over year. We continue to build up a strong instructor and tutor team, reaching 151 instructors and 520 tutors by the end of 2019.
Sales of our intelligent learning devices also continued to do well in Q4 after the launch of Youdao Dictionary Pen in August, reaching RMB 67 million of revenue in Q4, a 396% growth year over year. When we became a public company in October, we told people we are an intelligent learning company. What I mean is that, first and foremost, technology is in our corporate DNA. We have deeply integrated our proprietary technology across our offerings to create a unique online learning experience.
For example, in 2019, we distributed over 60,000 Youdao Smart Pens to our students. This gives our students seamless real-time student-teacher interactions that mimic a physical classroom environment and personalized feedback. Second, the strength of our organic user base is another element that differentiates us. By the end of 2019, the number of our total monthly average users have reached 108 million and it keeps on growing.
This is a testament to the engagement of our users, and moreover, it's driving growth across our online courses and learning devices alike. In fiscal-year 2019, almost 40% of our new paid enrollments for online courses were driven by our organic traffic. These unique advantages set an important foundation for our future and put us on track for achieving our goal of long-term and sustainable growth. With this synopsis, I'd like to walk you through our performance initiatives with our online courses, intelligent learning devices, knowledge tools and marketing segments, and discuss how these items build up our plans for 2020.
Our yearly gross billings of our K-12 segment grew to RMB 454 million, representing a 166% increase year over year, accounting for 48% of our total gross billings from our online courses. For the fourth quarter, our K-12 gross billings were RMB 169 million, up 256% year over year. Our junior high school segment, in particular, increased 580% year over year in Q4. Our strong growth came from continued enhancement to our course content and products.
We will take two of our strongest subjects, for instance. Our junior high school Chinese course was upgraded with new content that followed the new national exam syllabus, which cultivates students' literary and humanistic attainments. For our K-12 Physics programs, we developed a new content with multi-tiered levels of difficulty. Based on the data gathered by our complementary Smart Pen, additional explanatory videos were added to emphasize questions that many students answered incorrectly.
Moving to our adult segment. Annual gross billings were RMB 296 million, up 57% year over year. And for the fourth quarter, gross billings for our adult education segment were RMB 112 million, up 145% year over year. In October, we launched a more comprehensive course in Practical English, following the major content and future upgrades.
We also added more exercise features such as human-to-machine interactive oral practices using voice and neuro-machine translation technologies to boost the learner's level of engagement and provide immediate feedback. These changes were well received, and the conversion rate jumped by 50% following these product upgrades, even with an increase in ASP. In Q4, the gross billings of our Practical English reached RMB 86 million, a 308% increase year over year and a 117% increase quarter over quarter. To further grow our adult education segment, we are currently enhancing our graduate entrance exam course content and products as the next step in our adult user's learning process.
For our growing STEAM education courses, we launched a number of programs in 2019 targeting our early learners, including Youdao Kids program, Youdao Math, Youdao Fun Reading and Youdao Kids English. Let me talk a little bit more about the Kids' schooling courses. Our course is highly differentiated. We adopted a large class two-teacher model for teaching history program, while a lot of our peers used a small class or one-on-one format.
Our course works because of the sophisticated in-class practice system we implemented. In Q4, we achieved over 80% of retention for our kids programming courses. This is a testament to the effectiveness of our approach, combining great contents with advanced technology. In Q4, we also added a Python language course for our Kids' programming courses, which is a natural progression for those enthusiastic young coders who have mastered graphics or block-based programming.
Many of our courses come with a Smart Pen. This considerably enhanced our offerings both to students and for upgrading our courses. With the Smart Pen, students gain an interactive experience like into that of an in-class experience. For example, students gain immediate feedback on quiz results and can interact with tutors in real time, similar to face-to-face teaching.
In the meantime, our Smart Pen also brings skill closer to our students with the ability to use data collection to further improve the way we help our users learn. In tandem with our technology, we are constantly recruiting and training our service teams. By the end of the year, our tutoring team was composed of 520 employees, and we currently have three tutoring bases located in Guangdong, Guangzhou, Nanjing and Xi'an. Throughout 2019, we were busy implementing operating procedures and improving our training processes.
In Q4, we also substantially enhanced our process management systems used by our tutoring and growth teams. These activities have led to an increase in conversion rate from Q3 to Q4 and an expected increase in retention rate after winter-spring season compared with the summer-fall season of 2019. Turning to our intelligent learning devices segment, we are seeing excellent adoption. In 2019, learning devices yielded RMB 152 million in revenue.
44% of those revenues or RMB 67 million were recognized in the fourth quarter, driven largely by the successful launch of our second-generation Dictionary Pen in August. Within two months of its release, the device had become the best seller in the digital dictionary category of multiple e-commerce platforms. We also started distributing the product through off-line channels in the fourth quarter, with current distribution in three provinces. In Q4, over 100,000 units were sold.
We are working to further grow our off-line channels to more areas in 2020. Looking at our online knowledge tools, in 2019, average MAUs on our platforms were up 12% year over year to 108 million and 114 million MAUs in the fourth quarter. We go through continuous iterations during the year, introducing new tools for our huge and growing user base. For Youdao Dictionary, we upgraded new audio features and added comprehensive content to suit various learning scenarios.
We also implemented personalized course recommendations based on user profiles to help direct traffic to corresponding online courses and intelligent learning products. For U-Dictionary, we rolled out Magic Translate, a new translation feature for mobile phones to support our expanding overseas traffic. Users frequently use Magic Translate for text chatting and other online social activities, such as Facebook or WhatsApp. In 2019, U-Dictionary's average MAUs increased by 75% to 14 million, with the average MAUs for the fourth quarter up 50% year over year to 16 million.
We saw the largest increase in Latin America and Arabic-speaking countries, where the number of U-Dictionary users grew by more than 300%. Additionally, Youdao Kids' Dictionary was selected as one of the Apps On Display in Apple stores throughout China. After the review of our learning services and products, I would like to briefly discuss our online marketing services. Despite the continued weakness in the overall advertising market, revenues from our online marketing services grew nearly 50% year over year, reaching RMB 453 million in 2019 and reached RMB 99 million in the fourth quarter.
Our overseas media alliance have increased in Southeast Asia and the Middle East. We also enhanced our offerings in 2019 with newly developed automated tools. In Q4, online marketing revenue grew by 5% year over year due to the relatively weak results in the performance ad segment. Going forward, we expect the ad market to remain volatile, and we will manage it with flexibility.
In summary, over the past year, our system helps drive our strong growth, particularly in courses such as junior high school Chinese, Physics and Practical English, as well as our Smart Pen and Dictionary Pen 2. Armed with the replicable content, products, operational knowledge, tutor and growth services team and a large user base, we have established the groundwork for sustainable growth. To further strengthen this model, in 2020, we will focus on enhancing our content and adding new premium products while simultaneously instituting operational efficiencies that allow us to further benefit from economy of scale. We are excited to enter another year of rapid growth that help our students and parents and create value for all of our constituents and stakeholders.
Before I turn the call over to Su Peng, who will walk you through our financials, I would like to touch on something that concerns ourselves, the coronavirus outbreak. As China's leading online education service platform, NetEase Youdao has a social responsibility to assist in any way we can. Currently, we are providing three online courses, as well as other supporting measures and services to school, students and parents. This can go a long way in promoting content and emotional stability during these uncertain times.
Starting on January 24, we were the first company in the industry to offer free winter courses to K-12 students in Wuhan City and Hubei province. We then officially launched a nationwide initiative to offer complementary K-12 courses to help students review key points and improve on problem-solving skills. As for the college students, China University MOOC connected the 800 universities, covering 4,000 professors requests across all provincial administrative regions, except Hong Kong and Taiwan. We're hopeful that there will be a solution to the virus soon.
In the meantime, we stand ready to assist people in need. With that, I would like to turn the call over to Su Peng to review our financial performance. We will then open the call up for questions. Su Peng?
Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Zhou, and hello, everyone. Today, I will be presenting some financial highlights for the 2019 fiscal year and the fourth quarter.
We encourage you to read through our press release issued earlier today for the further details. We saw excellent gains across many of our primary metrics while we are building our business scale and offering. We are simultaneously working to balance our investment in our operations to best position us for sustainable growth over the long term. For the fourth quarter, we had a total net revenue of RMB 410.4 million or the USD 59 million.
This represents an increase of 78.4% from the fourth quarter of 2018. If we look at this growth by segment, net revenue from our learning services and products grew by 128.6% year over year to RMB 311.9 million or USD 44.8 million. We attribute this growth to strong growth in the K-12 paid student enrollment. Net revenue for the online marketing services were RMB 98.5 million or USD 14.2 million, flat compared with the prior-year period.
For the fourth quarter of 2019, our total gross profit was RMB 122.4 million or USD 17.6 million compared with RMB 68.3 million for the fourth quarter of 2018. Gross margin for learning services and products improved to 29.3% for the fourth quarter of 2019, up from 21.6% for the fourth quarter of 2018. The large margin growth was primarily attributable to the effects of the economics of scale and the further optimization of our business and the faculty compensation structure. Gross margin for online marketing services was 31.6% for the fourth quarter of 2019 compared with the 41.4% for the fourth quarter of 2018.
The decrease was mainly the result of the more revenue generated from advertisement through the third-party Internet properties and the international markets, which carry lower gross margin. As a reminder, we are still in the early stage of cultivating our online learning business. Over time, we expect to improve our margin profile as we further grow our paid student enrollments and realize more economics of scale. The efficiency we are gaining from the optimization of our faculty compensation model will also greatly improve our margin as the bulk of associated costs are upfront.
For the fourth quarter, total operating expense were RMB 326.5 million or USD 46.9 million compared with RMB 118.6 million for the same period last year. We continue to invest in technology, student acquisition and acquiring talent teachers. Building our sustainable growth business is our goal, which means we are focused on doing it right, not just on short-term financial optic gains. These investments are under planning and that we are increasing our top line and structuring our model to become more efficient and recognized economic of scale.
With that in mind, sales and marketing spend for the fourth quarter was RMB 205.8 million compared with RMB 54.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2018. Research and development expense for the fourth quarter were RMB 89.3 million compared with RMB 50.6 million in fourth quarter of 2018. Our operating loss margin was 49.7% in the fourth quarter of 2019, down from a 21.9% for the same period last year. For the fourth quarter of 2019, our net loss attributable to ordinary shareholders was RMB 205.7 million or USD 29.5 million.
Non-GAAP net loss attributable to ordinary shareholders for the fourth quarter was RMB 186.1 million or USD 26.7 million. Basic and diluted net loss per ADS for the fourth quarter was RMB 1.95 or USD 0.28. Non-GAAP basic and diluted net loss per ADS for the fourth quarter was RMB 1.76 or USD 0.25. Our net cash used in operating activities for the fourth quarter was RMB 29.4 million or USD 4.2 million.
Again, we are focused on meeting our long-term objectives. We will continue to prudently manage our cost and strike a balance between top-line growth and expense. Turning to our full-year results, our total revenue for the fiscal 2019 increased by 78.4% to RMB 1.3 billion or USD 187.4 million. Net revenue from our learning services and products for the fiscal 2019 grew by 98.7% year over year to RMB 851.9 million or USD 122.4 million.
Net revenue from online marketing services were up 49.6% year over year for the fiscal 2019 to RMB 453 million or USD 65.1 million. Total gross profit for 2019 was RMB 370.6 million compared with RMB 216.5 million in 2018. Total operating expense for the year increased to RMB 971.5 million or USD 139.6 million compared with CNY 435.6 million in 2018. For the year, net loss attributable to ordinary shareholder was RMB 637.4 million or USD 91.6 million, and the basic and diluted loss per ADS was RMB 6.68 or USD 0.96.
Looking at our balance sheet. As of December 31, 2019, our contract liability, which mainly consists of deferred revenue, were RMB 456.8 million or USD 65.6 million compared with RMB 177.5 million as of December 31, 2018. At the end of the period, our cash, cash equivalents, time deposits and short-term investments totaled RMB 1.6 billion or USD 232.7 million. This concludes our prepared remarks.
Thank you for your attention. We would now like to open the call to your questions. Operator, please go ahead.
[Operator instructions] The first question comes from Mark Li of Citi. Please go ahead.
Thank you, management, for the time. I have two questions. One is I want to know more -- given the unfortunate virus incident, could you share more about the online operating metric? We have seen like a bit color on the online students or the traffic that we get. Or any plan for the servicing and retention? And the second question is I would like to know our promotion or retention plan for the upcoming spring semester for both K-12 and adults segments.
Thank you, Mark. Yes, so the first is regarding the virus. So our first priority is always the health of our employees and customers. And with that said, the outbreak significantly raises the awareness of online education, so business-wise, it's very positive for our courses.
So we are doing several things. So first is, as we talked about, we are offering free courses to our users. And most of the results for the free course is actually branding awareness, so a lot of users are -- through these free courses, they get to know Youdao and get to know online education for the first time. So actually, there's one number I can share with you.
There have been over 10 million free course enrollments since we launched the campaign on January 24, so over 10 million enrollments there. So the second thing we're doing is, at the same time with the free courses, we are also offering low-cost trial courses. Most of these courses are the same with the before, but we do a little bit of an adjustment to some of them. And so that low cost to trial courses, so what we are seeing is, of course, much lower user acquisition costs over the period of time and also better conversion rates.
So that's the second thing. The third thing is that, overall, we are spending more on -- actually on our marketing budget. So most of that is actually around the low-cost trial courses, so this enables us to ramp up the business faster. And the coronavirus situation has negative impact for our other businesses, for advertising and smart devices business.
For the smart devices business, this mostly impacts our off-line sales. However, these are currently smaller businesses for us, so overall, it's positive. And for promotion and retention for spring courses, so if you look at our basic approach, we're basically doing two things. So one is performance ad-based customer acquisition, so low-cost trials like three or 48 courses, some free trials.
And these will continue to do, and we will probably spend more on that. And given that we have better conversion now, so these we think are the right time to do the investment. And the second thing we do is -- it's different from our peers. We have a lot of organic traffic, over 100 million of MAUs.
So we've always been optimizing the organic traffic conversion methodologies, so mostly from our dictionary app and translation app. And so if you look at our numbers, we've almost doubled the number of new course users from this organic traffic source in 2019, and we believe we can do more in 2020. So we've rolled out course recommendation based on user profiles in Q4, and we are doing more targeting improvements. And also, we have a new version of dictionary out in December.
If we look at it, so there's more learning-oriented content in the Dictionary version. And on the same page, you can have oral English practice services. You have listening comprehension content and also some trial courses. So this blend well, and we're doing that, and we believe we'll get good results.
And from a macro point of view, we believe this is the right time to do investment because we are seeing the perfect storm of adoption for online education, mature enough large class dual-teacher model, which we've been always been focused on; a new generation of instructors who are really good at teaching online, and of course, people staying at home due to the coronavirus. And during the process, the last point I want to make is that we require a healthy unit for each product that we promote. So we do not promote solely based on the revenue we want to achieve. We look at the [Inaudible] of these courses a lot.
Yes, I hope that answers your question.
