Home » Cryptocurrency » Ripple » XRP’s regulatory status still unclear, as Ripple discusses with SEC
XRP’s regulatory status still unclear, as Ripple discusses with SEC
Ripple claims that regulatory concern is seriously affecting XRP’s growth. The company is in talks with SEC to settle the issue.
Market participants not sure whether XRP is a commodity or a security. Others don’t think it’s either of the two.
A lawsuit against Ripple on the regulation of XRP could decide the actual stance of the cryptocurrency.
As BTC, ETH, XRP, and other cryptocurrencies keep dominating the market, regulators are keeping watch of any irregular development in the market. They are always on the move to prevent bad actors from taking advantage of any lax regulation.
how the asset should be treated.
provide answers to the questions of whether it’s a security, commodity, or
U.S. regulators have already branded those two as commodities. That’s why there
are futures contracts for digital assets.
XRP, which is the third-largest crypto coin has not made headway yet regarding its legality or stance. Many people are still uncertain what to call the cryptocurrency, whether security or a commodity. The uncertainty surrounding the position of the digital assets has actually held its growth and progress. Financial institutions are still not convinced to accept or trade the digital asset because the risk in uncertainly is a huge one.
Ripple is trying to set things straight with the way the community perceives the digital asset. Brad Garlinghouse , CEO of Ripple, said at a Switzerland event that the company is seriously working to clear that uncertainty about the nature of XRP digital assets. He said the company has engaged SEC and is making an attempt to convince and educate regulators about XRP’s true nature. Brad said he has strong confidence that things would work out fine and XRP will be recognized completely in the industry. Brad’s comment is coming shortly after Heath Tabert, Chairman of CFTC discussed the regulatory status of XRP in a recent interview.
where XRP stands is affecting the growth of the cryptocurrency. Market
investors should treat the cryptocurrency.   Some
as a commodity. Some even think it’s neither of the two. With this confusion,
it would be very difficult for XRP to reach the growth height its developer,
CEO of the Block, Mike Dudas, recently discussed this development in two presentations. The presentation provided comments and posts made by Ripple, which indicated that the company is selling the assets for the need to gain profit.
If this presentation is true, it means that XRP may be
regarded as an unregistered security. In this case, Ripple will have to face
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
