There was a fleeting moment when I thought I might make a million from Bitcoin. I held a handful of coins, and was trading fellow alt-coins ethereum and XRP by Ripple. It was December 2017, and cryptos were riding high.
Then reality struck. My dreams of becoming a Bitcoin millionaire were just that, dreams. Pretty ridiculous dreams, too.
Still, I’m not alone. Plenty of Britons continue to dream of making a million from Bitcoin. Hope springs eternal, and all that. One in 20 in the UK has bought cryptocurrencies, according to new figures from the Financial Conduct Authority. Of these, almost one in 10 used borrowed money. That is an incredibly reckless and dangerous thing to do, and could cost you dear. Please don’t do it.
I wouldn’t buy Bitcoin at today’s price. In fact, I wouldn’t buy it at any price. This is a purely speculative tool, only for short-term traders or as I call them, gamblers. With Bitcoin trading at around $9,250 you would have to buy an awful lot to stand a chance of making big money. Given its massive volatility, you could lose a small fortune trying.
Who doesn’t dream of becoming a millionaire? Bitcoin is not the way to do it, though. Instead, I would recommend you build a balanced portfolio of FTSE 100 shares, using your Stocks and Shares ISA allowance for tax-free returns.
You really can make a million from top UK shares and you do not have to be a brilliant stock picker or speculative genius to do it. All you have to do is give up all thoughts of getting rich quick, and aim to get rich slowly instead.
If you start early enough, you really make that million by investing £500 a month. If you started at age 25 and made an average total return of 6.5% a year after charges, by age 65 you would have £1.12m. To achieve this, you have to reinvest all your dividends for growth.
Remember, if this money is held in a Stocks and Shares ISA, all your returns are free of income tax and capital gains tax for life.
Naturally, if you are older, you will struggle to make a million by the time you turn 65. If you invest £500 a month from age 35, by age 65 you will have £551,935. That is still a lot of money, but half the sum you would have if you started 10 years earlier. Your early contributions are the most valuable, because they have longer to compound.
Late starters, do not despair. Investing something is always better than doing nothing. If you start investing £500 a month at age 45, for example, you also have £233,956 by 65, assuming the above growth rates. You may not have made a million, but your retirement will be a lot more comfortable.
So don’t waste time messing around with Bitcoin. There’s a much safer way to get rich and retire early.
And with so many great companies trading at what look to be ‘discount-bin’ prices, now could be the time for savvy investors to snap up some potential bargains.
But whether you’re a newbie investor or a seasoned pro, deciding which stocks to add to your shopping list can be daunting prospect during such unprecedented times.
Fortunately, The Motley Fool is here to help: our UK Chief Investment Officer and his analyst team have short-listed five companies that they believe STILL boast significant long-term growth prospects despite the global lock-down…
You see, here at The Motley Fool we don’t believe “over-trading” is the right path to financial freedom in retirement; instead, we advocate buying and holding (for AT LEAST three to five years) 15 or more quality companies, with shareholder-focused management teams at the helm.
Click here to claim your free copy of this special investing report now!
Harvey Jones holds one Bitcoin but has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
