companies are going into survival mode, cutting back harvest
fuel demand caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
the spread of the virus have undercut global demand.
sugar-based ethanol, the fall-off has hit hard, with ripple
effects across Latin America's largest economy.
The country is the world's No. 2 producer of ethanol behind
region dropped 20% in the second half of March, according to
storage as mills tap additional, costlier credit lines and cut
back on some crop care practices, which could hurt next year's
April, and maybe 60% of normal in May," said Fabio Montechi,
chief financial officer at Santa Isabel, a sugar company with
store ethanol and is setting up a revolving credit line.
private bank Itau Unibanco Holdings, estimates that
struggling financially and may have to halt operations.
produce more ethanol at the harvest kick-off, to sell the fuel
and raise cash to pay harvest costs," said Pedro Fernandes,
agribusiness director for Itau BBA, adding that the drop in
ethanol demand would hamper that business model.
Paulo state, according to the Cepea/Esalq research center,
having fallen from 2.04 reais per liter to 1.39 reais per liter.
mills shifted production from ethanol to sugar, boosting that
Even before the coronavirus crisis, some Brazilian sugar
subsidized gasoline prices between 2012 and 2016, when the
government tried to control inflation. More than 80 mills filed
for bankruptcy protection during or right after that period.
said the mill kicked off cane crushing late last month. Itajobi
is looking to crush 2 million tonnes of cane this season, but it
is struggling to pay bills, he said.
"It is a straight blow to cash flow," said Dalkirane, adding
that for every 10-cent decline in ethanol price, annual revenues
Larger groups such as Raizen, Sao
But that is not an option for everyone. Fernando Perri, a
month to see if prices improve, rather than produce ethanol that
"We risk ending up leaving cane in the field, but I guess
© Copyright Thomson Reuters 2020. Click For Restrictions - http://about.reuters.com/fulllegal.asp
