One tablespoon also contains about 58 calories , all of which come from carbs — mostly sugar.
In addition to containing vitamins and minerals, molasses is very high in sugar. In excess, sugar can be very harmful to your health.
Excess sugar intake has been linked to some of the world’s biggest health problems, including obesity , type 2 diabetes, and heart disease ( 2 , 3 , 4 ).
Nutritionists do not recommend that people start eating molasses for the nutrients because its sugar content is so high. The best way to get these nutrients is by eating whole foods.
However, if you are going to eat sugar anyway, molasses is likely a more healthful alternative.
Bottom line: Molasses contains several nutrients and is fairly high in minerals. However, it is not the most healthful source of these nutrients because it contains so much sugar.
Limited research about the health effects of molasses is available. However, researchers have linked the nutrients in the syrup to several health benefits.
However, other healthful food sources of these minerals are widely available. These include nuts, seeds, and dairy products. People should not rely on molasses as source for these nutrients.
Although researchers have not studied the effects of molasses on the heart in humans, studies in animals indicate that supplementing the diet with molasses can help increase levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), or “good,” cholesterol ( 8 ).
However, no evidence suggests molasses will have the same benefits in humans.
People with poor blood sugar control should limit their intake of all forms of sugar, including molasses. That said, molasses may help stabilize blood sugar levels in healthy adults on a high carb diet.
That said, molasses has a similar glycemic index rating to refined sugar. The glycemic index measures how quickly specific foods raise blood sugar levels.
People with diabetes may benefit from using a low-calorie sweetener, such as stevia or erythritol.
According to research, blackstrap molasses contains more antioxidants than honey and other natural sweeteners, including maple syrup and agave nectar ( 10 ).
Bottom line: Molasses contains several nutrients that provide health benefits. It also contains more antioxidants than other common sweeteners.
Molasses is safe for most people, if they consume it in moderation.
While molasses can be a good alternative to refined sugar, consuming too much of any added sugar can have adverse effects. The effects may be particularly harmful to people with diabetes.
Also, molasses can cause digestive problems. Consuming large amounts may cause loose stools or diarrhea .
People with irritable bowel syndrome or other forms of digestive discomfort may want to avoid this syrup.
Bottom line: Molasses is usually safe, but consume it in moderation. It may be a good idea for people with diabetes or digestive issues to avoid it.
Molasses contains several important nutrients and antioxidants, making it a more healthful option than refined sugar.
However, it still contains high levels of sugar, which can be harmful when consumed in excess.
Molasses contains more nutrients than refined sugar.
All things considered: While molasses appears to be a slightly less harmful version of sugar, it can still have negative health effects.
Anyone consuming molasses should do so in moderation, bearing in mind that a serving is 1 tablespoon, or 20 g.
Last medically reviewed on  March 16, 2020
