FTSE higher on vaccine progress, ABF jumps on strong trading in grocery and sugar
The FTSE 100 opened 0.6% higher on Thursday at 6,196, following gains in Asian markets which were boosted by positive news on development of a vaccine by US firm Pfizer (NYSE:PFE).
Travel related shares were strong following a government report that it will relax quarantine rules for around 75 countries, allowing Brits to go on holiday.  British Airlines owner IAG ( IAG ) was 4% higher while Easyjet (EZY) shares were 5% ahead.
In Asia, China’s Shanghai Composite gained 2% and Japan’s Nikkei was 0.2% higher. Oil prices were 1.4% higher at $40 a barrel while Gold was flat at $1,769 per ounce. On the foreign exchange markets the pound was trading 0.2% high against the US dollar at $1.25.
In a trading update Associated British Foods ( ABF ) said that it expected a sharp decline in Primark revenues after sales slipped 75% in the third quarter owing to store closures during the pandemic.
However the shares moved 7.4% higher to £21.10 on news that the company expected strong progress in full-year adjusted operating profit at its sugar, grocery, agriculture and ingredients businesses.
Packaging company DS Smith ( SMDS ) reported a 2% decline in revenue to £6.04 billion in its full-year results, which saw operating profit climb 6% to £455 million.
The company said that performance for the first 10 months of the financial year was robust with a relatively limited impact on operating profit of approximately £15 million in the final two months of the year from the COVID-19 pandemic.
However the firm said it was too early to restart dividends given the uncertainties. The shares dropped 9% to 290p.
Pub group Mitchells & Butlers ( MAB ) announced a pre-tax loss of £121 million for the half year on revenue of £1.04 billion as the lockdown took effect towards the end of the period and it prepares to re-open English sites.
The group said its German business, Alex, re-opened from mid to late May, and that it has been 'encouraged' that sales levels have grown each week since re-opening. The shares gained 0.8% to 193p.
Specialist in higher performance components and sub-systems for aerospace, defence and energy markets, Meggitt ( MGGT ) said it had seen a material impact on its operations in the second quarter with 60% of its fleet grounded in the civil aerospace division.
Overall it expects organic revenues to be 15% lower in the first-half, but in recent weeks it said it had seen signs of recovery in commercial aerospace, lifting the shares 4.9% to 320p.
Pure play music fund Hipgnosis Songs Fund ( SONG ) announced a £200 million equity raise by a placing of new C shares at 100p. The money will be used to continue its acquisition of music catalogues. The shares were flat at 116p.
Shares in Hungarian low cost carrier Wizz Air ( WIZZ ) flew 1% higher to £33.8 after it reported that its June passenger load factor fell to 52% from 95% a year ago, taking the rolling 12 month level to 92% from 93.2%. The company continues to grow its network with three new bases and 64 new routes.
Fresh produce company Total Produce ( TOT:AIM ) said trading for the six months to 30 June had been satisfactory with resilient sales, expected to be in line with the first-half of last year. The shares were flat at 101p.
