This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Koloa is spearheading agriculture programs across Kauai to help sustainably increase sugar and sugarcane production.
When commercial sugar production ended in Hawaii in 2016, it marked the end of an era. Sugar and sugarcane processing was one of the oldest industries on the islands, dating back to the 1850s. A group of companies known as the “Big Five” came to dominate the industry in what was Hawaii’s biggest exported commodity.
As modernization and rising labor costs crept up, sugar production declined, with more buyers looking to cheaper mainland U.S. producers. At the end of 2016, Maui’s Hawaiian Commercial and Sugar (HC&S) closed the last major sugar operation on the islands, marking the end of the line for 675 workers as well.
Bob Gunter was a first-hand witness to this decline, arriving in Hawaii more than 40 years ago after military service. He worked for one of the “Big Five” corporations for 10 years, then transitioned into a “man on the ground” role for a mainland joint venture group, where he assisted with the construction and commissioning of a rum distillery on Maui. (Eventually, this expanded to include the buildout of a second distillery to make vodka.)
Once he cemented his reputation in the spirits business, he wanted to return to his roots on Kauai. In 2007, he pooled resources with investors and business partners to build Koloa Rum with the plan of using Hawaiian sugar to create quality Hawaiian rum. The distillery started producing in September 2009 with sugar from Gay & Robinson (G&R), a sugar mill 10 miles away.
There was just one problem—a finite supply of Hawaiian sugar remained throughout the islands.
As sugar production decreased, Gunter made a deal to buy up as much sugar as he could find, totaling 60 tons of raw sugar from G&R and 190 tons from HC&S before they closed. Koloa exhausted all of those resources in February.
“We’re still using domestic American sugar,” says Gunter, Koloa’s President & CEO, “but now we’re bringing it in from California and Louisiana.”
Through all of this, Gunter saw a need and an opportunity to help rebuild Hawaii’s sugar trade.
Koloa produces seven different rums, including a standard white to Kaua’i Reserve, a limited, barrel-aged rum that spends three years in select American white oak before bottling. The distillery also produces a line of tropical, pre-mixed cocktails.
Koloa’s individual rums are priced from $30-$50 and the four ready-to-drink blended cocktails range from $16-$25.
From 2009-2013, Koloa was the only standalone distillery with a tasting room in the entire state. While several other distilleries have popped up since, Koloa remains one of the most popular, welcoming more than 1 million visitors to its tasting room since opening.
While Gunter won’t disclose specific sales and volume numbers, he does note that case sales and revenue have grown by double-digits year-over-year since 2009, and the brand has been profitable the last six or seven years.
“We’ve been very fortunate in being able to maintain a substantial growth curve,” he says.
Koloa has always been about supporting the local Kauai community as much as possible—90% of their 43 employees are from the island.
The distillery is also spearheading agriculture programs across Kauai to help sustainably increase sugar and sugarcane production.
“The idea first came about in realizing that we’re in the business to make rum and we’re not farmers, per se,” Gunter says, “so we decided to contract with others to do the labor.”
Gunter was invited by Retro Farms on Kauai’s north shore to visit and look at how to incorporate its excess sugarcane into production plans. The farm was primarily using the cane as windbreaks, and the total wasn’t much more than an acre at the start. Koloa quickly began incorporating that sugarcane into their rum production, and the agreement spearheaded new thinking to invite other landowners to grow sugar as well.
Although lands are fiercely protected across Hawaii, Kauai has substantial vacant agricultural land from old sugar production. As Koloa’s needs have grown, Gunter began discussions with various landowners to grow sugarcane on their grounds, using organic farming with the hopes of eventually cultivating “several hundred acres.”
President and CEO Bob Gunter.
“We won’t get back to what the industry used to be, but our long-range goal is to be entirely self-sufficient on Kauai sugar,” he says.
Another way the company is sustaining sugar is by being a home base for growing legacy varieties of sugarcane. It’s working with various public and private institutions and agencies to cultivate more than 40 varieties, some dating back to pre-Western contact (at least 170 years).
Gunter says that, with enough growth, the company could eventually incorporate some of these particular varieties into singular rums or general production.
Koloa has a new distillery and visitors center in the works that’s scheduled to open in early 2021. Gunter plans that along with selling rum, the center will have an interactive garden where visitors can get up close with these legacy cane varieties and understand the impact that sugar has had on the islands.
Koloa also plans to produce a single-estate organic rum from their own 12-acre organic farm at the site of their new distillery. The initial harvest and production is scheduled to begin in September.
When commercial sugar production ended in Hawaii in 2016, it marked the end of an era.
