ISMA and traders have estimated that exports would be about 5 million tonnes (mt) this season, against 6 mt of MAEQs issued by the government
Last Updated at February 19, 2020 00:30 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Though sugar export has picked up this season, with further scope for growth as Indonesia is expected to soon open the doors for Indian sugar, it is still expected to miss the government target.
This prompted the government to issue new guidelines directing the reallocation export quotas from mills that haven’t been able to use them to those that have asked for higher quotas. In a circular issued on Tuesday, the government warned mills that were not able to utilise their export quotas and don’t surrender or relinquish them that “such mills will not be entitled for ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
