The video has references to Styles' previous music videos, plus nods to accessories he's worn in the past.
Harry Styles has released the music video for "Watermelon Sugar," the upbeat track from his 2019 sophomore album, " Fine Line ."
The 26-year-old singer dropped the video Monday, and it featured him surrounded by people on a beach who were dancing, eating plenty of watermelons, and touching one another's bodies.
In a 2019 interview with Apple Music's Zane Lowe , Styles described "Fine Line" as an "open" record and said he didn't like to explain the meanings of his songs. He also played coy when Lowe asked whether "Watermelon Sugar" was about "the joys of mutually appreciated oral pleasure."
Here are all the details, references, and Easter eggs you might have missed in his new music video.
At the start, Styles is sitting at a table, which has a tablecloth reminiscent of the sail used in the video for "Adore You."
Harry Styles' music video for "Watermelon Sugar" opens with him dining on the beach.
The "Adore You" video was released in December and showed the singer leaving the fictional island of Eroda on a boat.
He's seen wearing initial rings from Gucci that say "H" and "S," which he often sports during performances and other appearances.
Styles often wears Gucci rings with his initials.
Styles has worn the rings in a photo shoot for a 2019 interview for The Guardian , while out and about in London , in a promotional video for "Fine Line," and during an appearance on NBC's "Today" show in February.
In the "Watermelon Sugar" music video, he appears to be wearing the same four rings, in the same order, as he did on the "Today" show.
The round blue glasses were previously worn by Styles in a photo shoot for his 2019 cover of Rolling Stone magazine.
In the magazine , Styles used the glasses to accessorize while wearing a denim outfit and standing in a field of flowers.
Styles' new music video was filmed on a beach.
Fans online noticed that the piece of land behind Styles in the "Watermelon Sugar" video resembled the area where the video for "WMYB" was filmed.
The tablecloth in the "Watermelon Sugar" video also has a similar hue as the vehicle Styles and his 1D bandmates drove in the "WMYB" video.
The people in the music video dance around and touch one another's bodies, similar to Styles' "Lights Out" video.
Harry Styles' video for "Lights Out" was released in October, marking the start of his new era of music.
They also feed one another slices of watermelon in the new music video.
Styles wears clothing from Gucci's fall 2020 collection.
Harry Styles wears clothing from Gucci in his "Watermelon Sugar" music video.
The cropped sweater and scarf that he wears near the end of the video are from Gucci, Vogue pointed out.
The video concludes with the singer and the other people posing for a photo, similar to the way his "Kiwi" music video ended.
The end of the "Watermelon Sugar" music video mirrors that of another video from Harry Styles.
In his "Kiwi" video, Styles posed for a class photo with a group of children after a cake fight.
