Delish editors handpick every product we feature. We may earn commission from the links on this page.
Harry Styles, silliest, raunchiest comedian and cheeky golden-voiced king of my heart, has been on a roll lately. Not only did he outdo himself earlier this month on SNL, but he also has been slowly dropping singles from his forthcoming new album Fine Line. One of those singles is called "Watermelon Sugar," and Harry just revealed in an Apple Music interview that the lyrics are...pretty sexually charged.
For context, the first verse of the song goes:
The cool teens of the internet were of course the first to note that "watermelon sugar" is very clearly related to oral sex. In fact, UrbanDictionary.com confirms it's, uh, a "term used for male precum while giving oral sex." Cue the tweets:
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
do ppl really not know watermelon sugar is about oral sex,,,,,
— lowrider slug (@MoreMilkMami) November 18, 2019
This content is imported from Twitter. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
— sarah (@cheery90s) November 19, 2019
Anyway, all this is to say that when Harry was confronted by Apple Music's Zane Lowe about the meaning of the song, Harry kind of confirmed and kind of denied that "Watermelon Sugar" is a super sexy song.
This content is imported from YouTube. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.
"'Watermelon Sugar' is out," Zane said. "Everyone's kinda figured out what it's about: the joys of mutually appreciated oral pleasure." Harry replied: "Is that what it's about? I don't know." And then he smiled like THIS:
Harry Styles, silliest, raunchiest comedian , cheeky golden-voiced king of my heart, sauciest lil minx.
Tess Koman Senior Editor Tess Koman covers breaking (food) news, opinion pieces, and features on larger happenings in the food world.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
