Simply Wall St June 21, 2020
Rogers Sugar Inc. ( TSE:RSI ) is about to trade ex-dividend in the next 3 days. You can purchase shares before the 25th of June in order to receive the dividend, which the company will pay on the 21st of July.
Rogers Sugar’s next dividend payment will be CA$0.09 per share. Last year, in total, the company distributed CA$0.36 to shareholders. Based on the last year’s worth of payments, Rogers Sugar stock has a trailing yield of around 7.3% on the current share price of CA$4.9. Dividends are a major contributor to investment returns for long term holders, but only if the dividend continues to be paid. That’s why we should always check whether the dividend payments appear sustainable, and if the company is growing.
Dividends are usually paid out of company profits, so if a company pays out more than it earned then its dividend is usually at greater risk of being cut. Rogers Sugar paid a dividend last year despite being unprofitable. This might be a one-off event, but it’s not a sustainable state of affairs in the long run. With the recent loss, it’s important to check if the business generated enough cash to pay its dividend. If cash earnings don’t cover the dividend, the company would have to pay dividends out of cash in the bank, or by borrowing money, neither of which is long-term sustainable. Over the last year, it paid out more than three-quarters (83%) of its free cash flow generated, which is fairly high and may be starting to limit reinvestment in the business.
Have Earnings And Dividends Been Growing?
Businesses with shrinking earnings are tricky from a dividend perspective. Investors love dividends, so if earnings fall and the dividend is reduced, expect a stock to be sold off heavily at the same time. Rogers Sugar was unprofitable last year and, unfortunately, the general trend suggests its earnings have been in decline over the last five years, making us wonder if the dividend is sustainable at all.
Another key way to measure a company’s dividend prospects is by measuring its historical rate of dividend growth. Rogers Sugar has seen its dividend decline 2.4% per annum on average over the past ten years, which is not great to see. While it’s not great that earnings and dividends per share have fallen in recent years, we’re encouraged by the fact that management has trimmed the dividend rather than risk over-committing the company in a risky attempt to maintain yields to shareholders.
We update our analysis on Rogers Sugar every 24 hours, so you can always get the latest insights on its financial health, here.
From a dividend perspective, should investors buy or avoid Rogers Sugar? First, it’s not great to see the company paying a dividend despite being loss-making over the last year. On the plus side, the dividend was covered by free cash flow.” Overall it doesn’t look like the most suitable dividend stock for a long-term buy and hold investor.
So if you’re still interested in Rogers Sugar despite it’s poor dividend qualities, you should be well informed on some of the risks facing this stock. We’ve identified 3 warning signs with Rogers Sugar (at least 2 which are concerning) , and understanding these should be part of your investment process.
A common investment mistake is buying the first interesting stock you see. Here you can find a list of promising dividend stocks with a greater than 2% yield and an upcoming dividend.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
