How Does Dwarikesh Sugar Industries’s (NSE:DWARKESH) P/E Compare To Its Industry, After The Share Price Drop?
Simply Wall St March 22, 2020
Unfortunately for some shareholders, the Dwarikesh Sugar Industries ( NSE:DWARKESH ) share price has dived 52% in the last thirty days. That drop has capped off a tough year for shareholders, with the share price down 41% in that time.
Assuming nothing else has changed, a lower share price makes a stock more attractive to potential buyers. While the market sentiment towards a stock is very changeable, in the long run, the share price will tend to move in the same direction as earnings per share. The implication here is that long term investors have an opportunity when expectations of a company are too low. One way to gauge market expectations of a stock is to look at its Price to Earnings Ratio (PE Ratio). A high P/E ratio means that investors have a high expectation about future growth, while a low P/E ratio means they have low expectations about future growth.
How Does Dwarikesh Sugar Industries’s P/E Ratio Compare To Its Peers?
We can tell from its P/E ratio of 5.18 that sentiment around Dwarikesh Sugar Industries isn’t particularly high. The image below shows that Dwarikesh Sugar Industries has a lower P/E than the average (10.3) P/E for companies in the food industry.
NSEI:DWARKESH Price Estimation Relative to Market, March 22nd 2020
Its relatively low P/E ratio indicates that Dwarikesh Sugar Industries shareholders think it will struggle to do as well as other companies in its industry classification. Since the market seems unimpressed with Dwarikesh Sugar Industries, it’s quite possible it could surprise on the upside. It is arguably worth checking if insiders are buying shares , because that might imply they believe the stock is undervalued.
Companies that shrink earnings per share quickly will rapidly decrease the ‘E’ in the equation. That means even if the current P/E is low, it will increase over time if the share price stays flat. Then, a higher P/E might scare off shareholders, pushing the share price down.
Most would be impressed by Dwarikesh Sugar Industries earnings growth of 15% in the last year. Unfortunately, earnings per share are down 27% a year, over 3 years.
It’s important to note that the P/E ratio considers the market capitalization, not the enterprise value. Thus, the metric does not reflect cash or debt held by the company. Hypothetically, a company could reduce its future P/E ratio by spending its cash (or taking on debt) to achieve higher earnings.
Such expenditure might be good or bad, in the long term, but the point here is that the balance sheet is not reflected by this ratio.
Is Debt Impacting Dwarikesh Sugar Industries’s P/E?
Net debt totals a substantial 121% of Dwarikesh Sugar Industries’s market cap. If you want to compare its P/E ratio to other companies, you must keep in mind that these debt levels would usually warrant a relatively low P/E.
Dwarikesh Sugar Industries’s P/E is 5.2 which is below average (9.7) in the IN market. The company may have significant debt, but EPS growth was good last year. The low P/E ratio suggests current market expectations are muted, implying these levels of growth will not continue. Given Dwarikesh Sugar Industries’s P/E ratio has declined from 10.8 to 5.2 in the last month, we know for sure that the market is more worried about the business today, than it was back then. For those who prefer to invest with the flow of momentum, that might be a bad sign, but for deep value investors this stock might justify some research.
Investors should be looking to buy stocks that the market is wrong about. As value investor Benjamin Graham famously said, ‘In the short run, the market is a voting machine but in the long run, it is a weighing machine. Although we don’t have analyst forecasts shareholders might want to examine this detailed historical graph of earnings, revenue and cash flow.
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking at a few good candidates. So take a peek at this free list of companies with modest (or no) debt, trading on a P/E below 20.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
