How Does Dhampur Sugar Mills’s (NSE:DHAMPURSUG) P/E Compare To Its Industry, After Its Big Share Price Gain?
Simply Wall St April 25, 2020
Those holding Dhampur Sugar Mills ( NSE:DHAMPURSUG ) shares must be pleased that the share price has rebounded 46% in the last thirty days. But unfortunately, the stock is still down by 54% over a quarter. But that will do little to salve the savage burn caused by the 56% share price decline, over the last year.
All else being equal, a sharp share price increase should make a stock less attractive to potential investors. While the market sentiment towards a stock is very changeable, in the long run, the share price will tend to move in the same direction as earnings per share. So some would prefer to hold off buying when there is a lot of optimism towards a stock. Perhaps the simplest way to get a read on investors’ expectations of a business is to look at its Price to Earnings Ratio (PE Ratio). Investors have optimistic expectations of companies with higher P/E ratios, compared to companies with lower P/E ratios.
How Does Dhampur Sugar Mills’s P/E Ratio Compare To Its Peers?
Dhampur Sugar Mills’s P/E of 3.06 indicates relatively low sentiment towards the stock. If you look at the image below, you can see Dhampur Sugar Mills has a lower P/E than the average (11.7) in the food industry classification.
Dhampur Sugar Mills’s P/E tells us that market participants think it will not fare as well as its peers in the same industry. Since the market seems unimpressed with Dhampur Sugar Mills, it’s quite possible it could surprise on the upside. You should delve deeper. I like to check if company insiders have been buying or selling .
When earnings fall, the ‘E’ decreases, over time. That means unless the share price falls, the P/E will increase in a few years. So while a stock may look cheap based on past earnings, it could be expensive based on future earnings.
Dhampur Sugar Mills’s earnings made like a rocket, taking off 81% last year. Unfortunately, earnings per share are down 3.8% a year, over 3 years.
It’s important to note that the P/E ratio considers the market capitalization, not the enterprise value. In other words, it does not consider any debt or cash that the company may have on the balance sheet. Theoretically, a business can improve its earnings (and produce a lower P/E in the future) by investing in growth. That means taking on debt (or spending its cash).
Such expenditure might be good or bad, in the long term, but the point here is that the balance sheet is not reflected by this ratio.
So What Does Dhampur Sugar Mills’s Balance Sheet Tell Us?
Net debt totals a substantial 235% of Dhampur Sugar Mills’s market cap. If you want to compare its P/E ratio to other companies, you must keep in mind that these debt levels would usually warrant a relatively low P/E.
Dhampur Sugar Mills has a P/E of 3.1. That’s below the average in the IN market, which is 10.3. The company has a meaningful amount of debt on the balance sheet, but that should not eclipse the solid earnings growth. The low P/E ratio suggests current market expectations are muted, implying these levels of growth will not continue. What is very clear is that the market has become less pessimistic about Dhampur Sugar Mills over the last month, with the P/E ratio rising from 2.1 back then to 3.1 today. For those who like to invest in turnarounds, that might mean it’s time to put the stock on a watchlist, or research it. But others might consider the opportunity to have passed.
Investors should be looking to buy stocks that the market is wrong about. As value investor Benjamin Graham famously said, ‘In the short run, the market is a voting machine but in the long run, it is a weighing machine. So this free report on the analyst consensus forecasts could help you make a master move on this stock.
You might be able to find a better buy than Dhampur Sugar Mills. If you want a selection of possible winners, check out this free list of interesting companies that trade on a P/E below 20 (but have proven they can grow earnings).
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
