The Rangarajan committee recommendations on sugar reforms have been put into cold storage. Yet, the industry has managed to break out from the infamous surplus-shortage cycle
Last Updated at March 25, 2020 23:16 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
The president of Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA) Vivek M Pittie claims on the basis of empirical evidences of recent years that this country, which in the last two seasons overtook Brazil to emerge as the world’s largest producer of the sweetener, has ceased to be visited by the “infamous cycle” in the commodity.
The phenomenon of the past when “three to four years of surplus production would be followed by two to three years of shortfall in output,” as Pittie points out, would see India alternating as an exporter in times of abundance of supply and an ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
