The negative effects of sugar on the body, from obesity to tooth decay, are well-known. Recent medical research is also showing stronger links between sugar consumption and symptoms of depression and anxiety.
Because sugary foods are widespread and popular, understanding this connection is important to maintaining good mental health.
Keep reading to learn more about the links between sugar and depression, including the latest research on how sugar can affect mood and emotion and how a person can control their sugar intake.
Reducing sugar consumption may help control the symptoms of depression and anxiety.
Although added sugar can lead to an imbalance of insulin and blood sugar, refined carbohydrates and sugars also drain the B vitamins required to sustain a positive mood.
This can also affect a person’s thyroid, with thyroid hormones regulating body temperature, metabolism, and growth. These factors may all impact a person’s mindset.
Sugar is a carbohydrate molecule, and there are two types.
The first is called simple sugar, and it is present in fruits, vegetables, nuts, whole grains, and beans. Because these foods contain vitamins, proteins, and fiber, they slow down sugar absorption and make it a healthful option.
The second is added, or processed, sugar, which has no nutritional value. Added sugar is present in candy bars and soft drinks, among other foods and beverages. The body does not absorb this kind of sugar, so the sugar goes straight into the system.
Although research is ongoing, people with a very high sugar intake are more likely to experience symptoms of depression.
Glucose, or blood sugar, is the simplest of the carbohydrates. It is also essential for human survival. Glucose acts as the primary source of energy for every cell in the body, and the brain depends on it. An even supply of glucose keeps the brain functioning in a balanced way.
However, consuming too much added sugar may lead to increased irritability and peaks and drops in energy levels. Although the initial intake of sugar may feel positive, it will cause blood glucose levels to drop. It is this that affects the mind and body so dramatically.
For some people, however, sugar can be incredibly addictive. When a person consumes sugar, the mesolimbic dopamine system in the brain offers a reward, thereby increasing mood. The dopamine system starts working when feelings of pleasure approach.
Because these are added sugars, however, they are not beneficial to the body in any way. A high intake of these will mean chemical changes in the body. These occur to prevent overstimulation, so the body may crave more sugar on future occasions to achieve the same high mood.
The connection between diabetes and depression provides an illustration of the glucose effect on depression. According to Diabetes UK , people with diabetes are twice as likely to experience symptoms of depression.
Eating regularly is vital for some people with diabetes. However, it is important that they choose food options that will balance their sugar levels and release energy slowly.
High blood sugar levels can make people with diabetes feel:
