News, views and top stories in your inbox. Don't miss our must-read newsletter
When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
If there was a magic pill that guaranteed you’d have more energy, better moods, sounder sleep and glowing skin, chances are you’d take it.
But the truth is, there is one simple change you could make to your life that would give you those results – quitting sugar.
And this simple plan will tell you how to do it in just 14 days.
You will be relieved to hear this is not another diet, but an enjoyable and sustainable guide to healthy eating.
It will help you reduce your sugar intake over two weeks so that you can get back in control.
Dentist James Goolnik has teamed up with chef Giancarlo Caldesi, nutritionist Jenny Phillips and dietitian Clare Gray to produce this easy-to-follow plan, packed with helpful tips and delicious recipes.
“My team and I are going to help you understand your relationship with sugar and how to break free of it,” says James.
Why is sugar so bad for you?
There are two main concerns about the amount of added sugars in our foods.
First, there is the “crowding out” issue, where sweet foods replace more nutritious foods as a source of calories.
Once you develop a taste for sugar, it may discourage you from eating other foods that don’t give you the same intensely sweet hit.
Second, sweet foods are high in calories and it’s extremely easy to over-indulge, fuelling a calorie excess which is apparent not only in our growing waistlines but also in the rise of diet-related diseases including heart disease, high blood pressure , Type 2 diabetes, stroke and some cancers.
Both the World Health Organisation and Public Health England have recently lowered recommended sugar intake levels, stating that added sugars should be kept below 5% of our total calories.
This doesn’t mean that you can’t enjoy the odd treat on special occasions and holidays if you are otherwise healthy.
But eating sweet foods every day will likely be a disaster for your long-term health.
This plan is simple – for the next two weeks, eat from the list of allowed foods to the right, and avoid the foods on the ‘no’ list.
Aim for three normal-sized meals a day and don’t snack in between.
Make sure you plan your meals in advance so you’re not tempted to eat something else at the last minute.
You can make this easier by cooking food in batches that can be eaten throughout the week.
If you’re busy working all day, make your lunch the night before so you can grab it from the fridge when you want it.
And before you start, stock up on Tupperware boxes and zip-lock bags to store food in.
Meat; seafood; eggs; full-fat dairy products; beans, lentils and pulses; all vegetables; two portions of fruit each day; nuts and seeds including nut butters; herbs and spices; three servings of wholegrains each week, for example brown rice, wholewheat pasta or wholemeal bread; tea and coffee; unsweetened sparkling water
Anything with more than 5g sugar per 100g; cake, ice cream, biscuits and sweets; ready meals and processed foods; alcohol; low-fat dairy; breakfast cereals; sweeteners; condiments such as ketchup; carbonated drinks; fruit juice; sports or energy drinks; vegetable oils such as rapeseed, sunflower or peanut oils; refined grains including white rice, bread, flour and pasta.
Here are some suggested meal ideas, but you can also make up your own recipes, using any foods from the allowed list.
And if you’re looking for inspiration, you’ll find exclusive low-sugar recipes to try in tomorrow’s paper.
Breakfast: Poached egg with smoked salmon and asparagus OR pan-fried halloumi, tomatoes and mushrooms with avocado.
Lunch: Butternut squash and lentil soup OR baked sweet potato with tinned tuna mixed with Greek yoghurt.
