How Does Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s (NSE:DALMIASUG) P/E Compare To Its Industry, After Its Big Share Price Gain?
Simply Wall St January 16, 2020
The Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries ( NSE:DALMIASUG ) share price has done well in the last month, posting a gain of 49%. The full year gain of 19% is pretty reasonable, too.
All else being equal, a sharp share price increase should make a stock less attractive to potential investors. While the market sentiment towards a stock is very changeable, in the long run, the share price will tend to move in the same direction as earnings per share. So some would prefer to hold off buying when there is a lot of optimism towards a stock. One way to gauge market expectations of a stock is to look at its Price to Earnings Ratio (PE Ratio). A high P/E ratio means that investors have a high expectation about future growth, while a low P/E ratio means they have low expectations about future growth.
How Does Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s P/E Ratio Compare To Its Peers?
We can tell from its P/E ratio of 5.36 that sentiment around Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries isn’t particularly high. If you look at the image below, you can see Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries has a lower P/E than the average (14.0) in the food industry classification.
NSEI:DALMIASUG Price Estimation Relative to Market, January 16th 2020
Its relatively low P/E ratio indicates that Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries shareholders think it will struggle to do as well as other companies in its industry classification. Many investors like to buy stocks when the market is pessimistic about their prospects. It is arguably worth checking if insiders are buying shares , because that might imply they believe the stock is undervalued.
Generally speaking the rate of earnings growth has a profound impact on a company’s P/E multiple. That’s because companies that grow earnings per share quickly will rapidly increase the ‘E’ in the equation. That means even if the current P/E is high, it will reduce over time if the share price stays flat. And as that P/E ratio drops, the company will look cheap, unless its share price increases.
Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries increased earnings per share by a whopping 26% last year. And earnings per share have improved by 163% annually, over the last five years. I’d therefore be a little surprised if its P/E ratio was not relatively high.
It’s important to note that the P/E ratio considers the market capitalization, not the enterprise value. Thus, the metric does not reflect cash or debt held by the company. Hypothetically, a company could reduce its future P/E ratio by spending its cash (or taking on debt) to achieve higher earnings.
Such expenditure might be good or bad, in the long term, but the point here is that the balance sheet is not reflected by this ratio.
How Does Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s Debt Impact Its P/E Ratio?
Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries has net debt equal to 48% of its market cap. You’d want to be aware of this fact, but it doesn’t bother us.
Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries has a P/E of 5.4. That’s below the average in the IN market, which is 13.8. The company does have a little debt, and EPS growth was good last year. The low P/E ratio suggests current market expectations are muted, implying these levels of growth will not continue. What is very clear is that the market has become less pessimistic about Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries over the last month, with the P/E ratio rising from 3.6 back then to 5.4 today. If you like to buy stocks that could be turnaround opportunities, then this one might be a candidate; but if you’re more sensitive to price, then you may feel the opportunity has passed.
Investors should be looking to buy stocks that the market is wrong about. If the reality for a company is not as bad as the P/E ratio indicates, then the share price should increase as the market realizes this. So this free report on the analyst consensus forecasts could help you make a master move on this stock.
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking at a few good candidates. So take a peek at this free list of companies with modest (or no) debt, trading on a P/E below 20.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
