How to get rid of visceral fat: Foods to help burn the belly fat
Metabolism researcher, Dr James Brown from Aston University carried out an experiment to investigate if apple cider vinegar made changes in a person’s blood sugar levels compared to malt vinegar.
The experiment involved volunteers fasting for a certain period and then consuming two bagels the next day followed by either a drink with dilute apple cider vinegar or with malt vinegar.
The volunteers' blood sugar levels were measured before and after the experiment.
The experiment found that the apple cider vinegar group witnessed a 36 percent reduction in overall sugar intake into their blood after a meal with no significant change in the malt vinegar group.
How to live longer: Apple cider vinegar reduces risk of heart disease and boosts life expectancy (Image: Getty Images)
Best supplements for weight loss: A supplement to help
Apple cider vinegar is also known to help prevent heart disease.
In a study with the National Library of Medicine, dietary acetic acid and how it affects cholesterol and triacylglycerols in rats was investigated.
The study noted: “To investigate the efficacy of the intake of vinegar for prevention of hyperlipidaemia, we examined the effect of dietary acetic acid, the main component of vinegar, on serum lipid values in rats fed a diet containing cholesterol.
“Compared with the cholesterol-fed group, the cholesterol and acetic acid-fed group had significantly lower values for serum total cholesterol and triacylglycerols.”
The study concluded that apple cider vinegar helped lower cholesterol and triglyceride levels, as well as several other heart disease risk factors.
How to live longer: Apple cider vinegar helps to control blood sugar levels (Image: Getty Images)
Experts have not set safe or recommended amounts of apple cider vinegar for its various health uses.
Medical News Today advised: “People should talk to a doctor first before using apple cider vinegar to treat a medical condition or for when using it in large quantities.
“The safest way to consume apple cider vinegar is to use it in small amounts in food and dressings.
