There are various things you can do to lower your sugar intake and get on the path to cutting unhealthy sugars out altogether:
Assess what you eat on a daily basis. Take a look at what you normally eat. Read the labels and check for the ingredients mentioned above. You might be very surprised at just how much sugar is in certain items, or surprised to find sugar in the ingredient list at all in something you didn't think was necessarily sweet.
Start with small changes. Don't try to quit sugar cold turkey. This might make sugar cravings and withdrawals worse. Starting small will make it easier for you to stick with the changes you're making and form new habits.
Don't spring for artificial sweeteners. Sugar-free doesn't always mean healthy. Many sugar-free snacks or beverages are sweetened with artificial sweeteners like aspartame or stevia extracts, which aren't necessarily good for you. In fact, switching to these chemically sweetened drinks can backfire on you. "Because our brain tastes sweet and perceives the sweet taste when we're having artificial sweetener metabolically, our body acts like we're metabolizing sugar, so you may crave more sweets if you have that," says Gandhi.
Give yourself a "budget". Gandhi says she often gives patients a "sugar budget" so they can know exactly how much sugar they should be consuming. "I might say, you can have a hundred calories of sugar per day to get started, and that may be enough to let them have a square of dark chocolate or one small cookie," says Gandhi. Once you've gotten the hang of that, you can even move on to work with a smaller sugar budget.
Use behavioral strategies. Create new habits that'll deflect you from eating sugary foods. For example, if you're prone to snacking on sweets at night, Gandhi recommends brushing your teeth and flossing after dinner, turning the lights in the kitchen off, anything that helps derail "the path to the pantry."
Find your new favorite substitutes. There's plenty of food and drinks that are delicious and not loaded with added sugar. You might try trading your sweet drinks for flavored herbal teas, and your usual dessert for some fruit salad. Play around and try new options until you find what you like the most – something you'll be happy to eat.
If you normally consume a lot of sugar and are cutting down, you'll likely experience cravings and even withdrawal symptoms. "You really can get a lot of pleasure from sugar. When cutting it out, you can hear people say they have 'the carb flu' or just feeling really lousy," says Gandhi. Withdrawal symptoms may only last a couple of days for some, but it's possible to last up to a couple of weeks.
Finding a healthy replacement is very helpful for fighting through these cravings, so you're not just cutting something out of your diet, you're substituting it with something new. For example, if soda is one of your main vices, you can try having a seltzer instead when the craving hits you.
