Eating my second bagel of the day.
I tracked my food for a week to see if there were any foods hiding surprising amounts of sugar.
While I expected some snacks like processed protein bars to be high in added sugar, I had no idea just how much was hiding in my home-cooked meals.
I ended the week shocked to find the seasoning I use religiously was full of sugar, and that my beloved honey-roasted carrot recipe had the same amount of sugar as a Hershey's chocolate bar .
Visit Insider's homepage for more stories.
I think I generally eat well. I cook most of my meals and stick to as many simple, affordable, and fresh ingredients as I can find.
But I decided to track my sugar for a couple of reasons. I wanted to understand my total sugar intake and find exactly where sugar was hiding, especially in my home-cooked meals. I also wanted to better understand my sugar cravings to see if there were any bad snacking habits I had to break.
Of course, there are different types of sugar. While natural sugar and added sugar are still both sugar , when you eat natural sugar in fruits and vegetables, you're also consuming other minerals, vitamins, and nutrients. You're also consuming fiber, which allows your body to digest sugar slower so you don't crash . On the other hand, added sugar can lead to crashes in energy , and eating too much of it can lead to negative health effects . I wanted to take a look at all of my sources of sugar to understand where they were coming from.
I used MyFitnessPal to clock the amount of sugar in each ingredient or food religiously, but unfortunately the app did not separate natural from added sugar so I did that manually. In the end, I was shocked to realize that some of my go-to recipes were harboring huge amounts of sugar.
Keep reading to find out the sneaky foods that were loaded with sugar.
Monday: Breakfast was two pieces of avocado toast.
The Insider kitchens are fully stocked with snacks, including avocados, so I started my week off with some avocado toast. I ate two slices of wheat bread from Trader Joe's and about three-quarters of an avocado.
Monday: Lunch was a home-cooked meal covered in my go-to seasoning.
I try to pack my lunch most days because I really enjoy cooking, plus, it saves me money. I kept things simple today with a meatless sausage from Trader Joe's, roasted asparagus, and brown rice.
You'll soon realize that I coat almost everything I cook in one seasoning: Eat Barbecue Zero to Hero Sweet Rub . It's a sweet and spicy combination that I swear by, usually mindlessly shaking it on everything. Once I started tracking my sugar, I quickly realized that it is loaded with added sugar. No wonder I am addicted.
Olive oil and brown rice: 0g sugar
Monday: My first snack of the day was a single clementine.
I grabbed a clementine from the office kitchen as a quick pick-me-up. Of course, it was packed with natural sugar.
Monday: When I got home, I had a second snack: homemade olive oil cake.
My roommate had made a delicious olive oil cake this past weekend, and I couldn't resist having a slice while waiting for my dinner to cook.
Monday: Dinner was more veggies ... but with a lot of added sugar.
For dinner, I sauteed some onions, kale, and then threw in my extra brown rice. This time I stayed away from the barbecue rub, instead opting for a sweet chili sauce and some plain hummus. Once, I clocked the sauce, I realized I had made an even sugary choice.
Monday: I had one final sweet treat at the end of the day.
I have a huge sweet tooth and usually need to end the night with a little dessert. This time, I opted for a small piece of Hershey's dark chocolate.
Monday summary: I was surprised to see I'd managed to consume more sugar than I expected in what I thought was a relatively healthy day.
Total sugar for the day.
According to MyFitnessPal, my maximum sugar intake for the day should be around 68 grams, which I did not reach, but it's important to note that this number is a combination of added and natural sugars.
When it comes to just added sugar, the American Heart Association recommends women should eat no more than an average of 25 grams a day.
Reflecting on my first day of tracking my sugar, I was surprised by just how much sugar I still managed to consume in what I thought to be a relatively healthy day.
By far the most surprising culprit was the sweet chili sauce from Trader Joe's. I couldn't believe how much sugar I was drizzling on my food mindlessly, turning a very healthy veggie stir-fry into a sugar-filled dish.
At 4.8 grams of sugar, 12 spears of asparagus also added more (albeit natural) sugar to my day than I expected.
Tuesday: I had two types of toast toppings for breakfast.
Avocado and peanut butter toast.
I decided to fuel my day with some more toast. This time, I used up the rest of my leftover avocado on one slice and some unsalted peanut butter on the other.
