Blicker has an outperform rating and 430 price target on DXCM stock.
Shares of DXCM stock surged 7.7% on June 15, the day Abbott's Freestyle Libre 2 gained the FDA's blessing. Abbott stock ended the regular session with a fractional boost.
Tracking glucose is especially important for diabetic patients whose bodies don't properly regulate that type of blood sugar. Dexcom's body-worn glucose monitor can be integrated with automated insulin pumps. These pumps respond with insulin to help control glucose levels.
But it could take a year for Tandem and Insulet to integrate Abbott's new glucose monitor with their automated insulin pumps, Piper Sandler analyst Matt O'Brien said in a report to clients. Then, these integrated systems may need FDA clearance, he said.
"When everything is considered, we still remain positive on Dexcom's competitive positioning given the more accurate sensor and ability to integrate with AID (automated insulin delivery) systems," he said.
O'Brien reiterated his overweight rating and 450 price target on DXCM stock.
Dexcom's devices allow patients to focus on their lives, rather than their diabetes, the company said in its emailed statement.
"The strength of our strategic plan for the future will help us continue our positive trajectory," Dexcom said. "As we execute this plan, we'll leave the investors to determine the value of our company."
DXCM stock is forming a cup-with-handle base and a buy point at 415.59. In afternoon trading on the stock market today , shares rose 1.8% to 407.35. (Related: Keep tabs on chart patterns by visiting IBD's MarketSmith.com .)
Analysts also have bullish expectations for Dexcom's second quarter. The diabetes devices company is slated to report its earnings after the stock market closes on July 28.
Then, analysts polled by Zacks Investment Research call for Dexcom to earn 28 cents per share, minus some items, on $405 million in sales. Earnings would skyrocket 250%. Analysts see 20.4% sales growth.
It's also important to note that DXCM stock leads its industry group with a nearly perfect Composite Rating of 98, according to IBD Digital . This Composite Rating puts DXCM stock in the top 2% of all stocks in terms of key fundamental and technical growth metrics.
Shares also have a strong Relative Strength Rating of 97 out of a best-possible 99. The RS Rating is a 1-99 measure of a stock's 12-month performance. So, DXCM stock ranks in the top 3% of all stocks on that metric.
