If You Invested $1,000 in Dexcom's IPO, This Is How Much Money You'd Have Now
Even small investments can have a big payoff down the road.
Taylor Carmichael is a former attorney and filmmaker. He's the author of a line of murder mysteries, including Whodidit in the Supreme Court? and Whodidit With a Senator? The majority of what he knows about stocks he learned right here at the Motley Fool.
Dexcom ( NASDAQ:DXCM ) went public on April 14, 2005. The stock opened at $12.08 a share. At that price, an investment of $1,000 would have gotten you 82 shares.
That investment would have been a leap of faith, as the company had no revenues at that point. But in a year, Dexcom would release its first commercial product, the STS Continuous Glucose Monitoring System. It consisted of a tiny device inserted under the skin of a diabetes patient. Dexcom's system provided real-time glucose measurements, alerting the user if their blood sugar levels were too high or too low.
The stock went up -- and then way, way down
At first, the stock market reacted favorably to the introduction of Dexcom's first commercial product. By 2006, an IPO investor would have doubled their money. In a little over a year, that $1,000 investment would be worth over $2,000, as the share price hit $25 a share in May. Unfortunately, the stock crashed at that point. It fell back under the IPO price later that year, hitting $9 a share in October.
In 2007, the stock stayed under the IPO price all year, so early investors were still underwater. In 2008, the entire stock market crashed , sending Dexcom shares down to penny stock territory. The share price dropped all the way to $1.42.
What could you do? Of course, as a stock investor, there are only three things you can do: buy, sell, or hold.
If you admitted defeat, you would have sold your shares and taken your losses. Dexcom would have been a horrible investment for you.
What if you bought more? You might've realized that the stock market crash of 2008 had little to do with diabetes. Maybe you were a user of Dexcom's device and loved the product. Perhaps you saw this market panic as an opportunity, and you invested another $1,000 in the company, picking up another 704 shares. So, if you were a crazy optimist, you held 786 shares of Dexcom, the penny stock .
What if you didn't want to admit defeat, but you weren't feeling optimistic, either? After three years of investing in Dexcom, you'd lost almost 90% of your money. Your IPO investment in Dexcom would now be worth $116.44. Maybe at this point, you just shrug and do nothing.
