Simply Wall St March 18, 2020
These days it’s easy to simply buy an index fund, and your returns should (roughly) match the market. But in any given year a good portion of stocks will fall short of that. The Rogers Sugar Inc. ( TSE:RSI ) is such an example; over three years its share price is down 31% versus a market return of -16%. And over the last year the share price fell 30%, so we doubt many shareholders are delighted. More recently, the share price has dropped a further 21% in a month. But this could be related to poor market conditions — stocks are down 30% in the same time.
To quote Buffett, ‘Ships will sail around the world but the Flat Earth Society will flourish. There will continue to be wide discrepancies between price and value in the marketplace…’ One way to examine how market sentiment has changed over time is to look at the interaction between a company’s share price and its earnings per share (EPS).
Over the three years that the share price declined, Rogers Sugar’s earnings per share (EPS) dropped significantly, falling to a loss. This was, in part, due to extraordinary items impacting earnings. Due to the loss, it’s not easy to use EPS as a reliable guide to the business. But it’s safe to say we’d generally expect the share price to be lower as a result!
TSX:RSI Past and Future Earnings, March 17th 2020
It’s probably worth noting we’ve seen significant insider buying in the last quarter, which we consider a positive. That said, we think earnings and revenue growth trends are even more important factors to consider. This free interactive report on Rogers Sugar’s earnings, revenue and cash flow is a great place to start, if you want to investigate the stock further.
It is important to consider the total shareholder return, as well as the share price return, for any given stock. Whereas the share price return only reflects the change in the share price, the TSR includes the value of dividends (assuming they were reinvested) and the benefit of any discounted capital raising or spin-off. It’s fair to say that the TSR gives a more complete picture for stocks that pay a dividend. In the case of Rogers Sugar, it has a TSR of -17% for the last 3 years. That exceeds its share price return that we previously mentioned. This is largely a result of its dividend payments!
Rogers Sugar shareholders are down 25% over twelve months (even including dividends) , which isn’t far from the market return of -25%. The silver lining is that longer term investors would have made a total return of 5.1% per year over half a decade. If the stock price has been impacted by changing sentiment, rather than deteriorating business conditions, it could spell opportunity. I find it very interesting to look at share price over the long term as a proxy for business performance. But to truly gain insight, we need to consider other information, too. Consider for instance, the ever-present spectre of investment risk. We’ve identified 4 warning signs with Rogers Sugar (at least 2 which don’t sit too well with us) , and understanding them should be part of your investment process.
Rogers Sugar is not the only stock insiders are buying. So take a peek at this free list of growing companies with insider buying.
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on CA exchanges.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
