Is Fruit Juice as Unhealthy as Sugary Soda?
Fruit juice is generally perceived as healthy and far superior to sugary soda.
Many health organizations have issued official statements encouraging people to reduce their intake of sugary drinks, and several countries have gone as far as implementing a tax on sugary soda (
Yet, some people suggest that juice isn’t as healthy as it’s made out to be and just as detrimental to your health as sugary soda.
This article examines the latest scientific evidence to compare fruit juice and soda.
One of the main reasons some people consider fruit juice as unhealthy as sugary soda is the sugar content of these beverages.
Research consistently shows a link between sugary drinks and a higher risk of illness, such as type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome, high blood pressure, and heart disease, as well as a higher risk of premature death (
Due to their similar sugar contents, some people have started grouping juices and soda together, suggesting that they should be avoided to an equal extent. However, soda and juice are unlikely to affect your health in the same ways (
For instance, soda tends to increase your risk of disease in a dose-dependent manner. This means that the more soda you drink, the higher your risk of disease — even if you only drink small amounts.
On the other hand, drinking small amounts of juice — specifically less than 5 ounces (150 ml) per day — may lower your risk of conditions like type 2 diabetes and heart disease. Only higher intakes appear to be detrimental to your health (
That said, the health benefits of juice only apply to 100% fruit juice — not to sugar-sweetened fruit beverages.
Fruit juice and soda contain similar amounts of sugar. Still, soda is likely harmful to your health, regardless of the amount you consume, whereas fruit juice may only increase your risk of disease when drunk in large amounts.
That’s because both are rich in calories yet low in fiber, a nutrient that helps reduce hunger and promote feelings of fullness (
