With 22k square feet over three floors, the retailer will join legacy luxury brands in the American Dream development currently under construction outside of New York City.
“We’ve all heard the expression ‘like a kid in a candy store,’ but this larger-than-life candy experience will exceed all expectations for those who are young and young at heart,”​ said American Dream CEO Don Ghermezian. “This entirely new concept will be a must-see, must-visit and must-taste for all looking to satisfy their sweet tooth.”​
Upon entering the tri-level IT’SUGAR space, visitors will be greeted by a 60-foot replica of the Statue of Liberty built out of candy.
“This concept has been a dream of mine for over 25 years and our IT’SUGAR team is thrilled to partner with American Dream to finally make it a reality,”​ said founder and CEO Jeff Rubin.
Though quiet on specifics, he confirmed the store would feature more than 10k candy choices from brands like Mondelez’s Sour Patch Kids and Oreo, Hershey’s Reese’s, Ferrara’s Nerds, Mars Wrigley’s Starburst, plus Peeps and Pez, among countless others.
Rubin opened his first ‘immersive’ candy store in 2006, now leading more than 100 storefronts and 1k employees across the US. In May, IT’SUGAR debuted a flagship location on the Las Vegas strip ​​, though the American Dream store will be nearly four times larger.
More than a typical mall stacked with apparel chains, just over half of American Dream’s 3m square feet will contain dining and entertainment concepts – replete with indoor ski slopes, a National Hockey League-sized ice rink, an aquarium and 300-foot observation (Ferris) wheel. It will also house a Legoland Discovery Center, a performing arts theater, and a food hall curated by Munchies, the food vertical of Vice News Network.
Triple Five Group, the team behind the Mall of America and West Edmonton Mall – North America’s largest such centers – announced American Dream more than a decade ago, but developers ran into zoning delays and other problems. With workers reportedly testing theme-park rides ​​ and retailers posting job listings, it will finally open in October, according to the company.
The firm expects 40m annual visitors to its more than 450 stores and restaurants.
Retailers lean toward luxury brands such as Gucci and Louis Vuitton (through Saks Fifth Avenue), Barney's New York, Tiffany & Co and Dolce & Gabbana. According to the developers, the world's three largest retailers – Zara, H&M and Uniqlo – will also open stores.
Visitors will experience this series of retail stores intermingled with an aviary, a lighted tree structure from artist Albero dei Sogni, and various nooks filled with rotating installations and activations.
"For over 35 years, Triple Five Group has embraced the concept that retail cannot exist without entertainment and experiential elements, and American Dream will further raise the bar,”​ said Ghermezian. “Guests will experience something completely unique each time they visit—this project will be the realization of their wildest dreams.”​
