However, PTI former secretary general rubbishes report saying he was never chairman of any task force. PHOTO: EXPRESS
Prime Minister Imran Khan's close aide and the ruling PTI's former secretary general Jahangir Khan Tareen has been "removed" as  chairman of task force on agriculture after he was named in a high-profile inquiry report of sugar crisis as one of the main beneficiary.
"Mr Jahangir Khan Tareen has been removed as Chair of Task Force on Agriculture in light of findings of Sugar and Wheat Inquiry Report," PTI leader Shahbaz Gill confirmed on his official Twitter handle on Monday.
He also hinted that further action would be taken against those found guilty for the wheat and sugar crisis.
Mr. Jahangir Khan Tareen has been removed as Chair of Task Force on Agriculture in light of findings of Sugar and Wheat Inquiry Report. Any further action may be taken after final findings of the Inquiry Committee
— Dr. Shahbaz GiLL (@SHABAZGIL) April 6, 2020
However, Tareen has rejected the reports of his removal, saying he was never the chairman of any task force.
"Hello hello, News bring reported that I have been “removed” as C’man Agri Task Force ....I was never chairman of any task force. Can anyone show me a notification with me as C’man ?? Pl get your facts right people," he said in a tweet from his official handle.
— Jahangir Khan Tareen (@JahangirKTareen) April 6, 2020
"The sugar inquiry commission has been actively engaging with about 10 mills, including 3 of mine. We are sharing all records asked for. We have given free access even to our server. Nothing has been seized as we are fulfilling all requests We have nothing to hide," he also said in a follow-up tweet.
The sugar inquiry commission has been actively engaging with about 10 mills, including 3 of mine . We are sharing all records asked for. We have given free access even to our server. Nothing has been seized as we are fulfilling all requests
— Jahangir Khan Tareen (@JahangirKTareen) April 6, 2020
The development comes a day after PM Imran pledged not to spare those found guilty of creating and profiteering off the sugar and wheat crises once he received the detailed forensic reports of an FIA-led commission’s preliminary findings on April 25.
The high-powered inquiry body in its 32-page report last week termed the PTI government’s decision to allow the export of sugar unjustified as it had caused a 30% increase in its price.
The committee report had revealed that Tareen, the PTI stalwart, and then Federal Minister for National Food Security Makhdoom Khusro Bakhtiar were among the main beneficiaries.
Both went away with Rs1.03 billion subsidy on the export of sugar, paid out from the taxpayers money, which was equal to 41% of the total subsidy the government of Punjab paid to sugar barons, according to the report.
