To make the cookies: In a stand mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, cream the butter and granulated sugar on medium-high speed until light and fluffy, 3 to 4 minutes. Add the egg and vanilla and beat on medium-high until well incorporated, about 30 seconds.
On low speed, slowly add the flour mixture to the butter mixture. Mix until all the ingredients come together; a dough should be forming on the paddle and not sticking to the sides of your bowl.
Place the dough between 2 sheets of parchment paper and roll to about a ¼-inch thickness. Remove the top parchment sheet and use a 2-inch fluted round cookie cutter to cut out as many cookies as possible, leaving them in place. Gently peel off as much of the excess dough from between the cutout cookies as you can.
Carefully transfer the cut dough on the parchment from the work table to a baking sheet by gently sliding the parchment onto the baking sheet. Refrigerate for at least 30 minutes. This will firm up the dough and help you remove any remaining excess dough. Reroll the dough scraps and cut out more cookies.
Meanwhile, preheat the oven to 350°F.
Bake one baking sheet at a time until the edges of the cookies are slightly golden, 10 to 12 minutes, rotating the baking sheet front to back halfway through the baking time. Transfer the cookies to a wire rack to cool completely before glazing, about 30 minutes.
To make the glaze: In a medium bowl, whisk together the powdered sugar, ½ cup of the cream, and the vanilla. Mix in the remaining cream 1 tablespoon at a time until the glaze is the consistency of glue. (Drizzle a spoonful of the glaze back into the bowl and it should hold a ribbon for about 10 seconds before melting into itself.)
Transfer the glaze to a piping bag fitted with a small round tip or a heavy-duty zip-top bag with the corner snipped off. Pipe the glaze in a spiral on each cookie, starting in the middle and leaving a ¼-inch border around the edges. Use a toothpick to smooth the glaze, if needed. Let stand until the glaze hardens, about 1 hour.
Store in an airtight container at room temperature for up to 5 days.
Makes about 3 dozen cookies.
TIP: Letting cookies chill before baking helps maintain the perfect shape of Crew’s Cookies.
From Magnolia Table, Volume 2 by Joanna Gaines . Copyright © 2020 by Joanna Gaines. Reprinted by permission of William Morrow, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
