Kleer CBD Water announced a new sugar-free CBD Sparkling Water. The new CBD beverage includes 25mg of suspended CBD isolate. The Kleer CBD Sparkling water joins a full line of other Kleer CBD products, with Co-owners, Mark Ihrig and wife, Holly announcing the company's launch, stating,
“As the use of CBD consumables becomes more popular, we wanted to offer our customers something unique: A delicious soft drink that’s good for you. We developed KLEER CBD Water in collaboration with the leading supplier of CBD suspensions to the CBD consumables industry – SōRSE Technology, located in Seattle.”
As the world is very hip to know a days, there is no shortage of CBD-infused drinks to choose from and many more are coming to market this year and in 2021.
What Does CBD Suspension Mean?
CBD suspension technology makes it possible for the CBD in beverages to remain suspended evenly to deliver equal effects with every sip. The new Kleer CBD Sparkling Water is available in 3 flavors:
The new CBD beverage is THC free, 100% natural, with no added sugars, it doesn’t contain any GMO’s. Besides, it’s also sugar and THC-free. The quantity of hemp extract in this beverage is 25 mg and provides a mildly relaxing effect.
“The CBD in KLEER remains stable and effective for a full 12 months. It is NOT nanotechnology-based.”
The SōRSE Technology used in the making of KLEER CBD Water Drinks derives from over 150 years of product development. The emulsion technology makes for a safe, stable and homogeneous mix of integrating cannabis oils into commercially available consumer packaged goods.
How Much Does the Kleer CBD Sparkling Water Cost?
The Kleer CBD Sparkling Water is sold online, in 12 cans packs. Each can is 12 oz. The prices of the Kleer CBD sparkling water 12 pack for $55, and includes shipping, matching the price for a high-quality crafted beer. Purchases of the Kleer CBD Sparkling Water come either as a one-time purchase or consumers can get on the Kleer monthly subscription plan the company offers.
With a subscription, the customer chooses when the dates for sparkling CBD beverages should be delivered. Shipping is included in the prices. Launched back in May this year, Kleer CBD Water has a very user-friendly website at https://www.kleercbdwater.com/. Aside from the new Kleer CBD Sparkling Water, they also offer Kleer CBD Water, a Sumerian Brewing, and wine.
