Lidl is launching a campaign to raise awareness of sugar consumption and is aiming to cut the sugar content of its "own-brand" products to 20% by 2025.
Since 2017, the chain has been making small changes in the production and ingredients of its products.
The company has just released a spoon, the Lidl Spoon, which it says automatically reduces sugar consumption by 20%.
The product will be available to customers in Germany from October 10.
Visit Business Insider's homepage for more stories.
Since 2017, global discount superstore chain Lidl has stood firm on its campaign to reduce daily sugar consumption across the globe.
The chain started its initiative by reducing the sugar and salt added to the brand's own products, aiming to cut the respective content of each product to less than 20% by 2025, according to a press release from the company.
The superstore isn't stopping there — on October 10, 2019, the company will be launching a spoon it says automatically reduces your sugar consumption by 20%.
The spoon isn't magic though. As is clear from the image below, it's the shape of the spoon that cuts back your sugar intake.
And the best part? You'll hardly notice the difference.
From October 24, customers will receive it for free for purchases over $27, and in-store it can be purchased for around ¢1.
Lidl started its initiative by reducing the sugar and salt added to the brand's own products.
"For many years, Lidl has been gradually reducing the added sugar quantities in its own products. To prove that everyone can easily cut back on sugar even in everyday life, we invented the Lidl spoon. This is how we want to raise awareness and simultaneously allow enjoyment without sacrifice," said Anita Wälz, managing director of Corporate Communications and Sustainability at Lidl Germany. "It's just the same as using a normal spoon to add a spoonful of sugar to your morning coffee but it's just adding 20% less."
The goal isn't to stop users adding sugar to their food; it's simply to reduce the amount added.
According to the firm, the change is hardly perceptible in taste but, overall, will benefit users' health.
Read more: Nestlé is introducing a new chocolate KitKat bar made of white cacao pulp, with no added sugar
"20% isn't much," continued Wälz. "This is clear when you use the Lidl spoon, for example, to add sugar to hot drinks like tea or coffee, and you can barely taste the difference. We want to have a positive effect on society and encourage discussions at home, in the office kitchen, or with friends — and if the cutback effect can easily be integrated into everyday life with sugar, why not apply it to salt, fat, or oil?"
Lidl isn't just trying to reduce sugar consumption; according to its announcement, the company is also looking to reduce salt content, saturated fatty acids, and calorie content by implementing small changes into day-to-day groceries, without stopping you from eating what you enjoy.
