Lord Sugar has today announced that he has made an investment in Scarlett Allen-Horton’s recruitment business, Harper Fox Partners.
Scarlett narrowly lost out to Carina Lepore in The Apprentice final last December, but has now won the backing of Lord Sugar who has come onboard as a partner in her business. This is the fourth recruitment business in Lord Sugar’s portfolio of companies.
Harper Fox Partners offer senior leadership talent and diverse executive recruitment solutions for the UK and International engineering and manufacturing industries.
A new generation of transparent, forward-thinking search, formulated to elevate quality recruitment methods, passionate about diverse and inclusive talent attraction with a pinpoint focus in board composition, C-level, executive and director talent acquisition, leadership assessment and standalone talent advisory solutions.
A green business equipped with radical talent solutions, Harper Fox Partners are the leadership search partner of choice for the global transport engineering industries.
Lord Sugar said: “I was very impressed with Scarlett throughout The Apprentice process, and we stayed in touch afterwards. Prior to coming on The Apprentice, Scarlett held a highly successful career within the corporate world of executive recruitment, however, spotted a key gap in the market for a true quality led search firm, operating within the manufacturing & energy sectors, focusing on green technologies with a passion for attracting senior female, diverse and inclusive talent solutions.
“I already own three recruitment businesses, so understand this industry well. I liked Scarlett’s approach and her recruitment industry offer, so it made sense to me to see if Scarlett would be interested in working with me, and I’m very happy she was.”
Lord Sugar’s other recruitment businesses within the Amshold group of companies include:
Hyper Recruitment Solutions (HRS) – Founded by 2012 The Apprentice winner, Ricky Martin. The company works with clients in the science and technology sectors and takes an ethical, highly compliant approach to recruitment. The team have helped countless talented scientists to take the next step in their careers.
Right Time Recruitment – Founded by 2017 The Apprentice joint-winner, James White. The company is focussed on finding ‘careers that work’ within the IT and infrastructure sectors and has quickly established itself as a leading light in a very competitive field.
Hernshead Recruitment – Founded in 2019 by recruiter Tom Johnson. The company focuses on providing specialist skills into the Technology and Engineering sectors. Tom, together with Lord Sugar are helping the growth of technology and engineering in the UK, not just by helping recruit specialist skills, but also by providing consultative advice and support to the engineers of the future.
Share this post via Facebook, Twitter, Google Plus and LinkedIn
Did you enjoy reading this content?  To get more great content like this subscribe to our magazine
