Luckily, Gina was able to find an inpatient program in Florida that was willing to take June for free, but she decided not to tell Pumpkin and Alana immediately, so not to get their hopes up.
After two weeks, Mama June agreed to inpatient rehab, only after Gina was able to get a spot for her boyfriend Geno, but they wouldn't be allowed to see each other during the program.
Dropping out: The reality TV star ultimately quit outpatient rehab after one session, following an emotional heart-to-heart with daughter Pumpkin
On the road: Gina gave an update toward the beginning of the episode, revealing that June and Geno were living in a truck after leaving rehab
Over budget: On the way to the airport, Geno sat in the back with June, revealing to producers that they'd spent $150k on cocaine in the past six months: 'It's been rough, it really has'
On the way to the airport, Geno sat in the back with June, revealing to producers that they'd spent $150k on cocaine in the past six months: 'It's been rough, it really has.'
June appeared to be convinced that they wouldn't have fallen off the wagon the most recent time if they hadn't been offered.
She said: 'If we would not have got offered that one hit, like four to five days ago, we would still be clean. And that's true.'
Upon their arrival in Florida, one of the rehab employees picked them up, informing them that their first week would be a detox.
Mama June experienced some second thoughts when they arrived at Banyan Treatment Center, but they ultimately convinced her to go in.
After their check-in and initial evaluations, June and Geno gave each other a kiss and hug for the last time, getting teary-eyed before being separated.
Detox week: Upon their arrival in Florida, one of the rehab employees picked them up, informing them that their first week would be a detox
Second thoughts: Mama June experienced some second thoughts when they arrived at Banyan Treatment Center, but they ultimately convinced her to go in
Kiss goodbye: After their check-in and initial evaluations, June and Geno gave each other a kiss and hug for the last time, getting teary-eyed before being separated
Resting up: Staff showed her to her bedroom, telling her to get some sleep and rest as she prepares to detox
Riddled with anxiety: Mama June immediately felt overcome with anxiety, admitting she wanted to get high after only 12 hours of being clean
Staff showed her to her bedroom, telling her to get some sleep and rest as she prepares to detox.
Mama June immediately felt overcome with anxiety, admitting she wanted to get high after only 12 hours of being clean.
She admitted: 'I have been clean. I was clean for nine months. And I went back when he was still using.'
Meanwhile, Sugar Bear's wife Jennifer got lunch with her friend Janice, with whom she discussed their custody battle over Alana.
Janice told her they need a bigger place if they want custody, revealing she has a friend with a four-bedroom house up for rent.
Jennifer said in a confessional: 'If the judge does give us custody of Alana, I'll always be a better mom than June ever thought she was. And with Pumpkin, she doesn't have the experience I do of raising kids.'
Lunch date: Meanwhile, Sugar Bear's wife Jennifer got lunch with her friend Janice, with whom she discussed their custody battle over Alana
New digs: Janice told her they need a bigger place if they want custody, revealing she has a friend with a four-bedroom house up for rent
Stepmother of the year: Jennifer said in a confessional: 'If the judge does give us custody of Alana, I'll always be a better mom than June ever thought she was. And with Pumpkin, she doesn't have the experience I do of raising kids'
Addictive personality: June told her during their daily one-on-one: 'I do have an addictive personality. But when I think about a drug addict, I guess I don't think about myself'
Back in rehab, it's June's second week, and her therapist is having trouble getting her to admit that she's an addict.
June told her during their daily one-on-one: 'I do have an addictive personality. But when I think about a drug addict, I guess I don't think about myself.'
She also revealed during her session that her home life and Geno contributed to her wanting to use.
She said: 'I quit for nine months, and I didn't wanna deal with what was going on between me and him... using the cocaine just kind of glued that feeling up.'
Pumpkin still didn't know about June being in rehab, until she got a text from her while driving Alana and daughter Ella around.
She was skeptical about her mom being in rehab, which is why she called June's manager Gina to get the story.
Surprise surprise: Pumpkin still didn't know about June being in rehab, until she got a text from her while driving Alana and daughter Ella around
The whole story: She was skeptical about her mom being in rehab, which is why she called June's manager Gina to get the story
Lost hope: Pumpkin says in confessional: 'I don't have the hope I once had before, because she's let us down so many times. Mama better get her s*** together this time. Or seriously, we're done'
Hint hint: Meanwhile, Jennifer was driving around with Sugar Bear, trying to drop some not subtle hints that they should move
Jumping the gun: She revealed during her confessional that she already signed all the papers, and she just needed to tell him
Gina admitted it was true and the she didn't want to tell them just to end up disappointing them.
Pumpkin says in confessional: 'I don't have the hope I once had before, because she's let us down so many times. Mama better get her s*** together this time. Or seriously, we're done.'
Meanwhile, Jennifer was driving around with Sugar Bear, trying to drop some not subtle hints that they should move.
She revealed during her confessional that she already signed all the papers, and she just needed to tell him.
Although he was initially shocked that she made such a big decision without asking, Sugar Bear ultimately went with the flow.
Pumpkin later got a call from her mom's therapist Lauren at the rehab center in Florida, giving her some updates on June's progress.
Progress report: Pumpkin later got a call from her mom's therapist Lauren at the rehab center in Florida, giving her some updates on June's progress
Drug test: Pumpkin asked how June's drug test during check-in came back, which Lauren revealed was positive for cocaine
Family visit: While driving around with Alana, they got a call from Sugar Bear and Jennifer, asking them to come over for a surprise
Lauren revealed that she was engaging in groups, but still hadn't admitted to being an addict, which is normal.
Pumpkin asked how June's drug test during check-in came back, which Lauren revealed was positive for cocaine.
The news upset Pumpkin, as it was one of her only three rules June had to follow if she wanted to see Alana.
While driving around with Alana, they got a call from Sugar Bear and Jennifer, asking them to come over for a surprise.
Pumpkin was immediately suspicious after they sprung the custody papers on her last time.
She had her husband Josh go with them to the address that Sugar Bear and Jennifer gave them.
Welcome home: Upon their arrival, they all stood in the front yard, acting standoffish until Jennifer revealed they want Alana to live with them in their new house
Unfit parents: She accused Pumpkin and Josh of being unfit parents, after they had to live in hotels over Mama June's drama, to which they revealed they bought a house with a room for Alana
Shut up! Alana ultimately blows up at them, telling everyone to shut up: 'Y'all always making decisions on my life, and I can never make them for myself'
Shouting match: The conversation quickly turned into a shouting match, as Jennifer threatened to take them to court
Upon their arrival, they all stood in the front yard, acting standoffish until Jennifer revealed they want Alana to live with them in their new house.
She accused Pumpkin and Josh of being unfit parents, after they had to live in hotels over Mama June's drama, to which they revealed they bought a house with a room for Alana.
Jennifer also claimed Pumpkin didn't want to lose her temporary custody of Alana because she's become Ella's babysitter.
She then asked why Sugar Bear hasn't said anything, since he's Alana's father and it shouldn't be up to Jennifer.
Alana ultimately blows up at them, telling everyone to shut up: 'Y'all always making decisions on my life, and I can never make them for myself.'
Another surprise: Shortly after, Pumpkin and Alana went to visit Cousin Amber and Aunt Doe Doe, who was previously called about Mama June's storage facility going up for auction
Hidden treasures: After convincing the owner to let her go look at the space first, she called up the girls to see what she recovered
Precious memories: Pumpkin and Alana waited in anticipation, before Doe Doe popped the trunk to reveal all of Alana's pageant trophies
Group hug: The Here Comes Honey Boo Boo star was immediately brought to tears, as Pumpkin, Doe Doe and Amber gave her a group hug
Keepsakes: Alana said during a confessional: 'I'm honestly so shocked that mama kept the trophies. Now I just feel like all them memories are coming back...'
She starts crying, telling Sugar Bear: 'I appreciate you wanting to be in my life Sugar Bear, I really do. But we should just know that I wanna stay with Pumpkin, and that's the end of the conversation.'
The conversation quickly turned into a shouting match, as Jennifer threatened to take them to court.
Shortly after, Pumpkin and Alana went to visit Cousin Amber and Aunt Doe Doe, who was previously called about Mama June's storage facility going up for auction.
After convincing the owner to let her go look at the space first, she called up the girls to see what she recovered.
Pumpkin and Alana waited in anticipation, before Doe Doe popped the trunk to reveal all of Alana's pageant trophies.
The Here Comes Honey Boo Boo star was immediately brought to tears, as Pumpkin, Doe Doe and Amber gave her a group hug.
Day 30: Meanwhile, Mama June was in high spirits as she completed her 30 days in rehab: 'The old June is back. I mean I'm feeling good, just being back to my old self'
Reunited: She looked happy and healthy as she stepped out to reunite with Geno, who also completed his program
Alana said during a confessional: 'I'm honestly so shocked that mama kept the trophies. Now I just feel like all them memories are coming back... So many memories doing pageants, and they were just so fun. So, I just know there's a little bit of the old mama in her.'
It then showed a sweet video montage of happier times, during her and her mom's pageant days.
Meanwhile, Mama June was in high spirits as she completed her 30 days in rehab: 'The old June is back. I mean I'm feeling good, just being back to my old self.'
She looked happy and healthy as she stepped out to reunite with Geno, who also completed his program.
They said during a confessional: 'We made it through inpatient together, so we're just gonna make a fresh new start for us.'
New start: They said during a confessional: 'We made it through inpatient together, so we're just gonna make a fresh new start for us'
Share or comment on this article:
