MEXICO CITY (Reuters) - Mexico's government on Saturday said the U.S. Commerce Department had published a notification of its intention to keep an agreement regulating Mexican sugar exports into the United States active for another five years.
The United States in 2014 imposed hefty duties on imports of Mexican sugar after determining the country's sugar firms were dumping cheap, subsidized sugar into the U.S. market.
The two governments then reached a deal to remove duties, which established quotas and minimum prices for imports of raw and refined sugars from Mexico.
"The announcement...is a good sign for Mexican sugar exports, given that it provides certainty and maintains access to the U.S. market under preferential conditions," Mexico's economy ministry said in a statement.
In the current sugar cycle, Mexico will be able to export up to 1,421,901 metric tons to the United States, the highest amount since the 2014 agreement, the ministry added.
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read Investing.com's comments guidelines and agree to the terms described.
