Oil prices rise after sharp drop in U.S. crude inventories
Crude inventories dropped by 8.2 million barrels to 537 million barrels, against analysts' forecasts for a draw of 710,000 barrels.
U.S. crude and gasoline stocks declined more than expected last week, while distillate inventories rose, data released by the American Petroleum Institute (API) late on Tuesday showed.
TOKYO: Oil prices rose on Wednesday after an industry report showed crude inventories in the United States fell much more than expected, suggesting demand is improving even as the coronavirus outbreak spreads around the world.
Brent crude rose 33 cents, or 0.8%, to $41.60 a barrel by 0044 GMT after declining more than 1% on Tuesday. U.S. crude was up 42 cents, or 1.1%, at $39.69 a barrel, having dropped by 1.1% in the previous session.
U.S. crude and gasoline stocks declined more than expected last week, while distillate inventories rose, data released by the American Petroleum Institute (API) late on Tuesday showed.
Crude inventories dropped by 8.2 million barrels to 537 million barrels, against analysts' forecasts for a draw of 710,000 barrels.
"If the API estimates are vetted by the official government agency data due out tomorrow, this will be viewed as a definite bullish signal," said Stephen Innes, chief global markets strategist at AxiCorp.
"The reports could go a long way to easing some of those lingering inventory concerns," he said.
Inventory data from the U.S. government's Energy Information Administration is due out later on Wednesday.
Still prices are likely to be capped, analysts said, as the world is awash with oil after the coronavirus caused demand for fuel to drop by around a third.
A Reuters poll of analysts indicated that oil prices will consolidate at around $40 a barrel this year, with a recovery potentially picking up in the fourth quarter.
The virus continues to spread around the world with ever increasing rates of infection. Cases now total more than 10 million with more than half a million people dying after catching COVID-19.
How did you hear about us?
Plan to launch EV in India by 2022 but ecosystem is a must: Renault
Gasoline demand will be closely watched as the United States heads into its July 4 holiday weekend as many Americans are expected to hit the road.
Brent crude futures were down 37 cents, or 0.9%, at $42.77 a barrel as of 0042 GMT, and U.S. West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures fell 34 cents, or 0.8%, to $40.31 a barrel.
SEOUL: Crude prices fell on Friday as the resurgence of the coronavirus globally and in the United States, the world's largest oil consumer, dimmed the prospects of fuel demand recovery.
Brent crude futures were down 37 cents, or 0.9%, at $42.77 a barrel as of 0042 GMT, and U.S. West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures fell 34 cents, or 0.8%, to $40.31 a barrel.
Both benchmarks rose more than 2% on Thursday, buoyed by stronger-than-expected U.S. jobs data and a fall in U.S. crude inventories. For the week, Brent is up 4.3% and WTI is up 5.6%.
Increases in the daily cases of the coronavirus, however, globally and in the United States pressured prices. New U.S. COVID-19 cases rose by more than 50,000 on Thursday, setting a record for a third consecutive day, according to a Reuters tally.
"The market has become increasingly confident that easing restrictions on travel and business would boost demand for crude oil, but the pandemic's progress threatens to derail this recovery," ANZ Research said in a note.
"The recovery in gasoline demand will plateau until the U.S. economy improves," it said.
Gasoline demand will be closely watched as the United States heads into its July 4 holiday weekend as many Americans are expected to hit the road.
U.S. gasoline stocks rose by 1.2 million barrels in the week to June 26, according to data from the Energy Information Administration released on Wednesday.
The OPEC cut production by 1.93 million barrels a day to 22.69 million a day last month, according to the survey.
OPEC and its partners’ record output cuts since May have helped revive the oil market, but a recent surge of Covid-19 infections in countries including the US is highlighting the fragility of the revival.
Geneva: OPEC slashed oil production to the lowest level since the Gulf War in 1991, as it escalated efforts to revive global markets just as a resurgence of the coronavirus is threatening demand again.
Saudi Arabia faithfully delivered the extra curbs promised in June, and the laggards, though still trailing in implementing the cuts, stepped up their performance, according to a Bloomberg survey.
OPEC and its partners’ record output cuts since May have helped revive the oil market, but a recent surge of Covid-19 infections in countries including the US is highlighting the fragility of the revival.
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries cut production by 1.93 million barrels a day to 22.69 million a day last month, according to the survey. That’s the lowest since May 1991, though membership changes since then affect the comparison.
The survey is based on information from officials, ship-tracking data and estimates from consultants including Rystad Energy A/S, Rapidan Energy Group, JBC Energy GmbH and Kpler SAS.
The intervention by OPEC+, the coalition that spans the cartel plus outsiders such as Russia, has helped more than double benchmark Brent crude from the lows of April, when the virus outbreak is estimated to have taken out about a third of global demand. Prices were above $41 a barrel on Wednesday.
Yet the pullback in the group’s output to the lowest in almost three decades illustrates the scale of the sacrifice involved. OPEC+ pledged 9.7 million barrels a day of cuts at a meeting in April -- about 10% of global supplies -- and some of its Middle East members then promised to voluntarily cut even deeper in June.
Saudi Arabia, the group’s biggest member, cut back by 1.13 million barrels a day to 7.53 million in June, fully implementing its additional voluntary reduction. Fellow Persian Gulf exporters Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates met their OPEC-mandated targets, but fulfilled only a small part of the extra curbs.
Overall, OPEC delivered all of the reduction pledged in the April agreement, though rates of compliance vary significantly between members.
While Iraq, Nigeria and Angola are still lagging behind, their performances improved last month. Iraq implemented 70% of its quota, Nigeria 77% and Angola 83%. At a meeting in early June, the countries agreed to make up for earlier cheating by making extra curbs in the coming months.
Compliance from countries outside OPEC has been stronger than usual, as the scale of the demand collapse and risk of a renewed price decline encourage adherence. Russia pumped close to its target for a second month, and Kazakhstan was on track to hit its quota.
The slump in OPEC’s output also reflects the long-term decline in several members -- most notably Venezuela.
While exempt from having to make deliberate cuts, Caracas is nonetheless seeing output dwindle as US sanctions and prolonged economic recession slam its petroleum industry. It pumped just 340,000 barrels a day last month, the survey showed.
The oil companies have covered most of the shortfall arising when for 82 continuous days (from March 14 to June 6) petrol and diesel prices remained unchanged while the government substantially raised taxes on the products.
In the national capital, petrol price on Thursday stood at Rs 80.43 per litre and diesel at Rs 80.53 a litre, same level as Tuesday and Wednesday when the OMCs went for a pause and kept the prices unchanged.
New Delhi: Fuel prices seems to have gone for a longer pause after rising in 22 of the past 26 days as oil marketing companies (OMC) kept the pump prices of petrol and diesel unchanged again on Thursday.
In the national capital, petrol price on Thursday stood at Rs 80.43 per litre and diesel at Rs 80.53 a litre, same level as Tuesday and Wednesday when the OMCs went for a pause and kept the prices unchanged.
Sources in public sector oil companies said that consumers could get relief from the regular price rise of the two petroleum products in the coming days as the pause for three days now could be replicated in several of the coming days due to softening of the global oil prices.
Also, the oil companies have covered most of the shortfall arising when for 82 continuous days (from March 14 to June 6) petrol and diesel prices remained unchanged while government substantially raised taxes on the products.
Starting from June 7, petrol price has increased by Rs 9.17 and diesel by Rs 11.14 in the national capital. In the other cities the magnitude of increase was similar. With global oil prices remaining around $ 40 a barrel, any fall in oil prices now may result in fuel consumers actually getting the benefit of a cut in the petrol and diesel prices.
But oil inventories in the US have fallen and that may again bump up the prices that could take crude closer to $ 45 a barrel mark. If this happens, and the price level is sustained for some time, fuel price could rise further in India.
Oil prices rose in the previous session after U.S. Energy Information Administration data showed U.S. crude inventories fell 7.2 million barrels from a record high last week.
Brent crude futures fell 15 cents, or 0.3%, to $41.89 a barrel, after rising 1.8% in the previous session.
MELBOURNE: Oil prices slipped in early trade on Thursday after California reimposed some coronavirus lockdown measures, stoking worries a resurgence in COVID-19 cases will stall a recovery in fuel demand.
U.S. West Texas Intermediate ( WTI ) crude futures fell 13 cents, or 0.3%, to $39.69 a barrel at 0024 GMT, trimming a 1.4% rise from Wednesday.
Brent crude futures fell 15 cents, or 0.3%, to $41.89 a barrel, after rising 1.8% in the previous session.
California sharply rolled back efforts to reopen its economy on Wednesday, banning indoor restaurant dining in much of the state, closing bars and beefing up enforcement of social distancing and other measures as COVID-19 infections surged.
Oil prices rose in the previous session after U.S. Energy Information Administration data showed U.S. crude inventories fell 7.2 million barrels from a record high last week, far more than analysts had expected, as refiners ramped up production and imports eased.
However, analysts noted the data also showed gasoline stockpiles rose due to a sharp increase in imports, against expectations for inventories to fall.
"Counter-seasonal builds in gasoline inventories as stockpiles unexpectedly rose are not precisely a bullish delight," AxiCorp strategist Stephen Innes said in a note.
All eyes will be on driving activity in the United States over the upcoming July 4th holiday weekend and how quickly U.S. producers revive shut-in production, analysts said.
Fuel demand gradually returning to pre-COVID levels: Govt
Petrol consumption of 2 million tonnes in June was 85 per cent of last year's levels, while diesel at 5.5 million tonnes was 82 per cent of normal levels during this month.  Demand, however, began to revive in May and in June reached 88 per cent of pre-COVID levels, it said.
At 11.8 million tonnes of consumption, fuel demand in June was 88 per cent of 13.4 million tonnes consumption in June 2019.
New Delhi: India's fuel sales in June reached 88 per cent of the pre-COVID-19 levels as easing of lockdownrestrictions is reviving economic activities, the government said on Wednesday.
"The sales of petroleum products in India, the world's third-biggest oil consuming nation, had in April fallen to the lowest since 2007, due to the nationwide lockdown, necessitated to prevent the spread of COVID-19 pandemic," an official statement said.
Demand, however, began to revive in May and in June reached 88 per cent of pre-COVID levels, it said.
"India's overall petroleum products consumption, which had nosedived in last week of March and April this year, is now steadily getting to its pre-lockdown levels in June, as emanating from the PSUs' (IOC, BPCL, and HPCL) sales figures," it said.
At 11.8 million tonnes of consumption, fuel demand in June was 88 per cent of 13.4 million tonnes consumption in June 2019.
Petrol consumption of 2 million tonnes in June was 85 per cent of last year's levels, while diesel at 5.5 million tonnes was 82 per cent of normal levels during this month.
"With the timely arrival of monsoon and pick-up in agricultural activities during Kharif season, there was marked acceleration in diesel consumption and gained 96 per cent on April volumes of 2.8 million tonnes," the statement said.
Demand for LPG fuel continues to rise, with robust growth of 16.6 per cent in June over last year.
ATF consumption registered 4-times volume increase from April levels.
"Demand of industrial fuels such as sulphur, petcoke, and naphtha reached to levels of 89.3 per cent, 118 per cent and 120.2 per cent respectively, while marine fuels reached to a level of 138.5 per cent vis-a-vis corresponding period last year," it said.
Similarly, with the restart of major road construction projects, bitumen consumption has registered a solid growth of 32 per cent in June.
The crude oil throughput of state-owned refineries has already crossed 85 per cent as on date, from as low as of 55 per cent in the beginning of April.
"Overall the consumption of all petroleum products has significantly increased from April level of 49 per cent (of normal) to 88 per cent level in June," the statement said.
April's fuel consumption was 6.6 million tonnes as compared to 13.4 million tonnes a year back.
In Delhi-NCR, the petrol price on Wednesday stood at Rs 80.43 per litre and diesel at Rs 80.53 a litre, same level as Tuesday.
Sources in public sector oil companies said that consumers could get relief from the regular price rise of the two petroleum products in coming days as the pause on Tuesday and Wednesday could be replicated in several of the coming days due to softening of global oil prices.
New Delhi: Fuel prices seem to have gone for a longer pause after rising for 22 of the past 25 days as oil marketing companies (OMC) kept the pump prices of petrol and diesel unchanged again on Wednesday.
In the national capital, petrol price on Wednesday stood at Rs 80.43 per litre and diesel at Rs 80.53 a litre, same level as Tuesday when OMCs went for pause and kept the prices unchanged over previous day.
Sources in public sector oil companies said that consumers could get relief from the regular price rise of the two petroleum products in coming days as the pause on Tuesday and Wednesday could be replicated in several of the coming days due to softening of global oil prices.
Also, the oil companies have covered most of the shortfall arising when for 82 continuous days (from March 14 to June 6) petrol and diesel prices remained unchanged while government substantially raised taxes on the products.
Starting from June 7, petrol price has increased by Rs 9.17 and diesel by Rs 11.14 in the national capital. In the other cities the magnitude of increase was similar. For the last six to seven days, the quantum of daily increase has fallen from 60 paise per litre to less than 20 paise per litre. With global oil prices remaining around $40 a barrel, any fall in oil prices now may result in fuel consumers actually getting the benefit of a cut on petrol and diesel prices.
In another development, the OMCs marginally increased the price of 14.2 kg non-subsidised LPG cylinder by Rs 1 in Delhi, effective Wednesday. The price of non-subsidised LPG in Delhi will now be Rs 594 per cylinder as against Rs 593 on June 1. Prices were up by Rs 4 in other metros mostly because of different local sales tax or VAT rate.
The oil companies also revised upwards the price of aviation turbine fuel by about 7.5 per cent to Rs 41,992.81 per kl in the national capital, according to a price notification by Indian Oil Corporation (IOC). The ATF prices increased twice in June by a record 56.6 per cent or Rs 12,126.75 per kl on June 1, and by Rs 5,494.5 per kl or 16.3 per cent increase on June 16. The increase in July is by Rs 2,922.94 per kl.
Record cuts were meant to last until the end of June but then had been extended into July.
LONDON: Opec and Russia will likely ease record oil production cuts from August as global oil demand recovers and prices have bounced back from their lows, four Opec+ sources told Reuters.
Opec and its allies including Russia, know as Opec+, have agreed to cut production by a record 9.7 million barrels per day, or 10 percent of global demand, from May to support oil prices as demand plunged because of the coronavirus pandemic.
Record cuts were meant to last until the end of June but then had been extended into July. The sources said no discussions have taken place so far about extending the record cuts into August, meaning they were most likely to be eased to 7.7 million bpd until December.
"A further extension is unlikely unless there is another downward move in demand," one Opec source said.
Key Opec+ ministers will meet in mid-July at a panel, known as the Joint Ministerial Monitoring Committee (JMMC), to recommend the next level of cuts.
Oil prices have recovered to above $41 a barrel from a 21-year low below $16 a barrel in April, helped by Opec+ cuts and a recovery in demand as governments ease coronavirus lockdowns.
Saudi Arabia , Opec's de facto leader, and Russia have to perform a balancing act of pushing up oil prices to meet budget needs while not driving them too high to avoid a resurgence of U.S. shale production.
Russian Energy Minister Alexander Novak said this month Moscow was happy with the current oil price. U.S. output has plunged by a record 2 million bpd, but there are signs it is recovering quickly.
Ethanol production capacity may increase to 375-400 cr litres: ISMA
The Government of India is targeting an ethanol production and supply target of 300-350 crore litres in 2020-21.
New Delhi: With improved production of sugarcane, India's ethanol production capacity may increase to over 375-400 crore litres, said the Indian Sugar Mills Association of India ( ISMA ), the apex sugar industry body in the country, on Monday.
However, the Government of India is targeting an ethanol production and supply target of 300-350 crore litres in 2020-21, and achieve 7.5-8 per cent ethanol blend levels with petrol, the ISMA said in a statement.
"As laid down in the National Biofuels Policy, 2018, the government intends to achieve ethanol with petrol blend levels of 10 per cent by 2022 and 20 per cent by 2030, and therefore, efforts are being made to achieve the targets," the statement said.
Against this, 92.5 crore litres of ethanol have already been supplied to the OMCs between December 1 2019 and June 22, 2020, achieving an average all-India blending of 5.09 per cent with petrol. The blending levels achieved in some states like UP, Haryana, Punjab, Uttarakhand, Bihar and Karnataka is much higher at 8.5 per cent to 9.8 per cent with petrol.
B-heavy molasses and sugarcane juice have been diverted away from sugar, to manufacture and supply 58 crore litres of ethanol to OMCs from in the current ESY up to June 20. As per the contracts entered into by the sugar mills across the country, another 23 crore litres of ethanol will be manufactured from B-molasses and cane juice for supply in the balance period up to November 30, 2020.
This use of B-molasses and cane juice in production of ethanol, and not for sugar production, will result in a diversion of sugar of around 8 lakh tonnes, the ISMA said.
The diversion will not only reduce surplus sugar availability in the country, but also reduce the carrying costs for the sugar mills. It will also give better returns to the mills because ethanol prices fixed by the government are more remunerative than sugar currently, besides giving them better cash flows because of immediate sale of ethanol as compared to delays in the sale of sugar, which could be stuck in the godowns for more than 10-12 months.
Despite the fall in petrol consumption/sales during the lockdown period, the supplies of ethanol were not too badly affected, and sugar mills have been able to supply as per the contracts during the lockdown too, said ISMA.
Accordingly, the blend levels have been maintained at an all-India average of 5 per cent for the country. This could happen because of the good understanding and cooperation between the OMCs and the sugar mills/ethanol manufacturers, when they together agreed to relocate ethanol supplies from depots that were full to other depots and even to distant states, where there was hardly any ethanol being supplied, and therefore there was tankage capacity to take the reallocated ethanol supplies, said the statement.
