All connecting roads to the well site have been badly hit by flood. The approach road via Talap-Daisajan-Kordoiguri-Badarkhati-Baghjan which was being repaired along with APWD is also affected by flood water in number of places
Dibrugarh ( Assam ): Ongoing operation at oil well No 5 of Baghjan in Assam's Tinsukia was suspended after floodwater inundated the area following heavy rainfall.
"Dangori River is overflowing. All connecting roads to the site are submerged with flood water. Bridge on Doomdooma-Baghjan Road is broken, while Plastic Park Road is closed by District Authority for vehicles for flood water. Flood water has entered Debris area, Kill Pump area and CMT Water Pump area making the areas unsafe for carrying out operations," Oil India Limited said in a statement.
All connecting roads to the well site have been badly hit by flood. The approach road via Talap-Daisajan-Kordoiguri-Badarkhati-Baghjan which was being repaired along with APWD is also affected by flood water in number of places. A recce is underway for exploring approach road to the well site, said OIL.
Debris removal work for the main capping operation at site couldn't be carried out since the main road to site is closed by District Authority due to flood. Fire service personnel are stationed at strategic locations for handling any emergency.
A meeting was held on June 27 between OIL technical team , M/s Alert and ONGC-CMT in presence of Ex-ONGC Director, V P Mahawar to chalk out a safe action plan for carrying out debris removal work as well as other preparatory work for capping operation in the midst of prevailing flood situation. A technical team is currently carrying out a detailed recce for possible approach road through Talap side, River side and Plastic Park Road side. The team will further explore safe working condition in debris area.
Heavy rainfall and flood is affecting the relief camps. Surveys for assessment of damage for compensation by the committee constituted by District Administration have been affected due to heavy rainfall and flood.
How did you hear about us?
Instead of treating CO2 as liability, we can make it raw material: Mukesh Ambani
The other participants in the conference included Prince Abdulaziiz bin Salman al-Saud, Minister of Energy, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and Patrick Pauyanne, CEO, Total and Tanya Beckett, as the moderator
HPCL delays $3 billion Vizag refinery expansion: Source
Gas will account for around 10 per cent of India's primary energy supply in 2025, up from 6 per cent currently, with renewables at 6 per cent from the current 3.6 per cent.
New Delhi: The Covid-19 outbreak has accelerated the transition in India's energy sector with profound implications for the economy, including addition of $140 billion of new direct investments in gas over eight years, rise in the employment growth rate by up to 300 basis points and a lower current account deficit by an average $4-4.7 billion annually.
"It should also lower energy costs for consumers and industrial companies alike, by up to 25 per cent on average, slow global oil demand growth by 10 per cent, and nearly double the market share of gas-powered vehicles in India's PV sales," Morgan Stanley Research aid in a report. "More importantly, we think it will reshape consumer habits as gas becomes their go-to fuel, boosting gas demand CAGR to 8 per cent through 2025."
The investment banking firm expects gas to account for around 10 per cent of India's primary energy supply in 2025, up from 6 per cent currently, with renewables at 6 per cent from the current 3.6 per cent.
As global oversupply has accelerated, prices for Asian gas consumers have deflated to the greatest extent. India is the biggest beneficiary as consumer prices have fallen 25 per cent and remain structurally low at a time when gas infrastructure is doubling and the advent of renewables is making gas even more prominent in the fuel mix.
"Stricter standards on pollution, the start of India's first gas exchange, and supportive regulatory policies will catalyze India's energy transition. India may steadily move to freely priced domestic gas as the industrial and power sector sees gas adoption due to cheap prices and easier access and environmental policies," the report said. It added that personal use of gas for cooking and travel should rise as last mile infrastructure more than doubles by 2025.
The likely beneficiaries of this shift towards gas include midstream gas pipeline and infrastructure owners -- IGL, Gujarat Gas-- gas-fired power plants, auto players like Maruti that are pushing for CNG in the vehicle mix, enablers like fuel retailers, infrastructure builders like L&T, and end industrial consumers like Ambuja and Tata Steel.
While refiners may face headwinds most of them are now integrating into downstream chemicals. Also, fuel retailers are offering energy integrated solutions by giving consumers a choice of filling tanks with petrol, diesel, gas or charging batteries.
BUENOS AIRES : Argentine state energy giant YPF on Thursday that it was seeking a swap deal on $1 billion of international bonds to push back payments currently due in March 2021, a move which comes as the sector has been hit hard by the coronavirus pandemic.
The company said in a statement that it would offer a swap that included a cash payment along with new instruments maturing in 2025. The new bonds would maintain the current coupon of 8.5% with amortization payments starting in 2022, it added.
"YPF is actively looking for competitive alternatives as part of its financial plan for the year, which includes, among other things, the possibility of extending the maturity of this new series to improve its debt profile," it said.
The proposed swap, which avoids a haircut on the debt, comes as the South American country's government races to restructure around $65 billion in foreign bonds that have become unsustainable after two straight years of economic recession.
Fitch Ratings , which assigned a "CCC"/"RR4" rating to the proposed new 2025 bond, said that the decision reflected the agency's view "that the transaction does not constitute a substantial reduction in original terms."
Argentina's oil industry was severely affected by the coronavirus pandemic, which sparked a historic drop in the price of oil and gas worldwide, while a fall in consumption has led to increased inventories.
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and allies, known as OPEC+, have been cutting oil output since May by a record 9.7 million barrels per day after the coronavirus crisis destroyed a third of global demand
DUBAI/LONDON : Angola is resisting pressure by OPEC's de-facto leader Saudi Arabia for a steeper oil output cut to comply fully with record supply curbs, OPEC and industry sources said.
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and allies, known as OPEC+, have been cutting oil output since May by a record 9.7 million barrels per day after the coronavirus crisis destroyed a third of global demand.
After July, the cuts are due to taper to 7.7 million bpd until December.
Saudi Arabia has been pressing laggards such as Iraq, Kazakhstan, Nigeria and Angola to improve compliance with the cuts and compensate for May overproduction in July-September.
"Angola is saying they would not compensate for its overproduction in July-September like the rest of the countries but would be able to compensate only in October-December," said one OPEC source. "We are still trying to convince them."
Angola's Ministry of Mineral Resources and Petroleum and state oil company Sonangol did not respond to a Reuters request for comment.
In May, Angola pumped 1.28 million bpd, according to OPEC data, or 100,000 bpd more than its target.
It trimmed production to 1.24 million bpd in June, based on a Reuters survey, 60,000 bpd above its target.
"Angola argues they did cut quickly despite the pain and difficulty it put them in with regard to long-term supply contracts," said one source familiar with Angolan oil plans.
The source said Sonangol will in August supply full volumes to buyers such as India's refiner MRPL and Indian Oil Corp. (IOC) as well as to Unipec , the trading arm of Chinese refiner Sinopec, and China 's state-owned Sinochem . (Additional reporting by Noah Browning; editing by Jane Merriman)
The court dismissed the appeal from the Squamish Nation, Tsleil-Waututh Nation, the Ts'elxweyeqw Tribes and Coldwater Indian Band, effectively ending the yearslong legal battle over the project
The court dismissed the appeal from the Squamish Nation, Tsleil-Waututh Nation, the Ts'elxweyeqw Tribes and Coldwater Indian Band, effectively ending the yearslong legal battle over the project.
The pipeline would end at a terminal outside Vancouver, resulting in a sevenfold increase in the number of tankers in the shared waters between Canada and Washington state.
Some First Nations successfully halted federal approval of the project in 2018 when the Federal Court of Appeal said Ottawa had failed to properly consult affected First Nations, which argued that the project would damage their lands and waters.
But in February the same court dismissed another challenge by the same groups against the government's June 2019 decision to approve the project a second time after another round of Indigenous consultation.
As usuall, the Supreme Court gave no reasons for Thursday's ruling.
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's government approved Trans Mountain in 2016 and was so determined to see it built that it bought the pipeline.
It still faces stiff environmental opposition from British Columbia's provincial government but construction is underway. Natural Resource Minister Seamus O'Regan said consultations will continue as construction continues.
"To those who are disappointed with today's SCC decision - we see and hear you," O'Regan said in a statement. "The Government of Canada is committed to a renewed relationship with Indigenous people and understands that consultations on major projects have a critical role in building that renewed relationship."
The pipeline would allow Canada to diversify oil markets and vastly increase exports to Asia, where it could command a higher price. About 99 percent of Canada's exports now go to refiners in the U.S., where limits on pipeline and refinery capacity mean Canadian oil sells at a discount.
Alberta Premier Jason Kenney called the dismissal another "legal vindication" for the pipeline, which was first proposed eight years ago but has been delayed by numerous legal challenges. He said 120 of 129 First Nations affected by the pipeline either approve or do not object to it.
The First Nations behind the appeal, however, said they were disappointed but not surprised by the outcome, and vowed to fight on.
"What I can tell you today is that this is not the end of our story," said Tsleil-Waututh Nation Chief Leah George-Wilson , at an online news conference..
Fatima Denton, director of the United Nations University Institute for Natural Resources in Africa, said such a situation had always been "talked about as a hypothetical scenario"
LONDON: As the COVID-19 pandemic bashes economies and demand for oil, many African nations dependent on exporting fossil fuels are "haemorrhaging" cash, African energy experts warned this week.
The crisis - which comes as more investors shun carbon-heavy businesses - is a taste of what may happen if Africa's rich oil and gas reserves become "stranded assets" that cannot be pumped as the world shifts to clean energy to meet climate goals.
Fatima Denton , director of the United Nations University Institute for Natural Resources in Africa, said such a situation had always been "talked about as a hypothetical scenario".
"But it's fair to say it's what's happening now," she said.
Hard-hit nations could respond to the threat in two ways, African experts said: either by switching up a gear on renewable power in a bid to meet development and climate change goals, or by pumping fossil fuels faster while they still can.
"It's time to optimise our resources," Senyo Hosi, CEO of the Ghana Chamber of Bulk Oil Distributors, told an online event this week. "If we don't utilise (fossil fuels) in time, we'll make fools of ourselves and miss a major opportunity."
Cutting back on fossil fuel use to curb global warming is the job of rich countries that produce the vast majority of global emissions - not African nations which are responsible for only a tiny share, noted James Murombedzi, coordinator of the African Climate Policy Centre.
But Denton said the continent had the potential to leapfrog dirty technology in getting electric power to the 565 million Africans who still live without it today.
"Africa could become the custodian of a new sustainable development world order" if it can make that energy transition in a clean way, she added.
Doing so could also be an opportunity to root out corruption in oil and gas nations that has meant Africa's fossil fuel resources "have never benefited the great majority of our people", she said.
Damilola Ogunbiyi, the U.N. Secretary-General's special representative on sustainable energy for all, said that as African states try to recover from COVID-19 "they are faced with a unique, once-in-a-generation opportunity to 'recover better'".
"Countries that recover better with sustainable energy will see the payoff in the form of resilient economies, new jobs and faster energy development", giving them a competitive advantage, she said as Sustainable Energy for All, a global energy access body, published a clean recovery guide for Africa this week.
Installing and maintaining solar mini-grids and solar home systems, in particular, could create millions of jobs for the fast-growing number of young Africans seeking work, clean energy backers said.
But finding political support and cash for a green energy transformation will be a huge challenge in many parts of Africa, not least with budgets flattened by the pandemic, they added.
Many African oil-exporting countries, from Gabon to Equatorial Guinea, have seen their oil revenues halved since the start of the pandemic, said Antonio Pedro, director for central Africa at the U.N. Economic Commission for Africa.
New licensing for fossil fuel exploration is also drying up, and projects are being postponed or cancelled in countries from Mozambique to Guinea Bissau, Pedro said.
Natural resources - including oil and gas - account for 25% of gross domestic product in Africa, he said, compared to 2% for richer countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
The pandemic-linked slowdown is raising awareness of the risks of relying so heavily on revenue from fossil fuels and other natural resources, the experts said.
But if Africa is asked to back away from using its oil, gas and coal, it will need help to do it, said Rose Mwebaza, director of the U.N.-backed Climate Technology Centre and Network.
"The transitions are not going to happen without financial facilitation," she said.
Selam Kidane Abebe, a legal adviser to the African group of negotiators at U.N. climate talks, said African officials were willing to make changes in their energy systems, but they had to be ones that would cut poverty and boost incomes.
"If countries are not going to use these (fossil fuel) resources, there have to be other resources to promote their sustainable development," she told the online event.
Africa already has most of the world's people lacking access to electricity, and climate change is making efforts to slash those numbers difficult.
Worsening droughts, particularly in southern Africa, now regularly dry up key hydropower dams, one of the continent's leading sources of clean energy.
Africa has huge potential for solar, wind and geothermal power, but so far the technologies "are not yet proven on a scale that can drive the industrialisation of this continent", said Murombedzi of the African Climate Policy Centre.
Investment by some multilateral agencies and countries from China to the United States also is still driving expansion of fossil fuel infrastructure in Africa - raising the risk of more stranded assets, the experts noted.
The World Bank in 2010 granted a $3.7 billion loan to build South Africa's large-scale Medupi coal-fired power plant, making it hard for the country to ditch the fuel, Murombedzi said.
"If South Africa moved out of coal, it would have not only the stranding of the facility itself but the ... debt South Africa owes," he said.
Denton said any effort to catalyse a shift to clean energy in Africa must take into account its heavy economic dependence on natural resources, including fossil fuels.
"The road to going green is fraught with many difficulties," she said.
