As sugar growers in and around the Everglades Agricultural Area continue to pre-harvest burn their sugarcane fields in the midst of the COVID-19 threat, Sierra Club urges Agriculture Commissioner Nikki Fried to finally address the impacts of the yearly six to eight month burn season on nearby residents.
This is not a new request. The Stop the Burn Campaign has been demanding an end to the toxic, outdated practice since 2015 and first asked Commissioner Fried for the buffer zone around schools, homes, churches, and businesses at a protest in Belle Glade last November.
We understand that the complete ban of pre-harvest burning must be effectuated in a series of phases; the COVID-19 threat requires that phase one begins right now.
At an Oct. 1, 2019, press conference, Commissioner Fried said “keeping Florida’s residents, communities, and environment safe is my number one priority.” She also announced a new 80-acre buffer zone to protect wildlands from pre-harvest burns.
The Stop the Burn Campaign refuses to accept that Glades residents are less worthy of protection than are wildlands or than are those residing in Wellington. But as of today they remain unprotected. The new measures announced in October 2019 did nothing to keep the residents in and around the Everglades Agricultural Area safe and healthy.  They are still choked by smoke and black snow while residents in Eastern Palm Beach County are protected by wind direction based restrictions.
As Commissioner Fried’s department considers measures to protect Floridians from COVID-19, she must not forget her stated priority. Pre-harvest sugar field burning is a constant threat to respiratory health in the Glades for most of the year, and the added risk of COVID-19, on an already vulnerable population during the burning season, is the perfect impetus for her to finally institute the first phase — a 27-30 mile buffer around all impacted communities — of the end to pre-harvest sugar field burning right now. Families there deserve the protection they have been denied for generations.
A comment posted on our Stop the Burn Campaign Facebook page, by a COPD sufferer in the Glades, paints a vivid picture: “They are telling people not to leave their houses because of the virus. This is what I go through every year during sugar cane burning season. I can’t even come out of my house every time they burn year after year.  Unreal. What people are feeling right now with this virus, it’s how I feel every time they burn sugar cane around here.”
Our demand is substantiated by multiple reports in the news about the additional danger people, especially those with pre-existing respiratory conditions, are in when exposed to air pollution on top of the threat of COVID-19; the most recent being a Harvard study published earlier this month.
This is a life and death matter. Commissioner Fried must take the steps to institute a protective buffer zone now. One that protects all nearby residents and not just the wealthier ones in Eastern Palm Beach County. Sugar growers already “green harvest” when it is convenient for them. It is way past due for them to do so whether or not it is convenient because Glades lives matter.
We expect Commissioner Fried to protect the health, safety and welfare of Florida’s most vulnerable communities first. Implementation of the first phase of a ban on pre-harvest sugar field burning will be the catalyst for a brand new, improved economic future for the Glades.
Patrick Ferguson is the Sierra Club Organizing Representative for the Stop Sugar Field Burning Campaign.
