'Soft' commodities such as sugar have had their worst quarter since 1986 but Covid-19 could put pressure on supply chains, experts say
At the climax of the classic 1980s film Trading Places, the attempt by rapacious brokers Mortimer and Randolph Duke to corner the market by buying orange juice futures ends in bankruptcy after the price collapses.
The duo might have had more success this year. Orange juice futures are the best performing "soft" commodity since the coronavirus outbreak struck with the price up by a quarter in the past month to 119c per pound.
American consumers fearful of shortages have been stockpiling the juice in their freezers. Ole Hansen, head of commodities at Saxo Bank - and a fan of the film - says: “This time the virus has cornered the orange juice market.”
Orange juice may have seen the biggest gains but the picture for "softs" is decidedly mixed. Some have been beneficiaries of the short-term stockpiling effect.  But others - like corn and sugar - have suffered as a result of a collapsing oil price , while cotton has been hit due to the dire economic outlook as billions adjust to life under lockdown . Overall, soft commodities are on course for their worst quarter since 1986.
Alongside orange juice, the other winner in our food cupboards has been wheat, up 2pc since the turn of the year but 9pc since the beginning of March. According to Hansen, this is another panic-buying story: wheat is the key ingredient in the pasta, flour and bread that shoppers until recently were rushing to grab from supermarket shelves .
Prices have also been supported by hints from Russia - the world’s biggest exporter of the staple commodity - that it could limit sales abroad. Ukraine, another top six wheat exporter, has also agreed to limit overseas sales to avoid rising bread prices at home. Rice too has seen a near 10pc rise in prices during the past month as Vietnam, the world’s third-biggest exporter, suspends exports to stockpile nearly 200,000 tonnes by June.
Another standout is coffee, where coronavirus has combined with the worst locust infestation for 70 years in Africa to boost the price of arabica coffee by 9pc.
That leaves Brazil, the world’s biggest exporter of coffee beans, enjoying rising prices despite the plunge in the value of its currency. President Jair Bolsonaro has also stuck his head in the sand over Covid-19, calling it “the sniffles”, stoking fears of widespread infection and a labour crunch.
Sam Burman, a commodities economist at Capital Economics, says: “While the recent fall in the Brazilian real has weighed on the price of arabica coffee, it has been more than offset by concerns about supply, concerns about labour shortages and the desert locusts in Africa.”
Prices heading the other way thanks to coronavirus are cotton, down 18pc in the past month as financial markets brace for a slump in demand from the global textiles industry. Retailers are sitting on unsold stock as shops have been forced to close , and demand is unlikely to return for months.
Punished even more heavily has been sugar, due to the collapse in global oil prices to just above $20 a barrel. Sugar futures are already down 20pc due to a lack of demand for the sugar cane which is usually converted into ethanol and used in making petrol. People are driving far less in lockdowns, while the unused cane is converted into bigger quantities of refined sugar, flooding the market.
The same applies to corn, as about 30pc of US production is used in ethanol, according to Hansen. “Demand for corn from biofuel production is going down and that means more is going towards the consumer,” he said.
Despite the spike in some softer commodities, experts caution against warnings of immediate price rises on the supermarket shelves. Wholesale costs are just one aspect of shop prices and the cost of transportation, for example, should come down with the oil price. The stockpiling effect should also fade, easing demand.
Due to advance purchases, the British Retail Consortium says commodity prices tend to take a year to feed through to the UK. Where labour costs put pressure on fresh food and meat prices, cautious supermarkets are “likely to try to absorb these as much as possible”, a spokesman says.
Despite low oil prices, the biggest potential upward risk in the short-term for food prices is Covid-19 damaging global supply chains by crippling workforces or closing ports, according to Hansen.
He warns: “We have become so accustomed that you buy whatever food you want from the supermarket from whatever part of the world. But if it starts to break, you end up with supplies in the wrong place. That creates some scarcity - and pressure on the price.”
