In 82 companies, promoters have pledged more than 90 per cent.
However, total promoter holding that is pledged across all companies has slightly increased from 13.05 per cent at the end of April to 13.07 per cent as on May 31.
Mumbai: A week, it is said, is a long time in politics. And a couple of months seem enough to turn the bear into a bull with conviction, going by the fortunes of promoters — and their stock earlier pledged for loan covenants.
As the indices climbed about a third from their March 23 lows, the promoter-owners of companies listed locally were the biggest gainers. Since then, the primary owners of AU Small Finance Bank, Sun TV Network and Sun Pharma Advanced Research have reduced their pledged shares to zero.
Promoters of another 14 companies have also significantly freed up the quantum of stock they had offered as collateral to lenders , according to nseinfobase.com.
In the biggest such release of pledged stock, Kalanithi Maran, promoter of Sun TV Network, revoked 13.4 million shares worth Rs 510 crore last month from Axis Bank and Yes Bank. Similarly, the Adani Group has revoked pledges shares worth Rs 496 crore of Adani Green Energy, while the Shroff family has released pledges worth Rs 451 crore in UPL last month.
“The sharp rally in stock prices since March 23 and easy liquidity have helped the promoters release pledges,” said Sudip Bandyopadhyay, MD, Destimoney Securities. “Most of these shares were given as top-up when the market crashed over the outbreak of Covid-19.”
The Sensex has rallied 31 per cent since March 23, fuelled by foreign portfolio flows to the tune of 18,600 crore.
Among the top firms, promoters of AU Small Finance Bank reduced pledged shares from 7.04 per cent to zero while GMR Infrastructure, Adani Power, Adani Ports, JSW Steel, Sun Pharmaceutical Industries and Jindal Steel have reduced their pledge up to 1 per cent.
However, total promoter holding that is pledged across all companies has slightly increased from 13.05 per cent at the end of April to 13.07 per cent as on May 31.
In 27 companies, including Bajaj Hindusthan Sugar, Dewan Housing Finance, Eastern Silk Industries, Gammon Infrastructure Projects, GTL Infrastructure, McDowell Holdings and MSP Steel, the entire promoter ownership was pledged as on May 31.
In 82 companies, promoters have pledged more than 90 per cent. There are 205 companies in which more than 50 per cent of the promoter’s shareholding was pledged.
