Cane growers across Queensland are objecting after valuations for farmland jumped by as much as 300 per cent.
In the Mackay Regional Council area, 59 cane farm valuations have more than doubled.
The council said that was out of more than 1,400 rateable properties in that category, with the highest increase totalling $69,500.
Why have land values increased?
Canegrowers Mackay chairman Kevin Borg said smaller blocks were being classified as lifestyle blocks.
"Canegrowers don't believe that that's true and fair," he said.
Mr Borg said the increased property values could also be put down to assumptions that the purchase of Mackay Sugar by Nordzucker would boost the value of cane-farming blocks.
"We'd hoped that there would be a positive effect, but it can't be taken for granted," he said.
The Bundaberg Regional Council area has been subjected to some of the biggest increases in the state.
Canegrowers Isis chairman Mark Mammino said he had seen hikes of up to 300 per cent.
He said in his region it was due to a changing landscape in the local agriculture industry.
"[It's] the increased value the tree croppers have been paying for land in the region over the last five or so years," he said.
Isis Canegrowers chairman, Mark Mammino says he's seen some land values increase by 300 per cent.
Are higher land values a good thing?
Higher land values can be good news for those looking to sell their properties.
But they can also mean significantly higher rates, which Mr Borg said cane growers would struggle to pay.
"The capacity to pay by cane farmers in today's prices and in today's environment, it becomes very difficult to justify increases in valuations," he said.
"There was a spike in sugar prices at the time of the Valuations Office was looking at this, and they've taken it for granted that prices were going to stop up there."
In a statement, a Mackay Regional Council CEO Craig Doyle said out of the 59 properties that had increased by at least 200 per cent, 42 were on the minimum rate for their category and would remain there next financial year.
He said anyone struggling to pay rates could talk to the council about options for payment plans at any time.
Cane farmers are being urged to check their valuations and appeal if they think it's too high.
Both canegrower groups have been supporting their members in submitting an official objection with the Valuer General's office in the State Government.
Mr Mammino said the timeframe for objections had been extended due to coronavirus until July 1.
"I encourage anyone to check their valuations that they've got, and if they're suspicious that they're too high to go through the appeal process," he said.
A spokesman for the Bundaberg Regional Council said he understood around 70 objections had been submitted to the Valuer General's office so far.
He said stakeholder views were also being taken into account as part of 2020-21 budget deliberations.
