Sugar and red gram being supplied to white ration cardholders in the State are set to become dearer with the government reportedly making it clear that it will not be possible to continue the subsidy on these two essential commodities. It has asked the Civil Supplies Department to work out the mechanism “independently.”
The price of red gram supplied to cardholders will go up to ₹67 per kg from the existing ₹40 per kg. Same will be the case with sugar whose price will shoot up to ₹34 per kg from the existing ₹20 per kg. Their prices will go up further if the trends in the open market were to be taken into account, sources say.
There are over 1.47 crore white ration cardholders in the State.
The revision, however, is not applicable to Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) cardholders who number about 1.60 lakh. They continue to get sugar at ₹ 16 a kg and red gram at ₹ 20 per kg as the Central government bears the subsidy burden.
“The government asked us to explore the available options. In a nutshell, we were told that it would not be possible to extend the subsidy,” said a senior official who did not want to be quoted.
The government has to supply about 5,000 tonnes each of sugar and red gram to the white card cardholders.
The situation is reviewed every quarter, and the prices of red gram and sugar may come down if the supplies improve. Sugar prices keep fluctuating, but as red gram is procured from Markfed or Nafed, its price is unlikely to change significantly. Last year, the government paid ₹51 per kg and ₹48 per kg to Markfed and Nafed respectively, the official said.
The government reviewed the sugar and red gram prices and decided to revise them in keeping with the trend in the open market. In February, it was decided to extend a subsidy of 25% on the open market price.
You have reached your limit for free articles this month.
Start your 14 days trial now. Sign Up
Find mobile-friendly version of articles from the day's newspaper in one easy-to-read list.
Move smoothly between articles as our pages load instantly.
Enjoy reading as many articles as you wish without any limitations.
A one-stop-shop for seeing the latest updates, and managing your preferences.
A select list of articles that match your interests and tastes.
We brief you on the latest and most important developments, three times a day.
*Our Digital Subscription plans do not currently include the e-paper ,crossword, iPhone, iPad mobile applications and print. Our plans enhance your reading experience.
We have been keeping you up-to-date with information on the developments in India and the world that have a bearing on our health and wellbeing, our lives and livelihoods, during these difficult times. To enable wide dissemination of news that is in public interest, we have increased the number of articles that can be read free, and extended free trial periods. However, we have a request for those who can afford to subscribe: please do. As we fight disinformation and misinformation, and keep apace with the happenings, we need to commit greater resources to news gathering operations. We promise to deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Your support for our journalism is invaluable. It’s a support for truth and fairness in journalism. It has helped us keep apace with events and happenings.
The Hindu has always stood for journalism that is in the public interest. At this difficult time, it becomes even more important that we have access to information that has a bearing on our health and well-being, our lives, and livelihoods. As a subscriber, you are not only a beneficiary of our work but also its enabler.
We also reiterate here the promise that our team of reporters, copy editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers will deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Please enter a valid email address.
var data = {"email" : email, "category" : "mb"};
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 768px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
box-shadow: 0 0 4px 0 rgba(0, 0, 0, .328);
@media ( max-width : 320px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
