Society for Science & the Public, which publishes Science News, uses cookies to personalize your experience and improve our services. For more information on how we use cookies on our websites, visit our Cookie Policy .
Ribose, a sugar needed for life, has been detected in meteorites
Space rocks that fell on a young Earth (illustrated) could have carried with them ribose, a molecule essential for life’s genetic machinery. This sugar now has been found in two meteorites.
ribose , an essential molecule for life’s genetic machinery, and other
the National Academy of Sciences, lends support to the idea that many of
life’s ingredients were delivered to Earth by interplanetary debris.
Many organic molecules have been found in space. Comet
for reading and carrying out instructions encoded in DNA.
Yoshihiro Furukawa, a geochemist at Tohoku University in Sendai,
Japan, and colleagues found the ribose, along with several chemically similar
sugars, in samples from two meteorites, one collected from Morocco, the other
of carbon with an extra neutron, which appears more often in organic molecules
likely originated in space and weren’t picked up on Earth.
A model of the molecule ribose sits next to the Murchison meteorite, which was collected in Australia and is one of two space rocks where the life-essential compound has been found.Yoshihiro Furukawa
reactions between water and formaldehyde in the meteorites long ago. Previous lab
ultraviolet light irradiated chilled water, ammonia and methanol — has also
shown that ribose could form on interstellar ice grains (SN: 4/7/16).  Other similar experiments have done the same
chemical cousin deoxyribose , which helps form the backbone of DNA (SN:
Questions or comments on this article? E-mail us at feedback@sciencenews.org
Y. Furukawa et al. Extraterrestrial ribose and other sugars in primitive meteorites . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Published online November 18, 2019. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1907169116.
Christopher Crockett is a freelance science writer and editor based in Arlington, Va. He has a Ph.D. in astronomy from the University of California, Los Angeles.
