The post came just days after he showed off  a much more slimmed down physique as he attended older sister Khloe's 36th birthday celebration on Sunday.
He looked happy and healthy as he joined his famous sisters for several photos and the 'family only' event.
Rob grinned ear to ear as he posed alongside his sisters in his black sweatsuit including Chrome Hearts hoodie and backwards baseball cap.
A source told ET in March: 'Rob is great and doing really well! Rob continues to work on staying healthy for himself and his daughter, Dream.'
Palling around: Rob then took a snap as he palled around with Khloé's reformed ex Tristan Thompson, 29, and their pal Savas
Little bro: He also cheesed up with sister Kourtney Kardashian, 41, after he was photographed chatting with her ex Scott Disick, 37
He posed with the birthday girl and their younger sisters Kendall, 24, and Kylie Jenner, 22, in one photo.
Rob then took a snap as he palled around with Khloé's ex Tristan Thompson, 29, and their pal Savas.
He also posed with sister Kourtney Kardashian, 41, after he was photographed chatting with her ex Scott Disick, 37.
Khloé also appeared in a video from the party, tackling Kourtney and Kendall to get them from leaving the event in the early hours of Sunday morning.
Other videos showcased the the Good American founder drinking champagne from the bottle while Kourtney was running around in a hot pink bikini.
The event also saw momager Kris Jenner, 64, pose up a storm while celebrating her third eldest child's special day
Sister brawl: Khloé also appeared in a video from the party, tackling Kourtney and Kendall to get them from leaving the event in the early hours of Sunday morning
Hot mom: The event also saw momager Kris Jenner, 64, pose up a storm while celebrating her third eldest child's special day
Rob previously wished Khloé a happy birthday with an adorable throwback photo of them as kids.
He captioned the photo: 'Happy Birthday Khlo-moneyyyy!! Woohoo ! I LOVE YOU best friend. TONIGHT WE DRINK AS KINGS‼️ (inside joke)'
The last time he appeared on his Instagram was in a Halloween photo, in which he went as a Troll and Kris went as a sugar skull.
Rob has been mostly silent on social media since his 2017 revenge porn scandal with ex Blac Chyna, 32, and his Kris has since been running his accounts.
In costume: The last time he appeared on his Instagram was in a Halloween photo, in which he went as a Troll and Kris went as a sugar skull
Social media cleanse: Rob has been mostly silent on social media since his 2017 revenge porn scandal with ex Blac Chyna (pictured in May, 2016)
His ex-fiancée recently accused the Kardashian-Jenner dynasty of racism, claiming it was why their show Rob & Chyna didn't get a second season.
It came amid the couple's ongoing custody battle over daughter Dream, three, in addition to allegations of assault and battery.
In response to the claims, Kardashian family attorney Marty Singer tells DailyMail.com: 'This is a two year old lawsuit in which Chyna has changed her defense more times than we can count.'
'Sadly, unsurprising to anyone, she has stooped to a new low, changing her defense to try to leverage the emotions and pain of the moment, insulting the pain and suffering of real victims of racial injustice and systemic racism.'
He continued: 'We take these allegations very seriously and once again, there is no Rob & Chyna show if there is no Rob & Chyna.'
Custody battle: The exes have been dealing with their ongoing custody battle over daughter Dream, three, in addition to allegations of assault and battery
