(2) The current period results include the impacts from the adoption of the new IFRS 16 Leases as discussed in note 3 (b) of the unaudited condensed consolidated interim financial statements. As is permitted with this new standard, comparative information has not been restated and, therefore, may not be comparable.
Free cash flow for the trailing twelve months end December 28, 2019 amounted to $34.9 million, representing a decrease of $11.4 million for the comparative period last year.   The reduction is free cash flow is mainly explained by a decrease in adjusted EBITDA(1) of $11.2 million, an increase in capital and intangible spending, net of operational excellence capital of $2.4 million, higher payments for capital leases of $1.0 million, associated with the adoption of IFRS 16 Leases, and higher income taxes paid of $1.9 million.  Somewhat offsetting this negative variance is a reduction in interest paid and shares purchased and cancelled under the NCIB of $2.9 million and $2.3 million, respectively, as well as lower pension plan contribution of $0.4 million.
Capital and intangible assets expenditures, net of operational excellence expenditures, increased by $2.4 million compared to last year’s rolling twelve months due to timing in spending.  Free cash flow is not reduced by operational excellence capital expenditures, as these projects are not necessary for the operation of the plants, but are undertaken because of the substantial operational savings that are realized once the projects are completed.
Financing charges are paid when a new debt financing is completed and such charges are deferred and amortized over the term of that debt.  The cash used in the year to pay for such fees is therefore not available and as a result is deducted from free cash flow.
Payments made for capital leases are deducted from free cash flow as such cash flow is no longer reflected as a reduction in cash flow from operation and is therefore not available.
The Company declared a quarterly dividend of 9.0 cents per common share every quarter, totalling 36 cents for both trailing twelve months periods.  The slight decrease in 2020 versus the comparable period is due to the purchase and cancellation of shares under the NCIB, which reduced the dividend paid.
Changes in non-cash operating working capital represent year-over-year movements in current assets, such as accounts receivable and inventories, and current liabilities, such as accounts payables.  Movements in these accounts are due mainly to timing in the collection of receivables, receipts of raw sugar and payment of liabilities.  Increases or decreases in such accounts are due to timing issues and therefore do not constitute free cash flow.  Such increases or decreases are financed from available cash or from the Company’s available credit facility of $265.0 million.  Increases or decreases in bank indebtedness are also due to timing issues from the above and therefore do not constitute available free cash flow.
The combined impact of the mark-to-market and derivative timing adjustments, amortization of transitional balances and financial instruments non-cash positive amount of $7.4 million for the current rolling twelve months does not represent cash items as these contracts will be settled when the physical transactions occur, which is the reason for the adjustment to free cash flow.
There are no significant changes in the contractual obligations table disclosed in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the September 28, 2019 Annual Report.
As at December 28, 2019, Lantic had commitments to purchase a total of 1,057,000 metric tonnes of raw sugar, of which 297,625 metric tonnes had been priced for a total dollar commitment of $121.6 million.
The Company has a total of $265.0 million of available working capital from which it can borrow at prime rate, LIBOR rate or under bankers’ acceptances, plus 20 to 250 basis points, based on achieving certain financial ratios. As at December 28, 2019, a total of $423.2 million of assets have been pledged as security for the revolving credit facility, compared to $393.1 million as at December 29, 2018, including trade receivables, inventories and property, plant and equipment.
At December 28, 2019, $188.0 million had been drawn from the working capital facility and $2.6 million in cash was also available.
Cash requirements for working capital and other capital expenditures are expected to be paid from available cash resources and funds generated from operations.  Management believes that the unused credit under the revolving facility is adequate to meet any future cash requirements.
A total of 104,701,023 shares and 104,029,669 shares were outstanding as at December 28, 2019 and February 11, 2020, respectively (105,008,070 as at December 29, 2018).
During the period, a total of $75 thousands of the sixth series debentures and $175 thousands of the seventh series debentures was converted by holders of the securities for a total of 9,079 and 19,774 common shares, respectively.
On December 2, 2019, 563,500 share options were granted to certain executives at a price of $4.68 per common share, representing the average market price for the five business days before the granting of options. These share options are exercisable to a maximum of twenty percent per year, starting after the first anniversary date of the granting of the share options and will expire after a term of ten years. Upon termination, resignation, retirement, death or long-term disability, all share options granted under the Share Option Plan not vested are forfeited.
Also on December 2, 2019, 324,932 performance share units (“PSUs”) were granted to executives.  These PSUs will vest at the end of the 2020-2022 Performance Cycle based on the achievement of total shareholder returns set by the Human Resources and Compensation Committee (“HRCC”) and the Board of Directors of the Company.  The value to be paid-out to each participant will be equal to the result of: the number of PSUs granted to the participant which have vested, multiplied by the volume weighted average closing price of the Common Shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange (the “TSX”) for the five trading days immediately preceding the day on which the Company shall pay the value to the participant under the PSU Plan.
On May 22, 2019, the Company received approval from the Toronto Stock Exchange to proceed with a normal course issuer bid (“2019 NCIB”).  Under the NCIB, the Company may purchase up to 1,500,000 common shares.  The 2019 NCIB commenced on May 24, 2019 and may continue to May 23, 2020.  In addition, on May 22, 2019, the Company entered into an automatic share purchase agreement with Scotia Capital Inc. in connection with the 2019 NCIB. Under the agreement, Scotia may acquire, at its discretion, common shares on the Company’s behalf during certain “black-out” periods, subject to certain parameters as to price and number of shares.  During the first quarter, the Company purchased 213,294 common shares for a total cash consideration of $1.1 million.  Subsequent to quarter end, an additional 862,000 common shares were purchased for a total cash consideration of 4.2 million.
Risk factors in the Company’s business and operations are discussed in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our Annual Report for the year ended September 28, 2019. This document is available on SEDAR at www.sedar.com or on our website at www.LanticRogers.com .
Market conditions remain positive for our sugar business and despite challenges in our manufacturing and supply chain plans as a result of the smaller crop in Taber, we continue to expect that the Sugar segment will exceed last fiscal year’s adjusted EBITDA.
As a result of severe adverse weather in late 2019, the beet harvest at Taber was terminated early, leading to lower than expected refined sugar volumes of approximately 65,000 metric tonnes, compared to previous expectations of 125,000 metric tonnes. As a result of the lower production volumes from Taber, the Company has optimized its supply chain to continue to service its customers. These changes mainly include the supply of cane sugar from the Vancouver and Montréal refineries, as both refineries have excess capacity to supply to the Company’s domestic market.  The Company will continue to mitigate the financial implication of a smaller sugar beet crop in Taber.
Given the smaller crop in Taber, export volume is expected to be approximately 15,000 metric tonnes lower than fiscal 2019.  The Company has a long-term relationship with its customer in Mexico and, as a result, we were able to reduce its shipments in fiscal 2020 and roll commitments into fiscal 2022 at no additional costs to the Company.  Shipments to the USA under the Canada-specific U.S. quota of 10,300 metric tonnes have been fully considered in our reconfigured supply chain and will be fully delivered in fiscal 2020.  At this point in time, the Company does not anticipate any additional volume under the Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (“CUSMA”) for the current fiscal year despite the fact that it is anticipated to be ratified within the new few weeks.
The Company anticipates that the consumer segment should be approximately 10,000 metric tonnes higher than fiscal 2019.  Last fiscal year, the Company gained additional business with an existing consumer account which started in April 2019 and as such, will improve consumer volume in fiscal 2020.
The Taber factory delivers a significant portion of its volume to liquid customers, which is still expected to occur in fiscal 2020.  Therefore, the Company’s liquid segment is expected to be comparable to fiscal 2019.
Finally, the industrial volume is expected to also be comparable to fiscal 2019.
Despite the challenges expected as a result of a small crop in Taber, the Company anticipates that the overall sales volume in fiscal 2020 should be approximately 735,000 metric tonnes, thus approximately 6,000 metric tonnes lower than fiscal 2019.
In 2019, the Alberta Legislature announced that Bill 1, An Act to Repeal the Carbon Tax, became effective as of June 1, 2019.  On October 30, 2019, in response to the Federal government legal challenge, the Alberta government proposed a new carbon tax on large emitters called the “Technology Innovation and Emissions Reduction (“TIER”)” system that would tax large emitting facilities as of January 1, 2020.  Under normal operating conditions, these changes will result in a reduction in carbon tax on the Taber operation.   Energy costs and carbon tax savings of approximately $2.5 million are expected in the first half of fiscal 2020 as a result of the temporary removal of the carbon tax in Alberta as well as the shorter slicing campaign.
In light of the smaller crop in Taber, it is expected that total distribution costs will increase in fiscal 2020 as we reconfigure our supply chains.
With the completion of the air emission project, capital spend for the Sugar segment is expected to return to a level of approximately $20.0 million, including a high proportion of return on investment capital expenditures.
The current quarter margins reflect the more competitive market conditions we are in today and as such, we don’t anticipate any short-term change in gross margins. In addition to defending our current market share, the Company will continue to invest in the business to lower operating cost and build new sales volume through the pursuit of new markets and value-added products.
Manufacturing throughput increased during the quarter with a combination of improved line efficiency in Degelis and planned overtime. The transition to the new manufacturing network is expected by the end of the second quarter, which should reduce operating costs and increase the overall network capacity, as well as allow for growth.
The Company expects to spend approximately $8.0 million for its footprint optimization, slightly higher than anticipated, of which, approximately $4.7 million will be spent in fiscal 2020 to complete the Granby relocation.
See “Forward Looking Statements” section and “Risks and Uncertainties” section.
In analyzing results, we supplement the use of financial measures that are calculated and presented in accordance with IFRS with a number of non-GAAP financial measures.  A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position or cash flow that excludes (includes) amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding (including) amounts, that are included (excluded) in most directly comparable measures calculated and presented in accordance with IFRS.  Non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized; therefore, it may not be possible to compare these financial measures with the non-GAAP financial measures of other companies having the same or similar businesses.  We strongly encourage investors to review the audited consolidated financial statements and publicly filed reports in their entirety, and not to rely on any single financial measure.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures in addition to, and in conjunction with, results presented in accordance with IFRS.  These non-GAAP financial measures reflect an additional way of viewing aspects of the operations that, when viewed with the IFRS results and the accompanying reconciliations to corresponding IFRS financial measures, may provide a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business.
The following is a description of the non-GAAP measures used by the Company in the MD&A:
Adjusted gross margin is defined as gross margin adjusted for:
“the adjustment to cost of sales”, which comprises the mark-to-market gains or losses on sugar futures, foreign exchange forward contracts and embedded derivatives as shown in the notes to the consolidated financial statements and the cumulative timing differences as a result of mark-to-market gains or losses on sugar futures, foreign exchange forward contracts and embedded derivatives as described below; and
“the amortization of transitional balance to cost of sales for cash flow hedges”, which is the transitional marked-to-market balance of the natural gas futures outstanding as of October 1, 2016 amortized over time based on their respective settlement date until all existing natural gas futures have expired, as shown in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Adjusted results from operating activities (“Adjusted EBIT”) is defined as EBIT adjusted for the adjustment to cost of sales, the amortization of transitional balances to cost of sales for cash flow hedges.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as adjusted EBIT adjusted to add back depreciation and amortization expenses, goodwill impairment and the Maple products segment non-recurring expenses.
Adjusted net earnings is defined as net (loss) earnings adjusted for the adjustment to cost of sales, the amortization of transitional balances to cost of sales for cash flow hedges, the amortization of transitional balance to net finance costs and the income tax impact on these adjustments.   Amortization of transitional balance to net finance costs is defined as the transitional marked-to-market balance of the interest rate swaps outstanding as of October 1, 2016, amortized over time based on their respective settlement date until all existing interest rate swaps agreements have expired, as shown in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Adjusted gross margin rate per MT is defined as adjusted gross margin of the Sugar segment divided by the sales volume of the Sugar segment.
Adjusted gross margin percentage is defined as the adjusted gross margin of the Maple products segment divided by the revenues generated by the Maple products segment.
Adjusted net earnings per share is defined as adjusted net earnings divided by the weighted average number of shares outstanding.
Free cash flow is defined as cash flow from operations excluding changes in non-cash working capital, mark-to-market and derivative timing adjustments, amortization of transitional balances, financial instruments non-cash amount, and includes deferred financing charges, funds received from stock options exercised, funds paid for the purchase and cancellation of shares, capital and intangible assets expenditures, net of operational excellence capital expenditures, and payments of capital leases.
In the MD&A, we discuss the non-GAAP financial measures, including the reasons why we believe these measures provide useful information regarding the financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and financial position, as applicable.  We also discuss, to the extent material, the additional purposes, if any, for which these measures are used.  These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for, analysis of the Company’s results as reported under GAAP. Reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable IFRS financial measures are as follows:
