A total of 103,554,993 shares and 103,536,923 shares were outstanding as at March 28, 2020 and May 5, 2020, respectively (105,008,070 as at March 30, 2019).
As at March 28, 2020, the Company had an outstanding amount of $57,425 for its sixth series convertible unsecured subordinated debentures (“Sixth series debentures”) and $97,575 outstanding for its seventh series convertible unsecured subordinated debentures (“Seventh series debentures”).  The convertible unsecured subordinated debentures mature on December 31, 2024 and on June 30, 2025, respectively.
During the first quarter, a total of $75 thousands of the Sixth series debentures and $175 thousands of the seventh series debentures was converted by holders of the securities for a total of 9,079 and 19,774 common shares, respectively.
On December 2, 2019, 563,500 share options were granted to certain executives at a price of $4.68 per common share.  Then on March 20, 2020, 250,000 share options were granted to an executive at a price of $4.28 per common share.  In both cases, the price of the share option granted represented the average market price for the five business days before the granting of options.  These share options are exercisable to a maximum of twenty percent per year, starting after the first anniversary date of the granting of the share options and will expire after a term of ten years. Upon termination, resignation, retirement, death or long-term disability, all share options granted under the Share Option Plan not vested are forfeited.
On December 2, 2019, 324,932 performance share units (“PSUs”) were granted to executives.  These PSUs will vest at the end of the 2020-2022 Performance Cycle based on the achievement of total shareholder returns set by the Human Resources and Compensation Committee (“HRCC”) and the Board of Directors of the Company.  The value to be paid-out to each participant will be equal to the result of: the number of PSUs granted to the participant which have vested, multiplied by the volume weighted average closing price of the Common Shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange (the “TSX”) for the five trading days immediately preceding the day on which the Company shall pay the value to the participant under the PSU Plan.
On May 22, 2019, the Company received approval from the Toronto Stock Exchange to proceed with a normal course issuer bid (“2019 NCIB”).  Under the NCIB, the Company may purchase up to 1,500,000 comment shares and commenced on May 24, 2019.  In addition, on May 22, 2019, the Company entered into an automatic share purchase agreement with Scotia Capital Inc. in connection with the 2019 NCIB. Under the agreement, Scotia may acquire, at its discretion, common shares on the Company’s behalf during certain “black-out” periods, subject to certain parameters as to price and number of shares.  During the second quarter and the first half of fiscal 2020, the Company purchased 1,146,030 common shares and 1,359,324 common shares, respectively, for a total cash consideration of $5.4 million and $6.5 million, respectively.  Subsequent to quarter end, on March 30, 2020, an additional 18,070 common shares were purchased for a total cash consideration of $0.1 million. An amount of 122,606 common shares were purchased in fiscal 2019, which brought the total purchase under the 2019 NCIB to 1,500,000 common shares.
The impact of disease and epidemics may have a negative impact on the Company, Lantic or TMTC and their performance and financial position. In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, known as “COVID-19” was identified in Wuhan, China. As of March 20, 2020, COVID-19 had spread to over 100 countries and been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. COVID-19 has resulted in, and renewed outbreaks of COVID-19 or new epidemics could result in, health or other government authorities requiring the closure of offices or other businesses and could also result in a general economic decline.  For example, such events may adversely impact economic activity through disruption in supply and delivery chains.  Moreover, the Company, Lantic or TMTC’s operations could be negatively affected if personnel are affected by or quarantined as the result of, or in order to avoid, exposure to a contagious illness. Lantic and TMTC have been designated as “essential businesses” at this time, with minimal disruptions to operations, as described above.
A resulting negative impact on economic fundamentals and consumer confidence may negatively impact market value, increase market volatility, cause credit losses on customer sales or credit spreads to widen, and reduce liquidity, all of which could have an adverse effect on the business of the Company, Lantic or TMTC.  The duration of the business disruption and related financial impact caused by a widespread health crisis cannot be reasonably estimated.  The speed and extent of the spread of COVID-19, and the duration and intensity of resulting business disruption and related financial and social impact, are uncertain, and such adverse effects may be material.  While governmental agencies and private sector participants will seek to mitigate the adverse effects of this coronavirus, which may include such measures as heightened sanitary practices, telecommuting, quarantine, curtailment or cessation of travel, and other restrictions, and the medical community is seeking to develop vaccines and other treatment options, the efficacy of such measures is uncertain.  The Company’s, Lantic’s and TMTC’s operations and business results could be materially adversely affected.  The extent to which COVID-19 (or any other disease or epidemic) impacts business activity or investment results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the coronavirus and the actions required to contain this coronavirus or treat its impact, among others.
All other risk factors in the Company’s business and operations are discussed in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our Annual Report for the year ended September 28, 2019. This document is available on SEDAR at www.sedar.com or on our website at www.LanticRogers.com .
The health and safety of our employees remains our top priority and the Company is closely following all public health authority recommendations.  The operations of both of our Sugar and Maple products segments are considered as an essential service and as a result, our plants have continued to fully operate without any disruption to date despite the COVID-19 pandemic. While most of our salaried employees are able to work from home, the employees in our operations have continued to come to work, resulting in our operations being largely unaffected by the pandemic, to date. It remains difficult to estimate or forecast the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic on the continued operation of the Company and/or the financial impact it may have; however, the Company is closely monitoring the situation and will react quickly to the changing circumstances.
Market conditions remain favourable for our sugar business and, despite the COVID-19 pandemic and the challenges in our manufacturing and supply chain plans related to the smaller crop in Taber, we continue to expect that the Sugar segment will exceed last fiscal year’s adjusted EBITDA.
As a result of severe adverse weather in late 2019, the beet harvest at Taber was terminated early, leading to lower than expected refined sugar volumes of approximately 65,000 metric tonnes, compared to previous expectations of 125,000 metric tonnes. As a result of the lower production volumes from Taber, the Company has optimized its supply chain to continue to service its customers. These changes mainly include the supply of cane sugar from the Vancouver and Montréal refineries, as both refineries have excess capacity to supply to the Company’s domestic market.  The Company will continue to mitigate the financial implication of a smaller sugar beet crop in Taber.
Due to similar to Canada beet sugar supply disruptions, on April 3, 2020, the United States Trade Representative (“USTR”) announced the allocation of additional Tariff-rate Quota (“TRQ”) volume for raw cane sugar and refined sugar.  Canada was allocated a total of 5,000 metric tonnes, to be entered into the United States prior to September 30, 2020 and can only be supplied by beet sugar from Taber.  In addition, a Global refined TRQ quota of 176,437 metric tonnes was also put in place with seven distinct tranches opening on April 3, 2020 and closing on June 29, 2020, which may be supplied on a first-come, first-served basis.  The Company intends to maximize its export volume to the U.S. under the Global refined TRQ with sales from its Montreal and Vancouver facilities and to fully utilize the additional refined beet sugar TRQ allocated to Canada from the Taber factory.  As a result, the Company now expects that export volumes should be slightly above fiscal 2019, despite the fact that shipments to Mexico were postponed into fiscal 2022 at no additional costs to the Company.  At this point in time, the Company does not anticipate any additional volume under the Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (“CUSMA”) despite the fact that all three countries have ratified CUSMA and that it is expected to take effect on July 1, 2020.
The Company anticipates that volume for the consumer segment for fiscal 2020 should be approximately 10,000 metric tonnes higher than fiscal 2019.  Demand for consumer volume was strong at the end of the second quarter and remained strong into the beginning of the third quarter; however, it is difficult to estimate the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on the Company’s future volume. Part of the stronger consumer volume could be offset by the anticipated slowdown in the food service segment, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Company continues to anticipate that volume for the liquid and industrial segments should be comparable to fiscal 2019.  The Taber factory delivers a significant portion of its volume as liquid, to customers, which is still expected to occur in fiscal 2020.  The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on volume for both of these segments is not expected to be significant.
Despite the challenges created by a small crop in Taber and the COVID-19 pandemic, the overall Sugar segment volume expectations for the Company is positive and it is anticipated that the total sales volume should exceed fiscal 2019 by approximately 9,000 metric tonnes, totalling approximately 750,000 metric tonnes.
In light of the smaller crop in Taber, it is expected that total distribution costs will increase in fiscal 2020 as we reconfigure our supply chains.
The Company’s preliminary estimate for costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic total approximately $1.0 million in additional administrative expenses in fiscal 2020, driven by premiums paid to employees starting at the beginning of the third quarter, additional supplies and consulting services.  The financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on administrative expenses may be higher should restrictions enforced by the government agencies continue past June 2020.
As at March 28, 2020, the Company has not re-assessed the defined benefit pension plan and other benefit plans assumptions.  As usual, the actuarial assumptions will be re-assessed at year end.  Any material change in assumptions such as discount rate and/or pension assets rate of return may have a material impact on the financial results of the Company.  In addition, the actuarial evaluations of the two defined benefit plans have not been completed as at May 5, 2020.  Any significant change in the assumptions used for funding purposes may have a material impact on pension plan contributions.
The Company contracted 30,000 acres for planting in Taber for the 2020 crop, an increase of 2,000 acres from last year.  Taber is expected to start harvesting and slicing earlier in September than previous years and, under normal growing conditions, the new crop is expected to yield approximately 132,000 metric tonnes.
Spending on capital projects have slowed down in March as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and is expected to continue at a slower pace than originally anticipated for fiscal 2020.  As a result, overall capital spending, including a high proportion of return on investment capital expenditures, may vary between $17.0 million and $19.0 million, down from the previously expectation of $20.0 million.
The maple syrup harvest season has started, albeit the reception of barrels is slower than prior years given supply chain challenges associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.  It is still very early in the harvesting season, but it is expected that the 2020 crop should range between an average and above average crop as opposed to a record crop last year.
The current year-to-date margins reflect the more competitive market conditions starting last year and as such, we anticipate gross margins rates to remain relatively stable at current levels. The Company is focused on defending its market share and improving its competitive advantage by continuing to pursue opportunities to further lower operating costs and drive new sales volumes through the pursuit of new markets and value-added products.  Although we have seen very strong demand at the onset of the COVID -19 pandemic, we are not anticipating a continuation of this trend into the future.
Manufacturing throughput continued to increase during the quarter with a combination of improved line efficiency in Granby and planned overtime. The focus for the remainder of the year will shift towards maximizing the various line efficiencies while optimizing shift crewing and production planning, now that the transition between plants is completed, which will allow for growth.  Labour costs for the remainder of the year will improve versus the first half of the fiscal year but not at anticipated levels due to new COVID-19 pandemic operating procedures and the impact of third-party plant access restrictions on the commissioning process.
The Company expects to spend less than $1.0 million in the last six months of the year for its footprint optimization project to complete the Granby relocation and the commissioning of equipment.
See “Forward Looking Statements” section and “Risks and Uncertainties” section.
In analyzing results, we supplement the use of financial measures that are calculated and presented in accordance with IFRS with a number of non-GAAP financial measures.  A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position or cash flow that excludes (includes) amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding (including) amounts, that are included (excluded) in most directly comparable measures calculated and presented in accordance with IFRS.  Non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized; therefore, it may not be possible to compare these financial measures with the non-GAAP financial measures of other companies having the same or similar businesses.  We strongly encourage investors to review the audited consolidated financial statements and publicly filed reports in their entirety, and not to rely on any single financial measure.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures in addition to, and in conjunction with, results presented in accordance with IFRS.  These non-GAAP financial measures reflect an additional way of viewing aspects of the operations that, when viewed with the IFRS results and the accompanying reconciliations to corresponding IFRS financial measures, may provide a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business.
The following is a description of the non-GAAP measures used by the Company in the MD&A:
Adjusted gross margin is defined as gross margin adjusted for:
“the adjustment to cost of sales”, which comprises the mark-to-market gains or losses on sugar futures, foreign exchange forward contracts and embedded derivatives as shown in the notes to the consolidated financial statements and the cumulative timing differences as a result of mark-to-market gains or losses on sugar futures, foreign exchange forward contracts and embedded derivatives as described below; and
“the amortization of transitional balance to cost of sales for cash flow hedges”, which is the transitional marked-to-market balance of the natural gas futures outstanding as of October 1, 2016 amortized over time based on their respective settlement date until all existing natural gas futures have expired, as shown in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Adjusted results from operating activities (“Adjusted EBIT”) is defined as EBIT adjusted for the adjustment to cost of sales, the amortization of transitional balances to cost of sales for cash flow hedges.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as adjusted EBIT adjusted to add back depreciation and amortization expenses, goodwill impairment and the Maple products segment non-recurring expenses.
Adjusted net earnings is defined as net (loss) earnings adjusted for the adjustment to cost of sales, the amortization of transitional balances to cost of sales for cash flow hedges, the amortization of transitional balance to net finance costs and the income tax impact on these adjustments.   Amortization of transitional balance to net finance costs is defined as the transitional marked-to-market balance of the interest rate swaps outstanding as of October 1, 2016, amortized over time based on their respective settlement date until all existing interest rate swaps agreements have expired, as shown in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Adjusted gross margin rate per MT is defined as adjusted gross margin of the Sugar segment divided by the sales volume of the Sugar segment.
Adjusted gross margin percentage is defined as the adjusted gross margin of the Maple products segment divided by the revenues generated by the Maple products segment.
Adjusted net earnings per share is defined as adjusted net earnings divided by the weighted average number of shares outstanding.
Free cash flow is defined as cash flow from operations excluding changes in non-cash working capital, mark-to-market and derivative timing adjustments, amortization of transitional balances, financial instruments non-cash amount, and includes deferred financing charges, funds received from stock options exercised, funds paid for the purchase and cancellation of shares, capital and intangible assets expenditures, net of operational excellence capital expenditures, and payments of capital leases.
Pro-forma debt (for the purposes of calculating financial covenant) is defined as the outstanding balance under the revolving credit facility, net of any bank cash balances, and it includes any obligations under IAS 17 Leases and it excludes the impact from the adoption of IFRS 16 Leases with regards to any new lease obligations as well as all convertible unsecured subordinated debentures.
Pro-forma Adjusted EBITDA (for the purposes of calculating financial covenant) is defined as Adjusted EBITDA adjusted to exclude the impact from the adoption of IFRS 16 Leases on Adjusted EBITDA.
In the MD&A, we discuss the non-GAAP financial measures, including the reasons why we believe these measures provide useful information regarding the financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and financial position, as applicable.  We also discuss, to the extent material, the additional purposes, if any, for which these measures are used.  These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for, analysis of the Company’s results as reported under GAAP. Reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable IFRS financial measures are as follows:
