Cheryl Strayed calls the writer Margaret Atwood to talk about hard times, pansies and eight decades of getting it done.
Today, I’m going to call Margaret Atwood, the legendary, extraordinary Margaret Atwood. Author of so many novels and books of poetry and children’s books. I was still in my teens when The Handmaid’s Tale came out, and I read it and was astonished by it. And I’ve loved her ever since. She’s written so powerfully about people in incredibly difficult circumstances, people who can’t even use their own names, people whose movement is constricted and whose thought is constricted. And I think that there’s something, in essence, the way she writes about how we persist in the face of extreme difficulty that I felt like she might be the person to talk to at this very moment when so many of us are wondering, well, how do we live this new way? And what is the way forward?
Margaret Atwood has written about that in so many ways and so many forms for decades now. I’m going to give her a call.
Hi, Margaret. I’m so glad to talk to you.
Lovely to talk to you.
So where are you, Margaret? And who are you with?
I’m right in my study. My sister is here. She has brought her sewing machine. I’ve dredged out my ancient sewing machine. And we’re going to make facemasks.
And we’re going to go get some blue shop towels, because apparently they make good linings.
Now, is this sewing machine — tell me, is this something you’ve had for a long time? And how did you learn to sew?
I’ve had it for a long time. I sewed all my clothes in high school, as people who were that way inclined did. And I also sewed clothes for my baby sister, who is here with me right now. She’s 12 years younger. And I also, of course, sewed for my daughter. And I sewed for myself for years. And then I just kind of didn’t for a while. So I’m going to have to learn how to re-thread this thing and oil it and all of those things. But I think I can probably get back into the groove.
Yeah. You know, it’s so funny that you should say that. Because, honestly, just two days ago, my daughter Bobbi, who is named after my mother Bobbi, said, do we have a sewing machine? And I said, I do. It’s in the basement. And it was your grandmother’s. The grandmother she never met, my mother, was an amazing seamstress and sewed all of my clothes when I was growing up. And so we pulled it upstairs. And it was the same thing. I was like, OK, I used to know how to thread this thing.
Yeah. Where does the thread go?
Right. But it’s the same thing. And I think it’s fascinating. We’re kind of going back in time in an interesting way. You grew up in rural northern Quebec, right?
OK, well, it depends what part of growing up you’re talking about. So one to five, out in the backwoods of Quebec — except in the winters, it was city. It was Ottawa. And then by the time I was 12, I was spending a full year in school. And that would be in Toronto. And that was where I was doing all of the sewing. So we started in grade 8. And guess what we made for our mothers?
I know. You know why I know that? The same thing. I grew up in northern Minnesota. Now, I’m a little younger than you. I’m 51. And you are —
That isn’t just a little younger, Cheryl.
That is a lot younger.
But no, the same thing. So this is something you and I share in common, this growing up in the sort of wilds of the north country. I was northern Minnesota. But because of that, I think of myself as an honorary Canadian.
Very close, yeah. And so I’m curious. Is it true you didn’t go to sort of formal school until you were about 12?
No, in the winters I went. Because my dad was a forest entomologist. That means bugs that eat trees. And they are dormant in the winter. They don’t do anything. So we were always in the city at that time. But it was the war. And there was no school, Cheryl. There wasn’t any pre-school. There wasn’t any daycare. There wasn’t any schooly school school until grade one. So I didn’t go to school until I was six. What a shock. It was horrible.
Well, sit in a desk in a row. It was also the military phase of school. So you did a lot of marching here and there. And the girls door, the boys door — you lined up, and then you marched in. And it was some kind of eternal curse if you went in the wrong door.
And I’m going to guess that this approach was always contrary to your spirit.
Who knows what your spirit is when you’re seven?
I think I disagree. I mean, you have a daughter, right? I mean, wasn’t she who she is the minute she was born? Didn’t you feel her personality?
Well, sure, but you have to wait and find out what form that is going to take.
So when you think about when you became you — I mean, what were you like as a girl?
Well, I was — like all kids, you’re in different ways at different ages. Are you not?
So I would say I was a happy four-year-old. I was a glum nine-year-old. I was a shy 12-year-old. And I was the life of the party at 16.
But what else do you need to know?
Well, Margaret, so when I emailed you and asked if I could call you, I told you. I said, this “Sugar Calling” thing, I’m really interested in talking to writers who are over the age of 60, because I’m seeking wisdom. And your reply was, well, I’d love to do it. I don’t know if I have any wisdom to offer. And of course, I know you’re wrong about that. But what I’m curious is, are you wiser now than you were at 40, or 60 or 20?
No, I’m wiser than I was at 17. And if that isn’t true for other people, they’re in trouble.
I think we all are.
Yeah, so I’d say I’m wiser than I was at 17. And I’m wiser than I was at 30. But then you start thinking of wise people you have known. So I think my parents were both pretty wise. My mother especially was exceptionally wise. My grandmother was very wise. And one of the wise things about them was that they instinctively followed the rule of the Inuit people of northern Canada, which is, when you’re an elder — and it’s other people who decide whether you’re an elder or not. It’s not just being old. But when you’re an elder, you’re considered to be wise. But you don’t offer any advice unless people ask you for it. And I think that’s a pretty wise thing to do.
Yeah, so when my daughter had a child, my friends said to me, just remember, you know nothing.
I think that’s part of wisdom, knowing when to stay silent and to simply let somebody make their choices, to sit back and witness.
Well, they’ll ask you for advice if they want it. And if they don’t want it, they’re not going to listen to it anyway. So why waste your time?
Right. Well, I certainly consider you an elder, Margaret. I mean, you have —
Well, I’ll tell you if I don’t know the answer.
Or I will say, Cheryl, what do you think? What do you think you should do about that?
And I think that that’s often the key. In my work as Dear Sugar, where I did give people advice when they sought it from me, I would very often say, the answer is actually within you. The question that you asked me tells me the truth. It tells me the thing that you want to do or the thing that you know is the right thing. I think a lot of it is very often we’re afraid to trust our own instincts. And so when we seek advice, we’re really just seeking reassurance.
Yeah, confirmation. Exactly. So I want to just back up. Here you are sewing masks with your baby sister. Are you guys being socially isolated in your place? Are you in Toronto? Or where exactly are you?
I’m in Toronto. I socially isolated when I got back from where I had been, which was on March the 10th. Of course, I made it out of New Zealand, Australia and Ireland in the nick of time.
And then, of course, I didn’t see anybody or breathe on them for the required number of days. And of course, now we’re social distancing. But because she lives in the woods and doesn’t see other people, and because I’ve socially isolated for all that time, we’re safe together.
She comes in on the weekends and cheers me up.
Yeah. But otherwise, you’re alone during the week.
It doesn’t feel like that, Cheryl, because everybody and their dog wants me to do something for them.
And we had a squirrel problem just recently. So the squirrel guy came. The roofing guy came. They can come, because they’re on the outside of your house. So you’re not near them. They’re doing their thing outside. So although, yes, I’m, quote, “alone,” I’m not alone.
That’s true. So tell me about your days.
Well, your days in general, during this time of social isolation.
There isn’t any in generally, because it’s something new every day. So today, we went out looking for shop towels colored blue, blue shop towels, because they are apparently very good filters for masks. But the place we went to we saw from afar that it had a huge, long line-up of people waiting to get in. And they were not social distancing. So we turned around, and we said, we think we can get some of these things online. And we can get other things by ordering them and opting for curb pickup. So we’re going to try doing that. But we scored something that’s in quite short supply, Cheryl. And that would be the pots of pansies.
We actually scored a couple of pots of pansies. The ordinary garden shops seem to be closed. However, at our local food depot, we saw two pots of pansies. And we grabbed them right away.
And where are you putting these pansies? Are they —
We put them in pots in the back yard. And they look very decorative and cheerful.
Beautiful. Wow. So it sounds like you’re kind of, so far, doing quite well for yourself during this time.
You know, Cheryl, you know this yourself, that if you grow up in the backwoods, not seeing a lot of people all the time doesn’t bother you a lot. I think it’s hard for people who have been used to going to the office, running their business, seeing a lot of people, talking to a lot of people in person — I think it’s very hard for them. Because they’re not used to this.
So OK, so far things are going well. You’re thriving in the face of this pandemic?
What is it that you think might go wrong, Cheryl? I think anybody who isn’t ill, and who has a place to be and who knows how to get food is in a very good place. But there are other people who don’t have that. They’re having a hard time.
And that’s my next question. Are you afraid for the world? Are you afraid for yourself? What are some of the more — I mean, what are you thinking as you’re watching the news?
OK, so the older you get, the less afraid you are of those kinds of things. You’re afraid for other people. But you already know your plot, the plot of your life. And the plot of your life is that there’s a lot more in the past than there’s going to be in the future. So time is limited anyway. So why waste your time worrying and being afraid? But if you’re younger, of course, you don’t know that plot. And you think that this may be my whole future just gone up in smoke. Everything that I thought was going to be in my life is in question. And particularly if, for instance, you’ve lost your job, you’re unemployed, you don’t know how to pay for things, you don’t know how you’re going to eat — these are very worrisome things.
And what if you have young children? So that can be very, very stressful and worrisome. And a lot of people are extremely anxious. But if you’re asking me, personally — so day before yesterday, I climbed out on the roof, because we had a squirrel problem. I wanted to deal with it. And poor Lucia was saying, don’t do that! Don’t do that! I said, what can go wrong? It’s a flat roof.
She works with me. So she was wringing your hands. Let me do that. I said, you’re too tall. You wouldn’t be able to get out the window.
Oh, Margaret. I’m sorry. I’m sorry, I’m with Lucia on this. I’m all for pushing the boundaries, but maybe you shouldn’t go up on the roof. I don’t know.
Oh, come on. It wasn’t dangerous, OK. I don’t do deliberately dangerous things. Trust me. That’s part of my wisdom. I know when it’s dangerous.
That’s, I guess, right. Well, unless the squirrels came after you. That could have happened too.
They would not come after me. I have an aura of squirrel protection around me like an invisible force field.
I was putting hot pepper down their hole so they wouldn’t aggravate me.
How does the hot pepper down their hole keep them from aggravating you?
Well, they’re like people, Cheryl. They’re mammals. And they have very sensitive noses. So the pepper would say to them, this is not where you want to be.
You do not want to be in Margaret’s ceiling. Yeah, so the hot pepper is to the squirrel like the yellow tape is to the place where you’re not supposed to go.
Got it. Got it. Because really, I want to come socially isolate with you and your sister. Because it sounds like — and Lucia. You’re having that sort of barrel of fun there over in Toronto.
It’s limited parameters. But within those parameters, we’re doing the best we can to not worry and do things that are positive.
Well, I want to ask you, though, about — so you mentioned the people who are really struggling, who either have family members or loved ones who have the virus and are sick or dying, or people whose jobs have been lost and whose lives have been deeply stressed. And I couldn’t help but think that you’ve written in your books about people who are really living in scary and restricted circumstances —
— and dire — and I thought you might, as an elder, have something to say or to sort of tell me about how you crafted those characters, what you imagined when you imagined those kind of difficult circumstances? And any kind of wisdom you might have to offer to people who are having a really difficult time right now.
Yeah, well, it would depend what kind of difficult time they’re having. So a material, physical difficult time, or an emotional difficult time, or both. So I was born in 1939, which meant that my early childhood was spent during World War II. So when I think of hard times I think of people in Europe during those times. Those were very hard times. And I’ve also always been interested in plagues. And I think that’s partly from hearing about my mom and dad who went through the 1919 influenza epidemic, which was very lethal and killed a huge number of people around the world, like really a lot. So the whole family — five kids, two grown ups — went through that. And they all survived. So that’s rather a hopeful story to have heard. So I think for young people who have never been through any of those things or lived at a time when they were happening, this seems just frightful. Seems like the absolute worst thing. They’ve never known anything like it. It’s horrible. But if you’ve witnessed, heard about, and known people who have been through these other things, you think, OK, we’re going to make it through this. It’s going to be bad. And things are not going to be the same on the other side. But you know they aren’t. They change anyway.
So I’ve got a little bit of perspective, which is a man called Barry Lord, who wrote a book called “Art & Energy,” in which he connects the kinds of culture you have with the kind of energy that is supporting it. He goes back to the days of fire. He goes through coal, which produced a culture of production. So Marx and trade unions and everything came out of that. And then oil comes along. And it’s very cheap, and it doesn’t take that many people to produce it. And you get a culture of consumption. Lots of cheap stuff. But we’re now transitioning into renewable energy. And that will produce and is producing right now a culture of stewardship. And this time is going to give us a bit of a reset button. How are we going to do things differently on the other side?
Yeah, I think you’re right that we will. And it is interesting. This pandemic, I think, is really making people live differently right now, today. And I do feel like on the level of really contemplating climate change, so much of that conversation has been around all the things we can’t do. Oh, we’re all so tied to our automobiles, and our travel, and our jobs and our this and that and the other thing. We can’t possibly reduce. And yet, here we are. Everything, thanks to COVID-19, came to a screeching halt.
Yeah. I think we’re going to be saying to ourselves, do I really need that? Do I really need to be doing that? So I think it is going to be — I’ve heard a number of people saying, I just wasn’t really using by my home as a home. I was just using it as a place to sleep. And now that I’ve had to be in it, I’m creating a whole new relationship with it. I think you look at stuff you have. And you think, do I really need that stuff? Could somebody else be making use of that stuff, which for me is sitting in a drawer? So I think a lot of people are thinking that way. And they’re sorting through their stuff and minimizing it. Are you?
I am. Yeah. I’ve really thought about this in a big way. I was this morning and getting dressed and thinking, I’m wearing the same thing I’ve worn for five days.
I know. Well, no. It’s been washed in between a time or two.
I mean, I don’t need all the clothes that I think I needed. Now, of course, you and I both do public events. And so you need a certain kind of wardrobe. But it’s been pretty liberating to just adapt a uniform, essentially, my stay at home pandemic uniform that, really, I’m very happy wearing.
And what is that like, Cheryl? Can you describe that for us?
They’re black. They’re black and gray. Why are you asking me these questions?
Well, because it’s a podcast. And people are listening. And they want to know what this outfit is like.
OK, so I’m wearing this kind of gray sweater right now over the black top I’ve been wearing all week and the black pants I’ve been wearing all week. What are you wearing right now, now that we’re on the subject?
Red. I’m wearing red, Cheryl. Because I’m old. It picks up the skin tones.
You know, I remember you — I think you said that to me the first time we met. You looked beautiful. And you said, yes, it picks up my skin tones, this color.
Think pink, pack black. You must have heard that.
See, I haven’t. And this is why I called you, my dear elder, to give me all the best advice. So I’m curious, who do you turn to? It sounds like you’re not feeling terribly alone and sad and struggling right now. But when you do, who do you to turn to or what do you turn to for wisdom?
Or just to have a chat. Well, it depends what the subject is.
I’m not — let’s see, how can I put this.
I like to talk things over with people whose opinions I value. So I have a number of people in my life that I can do that with. Somewhat fewer in number than they used to be, Cheryl. Because in my age group, people are dropping off the tree.
So nonetheless, there are younger people who aren’t stupid, believe it or not.
How does it feel to lose some of your best friends and the people who you used to turn to in hard times? How does that feel, to watch people around you dying who you love?
When people die. OK, people die. I hate to break this to you. But that’s one of the things that they do. And that has been going on pretty much my whole life. Not my first rodeo of people dying. And it’s always very hard if you value that person. They’re not going to be in your life anymore in the way that they used to be. They’ll still be in your life. It’s just that there probably won’t be any new conversations. If there are some new conversations and you’re awake while you’re having them, you’re not alone on the planet either. It’s fairly normal for people to turn up who aren’t alive in the usual sense anymore.
You feel like the dead talk to you?
Well, I think if you’re a writer, they’ve been talking to you all your life through their work.
Certainly. So you have a poem — speaking of writers talking to you through their work. You have a poem that I think you wanted to share with me. Would you read it to me?
Yeah. The question is, what did I do with it? Here it is. Here it is. I found it. OK, so this is by a poet called Jay Macpherson. J-A-Y M-A-C-P-H-E-R-S-O-N. She was actually a teacher of mine. And then she became a friend of mine. She’d had a very peculiar life. She was one of those English children that was evacuated during World War II and ended up in Newfoundland. And was also a very instinctive poet. So this poem is called “The Beauty of Job’s Daughters.” And it’s in a book of hers called Poems Twice Told. And what it is about is the force of the imagination — something that we can all think about in these times. So the story of Job is that God and the devil decided to have a wager about Job. And God allowed Satan to torture Job in various different ways, including killing all of his children. So at the end of the story, God admits that this hadn’t been fair and gives Job his wealth back and also gives him other children. So I always thought that it was a pretty fishy story. So I kill all your children. And these new children are supposed to make up for that. I don’t think so.
I don’t think it works that way. But that’s how it works in the story. And so this poem is called “The Beauty of Job’s Daughters.” The old, the mad, the blind have fairest daughters. Take Job. The beasts the accuser sends at evening shoulder his house and shake it. He’s not there, attained in age to inwardness of daughters in all the land no women found so fair. Angels and sons of God are nearest neighbors. And even the accuser may repair to walk with Job in pleasures of his daughters. Wide, shining rooms, more warmly lit at evening, gardens beyond whose secrets scent the air. Not wiles of men, nor envy of the neighbors, riches of earth, nor what heaven holds more rare can take from Job the beauty of his daughters, the gardens and the rock, music at evening and cup so full that all who come must share. Perhaps we passed them? It was late, or evening. And surely, those were desert stumps, not daughters. In fact, we doubt that they were ever there. The old, the mad, the blind have fairest daughters. In all the land, no women found so fair.
Guess who I learned to read that from?
