Decision is aimed at boosting research in sugarcane: minister
The move is aimed at boosting research in sugarcane farming for agriculturists in Marathwada and Vidarbha regions.
“The land in Patharwala village of Ambad taluka in Jalna district has been allotted to Pune-based VSI on 30 years lease as per ready reckoner rates,” an official said on Thursday.
The VSI was established in 1975 by sugarcane growers of the cooperative sugar factories. The institute performs scientific, technical and educational functions relevant to the sugar industry under one umbrella.
NCP president and former Union Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar is the chairman of the institute.
When contacted, State Health Minister Rajesh Tope, a member of the VSI governing council, said the decision to allot the land was aimed at boosting research in sugarcane farming in Marathwada and Vidarbha regions.
“It will be a boon to the farmers in these two regions,” he said.
“VSI centre in Jalna district will play a major role in academic, extension and research for sugarcane growers,” he said.
He said the VSI centre will provide sugarcane seeds to farmers and conduct research in breeding various varieties of sugarcane.
Mr. Tope said that the land was allotted under the condition that it will not be used for commercial purpose.
You have reached your limit for free articles this month.
Start your 14 days trial now. Sign Up
Find mobile-friendly version of articles from the day's newspaper in one easy-to-read list.
Move smoothly between articles as our pages load instantly.
Enjoy reading as many articles as you wish without any limitations.
A one-stop-shop for seeing the latest updates, and managing your preferences.
A select list of articles that match your interests and tastes.
We brief you on the latest and most important developments, three times a day.
*Our Digital Subscription plans do not currently include the e-paper ,crossword, iPhone, iPad mobile applications and print. Our plans enhance your reading experience.
We have been keeping you up-to-date with information on the developments in India and the world that have a bearing on our health and wellbeing, our lives and livelihoods, during these difficult times. To enable wide dissemination of news that is in public interest, we have increased the number of articles that can be read free, and extended free trial periods. However, we have a request for those who can afford to subscribe: please do. As we fight disinformation and misinformation, and keep apace with the happenings, we need to commit greater resources to news gathering operations. We promise to deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Your support for our journalism is invaluable. It’s a support for truth and fairness in journalism. It has helped us keep apace with events and happenings.
The Hindu has always stood for journalism that is in the public interest. At this difficult time, it becomes even more important that we have access to information that has a bearing on our health and well-being, our lives, and livelihoods. As a subscriber, you are not only a beneficiary of our work but also its enabler.
We also reiterate here the promise that our team of reporters, copy editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers will deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Please enter a valid email address.
var data = {"email" : email, "category" : "mb"};
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 768px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
box-shadow: 0 0 4px 0 rgba(0, 0, 0, .328);
@media ( max-width : 320px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
