Should You Think About Buying Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries Limited (NSE:DALMIASUG) Now?
Simply Wall St December 9, 2019
Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries Limited ( NSE:DALMIASUG ), which is in the food business, and is based in India, saw a double-digit share price rise of over 10% in the past couple of months on the NSEI. As a small cap stock, hardly covered by any analysts, there is generally more of an opportunity for mispricing as there is less activity to push the stock closer to fair value. Is there still an opportunity here to buy? Let’s examine Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s valuation and outlook in more detail to determine if there’s still a bargain opportunity.
Is Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries still cheap?
Good news, investors! Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries is still a bargain right now. In this instance, I’ve used the price-to-earnings (PE) ratio given that there is not enough information to reliably forecast the stock’s cash flows. I find that Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s ratio of 3.61x is below its peer average of 12.65x, which suggests the stock is undervalued compared to the Food industry. Although, there may be another chance to buy again in the future. This is because Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries’s beta (a measure of share price volatility) is high, meaning its price movements will be exaggerated relative to the rest of the market. If the market is bearish, the company’s shares will likely fall by more than the rest of the market, providing a prime buying opportunity.
Can we expect growth from Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries?
NSEI:DALMIASUG Past and Future Earnings, December 9th 2019
Future outlook is an important aspect when you’re looking at buying a stock, especially if you are an investor looking for growth in your portfolio. Buying a great company with a robust outlook at a cheap price is always a good investment, so let’s also take a look at the company’s future expectations. However, with a negative profit growth of -17% expected next year, near-term growth certainly doesn’t appear to be a driver for a buy decision for Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries. This certainty tips the risk-return scale towards higher risk.
What this means for you:
Are you a shareholder? Although DALMIASUG is currently undervalued, the negative outlook does bring on some uncertainty, which equates to higher risk. Consider whether you want to increase your portfolio exposure to DALMIASUG, or whether diversifying into another stock may be a better move for your total risk and return.
Are you a potential investor? If you’ve been keeping an eye on DALMIASUG for a while, but hesitant on making the leap, I recommend you dig deeper into the stock. Given its current undervaluation, now is a great time to make a decision. But keep in mind the risks that come with negative growth prospects in the future.
Price is just the tip of the iceberg. Dig deeper into what truly matters – the fundamentals – before you make a decision on Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries. You can find everything you need to know about Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries in the latest infographic research report . If you are no longer interested in Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries, you can use our free platform to see my list of over 50 other stocks with a high growth potential .
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
