The first two phases of Menkes Developments ' Sugar Wharf community are well under construction on the Queens Quay LCBO lands, just west of Jarvis Street in Toronto's rapidly-developing East Bayfront area. The 4.6 million ft² community of new office, condo, and retail space is already on its way to dramatically altering popular skyline views with its first trio of towers: an office tower on Queens Quay East, and a pair of condo towers to the north along Lake Shore Boulevard East.
Looking south over 100 Queens Quay, image by Forum contributor mburrrr
Work is furthest along for the complex's B+H Architects -designed office tower at 100 Queens Quay East , currently rising towards a height of 25 storeys at the southeast corner of the site. When we last checked in on the rising tower in mid-May, forming stretched as high as the 20th floor. Over a month later, the office component is fast approaching its final 117-metre height over Queens Quay, with crews in the process of forming the 22nd and 23rd levels.
Looking west to 100 Queens Quay, image by Forum contributor ADRM
After a pause in cladding installation, which stalled at the eighth floor during the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic, work on installing the building's curtainwall glass exterior has resumed. This textured, dark-tinted glazing now reaches to the 12th floor, while the recent addition of black-tinted glazing has since created a contrast between the building's base and tower volumes.
100 Queens Quay approaching final height, image by Forum contributor evandyk
The tower will eventually contribute 690,000 ft² of office space to the waterfront, opening next year with anchor tenant LCBO. (They will vacate their existing space at the west end of the Sugar Wharf site, freeing it up for the second phase of condo towers at the site.) The office tower is also set to house 90,000 ft² of space for The Toronto Region Board of Trade and its trade services arm, the World Trade Centre Toronto.
North of the office tower, an enormous podium continues to materialize for the architectsAlliance -designed Sugar Wharf Condos Phase 1 complex that will include towers of 64 and 70 storeys, reaching heights of 218 and 230 metres.
Looking south over Sugar Wharf Condos Phase 1, image by Forum contributor mburrrr
The podium's fourth floor includes extra-thick columns that will span several storeys and transfer the structural loads of the point towers down through the podium and underground levels to the earth below. The fifth floor is now being formed, with rebar cages in place atop the northwest and southeast sections of the podium, marking the locations where these exposed structural elements will continue up.
Large columns taking shape at Sugar Wharf Condos Phase 1, image by Forum contributor mburrrr
You can learn more from our Database files for the projects, linked below. If you'd like to, you can join in on the conversation in the associated Project Forum threads, or leave a comment in the space provided on this page.
UrbanToronto has a new way you can track projects through the planning process on a daily basis. Sign up for a free trial of our New Development Insider here .
