how much red and processed meat, coffee, fruit and vegetables and fruit and vegetable juice people consumed
They then calculated the relative chances of having died during the study for people who drank more or less total soft drinks, sugary soft drinks and diet soft drinks. They also looked at causes of death, to see whether certain causes were more strongly linked to types of soft drinks.
What were the basic results?
Compared to people who drank less than 1 soft drink of any type per month, people who had 2 or more glasses a day were 17% more likely to have died ( hazard ratio (HR) 1.17, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.11 to 1.22).
The increased risk was true for both sugary and artificially sweetened soft drinks. Compared with people who drank less than 1 glass  a month:
people who drank 2 or more sugary soft drinks were 8% more likely to have died (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01 to 1.16)
people who drank 2 or more artificially sweetened soft drinks were 26% more likely to have died (HR 1.26, 95% CI 1.16 to 1.35)
When researchers compared chances of death from different diseases, they found:
people who drank more than 2 artificially sweetened soft drinks per day compared to less than 1 glass per month, were 52% more likely to have died of cardiovascular disease (HR 1.52, 95% CI 1.30 to 1.78)
people who drank 1 or more sugary soft drinks per day compared to less than 1 per month were 59% more likely to have died of digestive diseases (HR 1.59, 95% CI 1.24 to 2.05)
How did the researchers interpret the results?
The researchers said that "consumption of total, sugar-sweetened and artificially sweetened soft drinks was positively associated with all-cause deaths in this large European cohort; the results are supportive of public health campaigns aimed at limiting the consumption of soft drinks".
This is not the first study to find a link between sugary soft drinks and poorer health. Doctors think that sugary soft drinks contribute to people becoming overweight, and also increase the chances of type 2 diabetes by causing sugar "spikes" in the blood when consumed.
The situation is less clear when it comes to artificially sweetened soft drinks. Studies have had conflicting results. Although artificial sweeteners have no or low calories, some studies have suggested they may also cause spikes in blood sugar.
However, the study has limitations that mean we should treat the results with caution. It is a cross-sectional study, which means we only know what people were eating and drinking at 1 point in time. Although the researchers tried to account for a range of potential confounding factors, there may be other factors affecting the results. For that reason we cannot say that soft drinks caused higher death rates.
One possibility is that people who drank more artificially sweetened soft drinks did so because they were worried about their weight or had other health concerns, so switched from sugary drinks to what they thought were healthier options. That would mean that people choosing artificially sweetened drinks were already less healthy than those who drank sugary soft drinks at the start of the study.
So there's no need to panic about the headlines suggesting that diet drinks will shorten your life.
Taking all that into account, it remains the case that drinking a lot of soft drinks is not recommended as part of a healthy diet. Water and unsweetened tea or coffee are likely to be healthier options. Replacing soft drinks with tap water is not only likely to be healthier but could save you a lot of money.
