This Fourth of July should look a little different as people continue social distancing practices since the coronavirus pandemic remains a real concern. Larger cookouts should be reduced to more intimate gatherings, if held at all. Nevertheless, you can still celebrate the holiday with your favorite summer foods made at home.
Foodology Cooking School owner Christina Hart shared a take on what she calls the “quintessential summer dessert” that is s’mores.
Instead of sitting by a hot fire pit, you can get your s’mores fix with her no bake recipe for s’mores bars.
“No bake recipes are great for the summer because there’s no need to turn on your oven in the hot weather and, let’s face it, s’mores is the quintessential summer dessert,” Hart said.
Foodology, 991 S. Main St., Southington, is planning to reopen during phase 3 of the state’s reopening schedule, specifically Aug. 1. Hart said they are preparing to follow all of the state recommended guidelines to ensure guests’ visits are safe and still fun.
All kid’s summer camps, adult cooking classes and family events from Aug. 1 to next March are up for registration on the Foodology website. Classes will be limited to a maximum of 10 participants for now.
■8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, softened
1.Line a 13-x-9-inch baking pan with foil or parchment so it extends up the sides and spray lightly with nonstick spray. A brownie pan works great too!
2.Beat the butter, sugar, and vanilla until light and fluffy, about 2 minutes. Beat in the graham cracker crumbs, flour, and salt then add in the condensed milk and mix until it’s all combined.
3.Stir in 1 cup of the chocolate chips and 1 cup of the marshmallows.
4.Transfer the mixture to the prepared pan and use a spatula to press into an even layer. Sprinkle the surface with the remaining 1/2 cup chocolate chips and 11/2 cup marshmallows, pressing gently to adhere. Cover with plastic wrap and chill until firm.
5.Use the foil to lift the bars out of the pan in one piece. Cut into small squares. Store in an airtight container in the refrigerator for up to five days.
No bake s'mores bars, made with a recipe by Foodology Cooking School in Plantsville. Pictured July 1, 2020. | Bailey Wright, Record-Journal
No bake s'mores bars, made with a recipe by Foodology Cooking School in Plantsville. Pictured July 1, 2020. | Bailey Wright, Record-Journal
