The strip-till machine consists of a disc opener to cut through mulch, followed by a trash wheel to clear away a clean strip. This is followed by a tine to work the soils, with a disc on either side to keep soil in place and form a slight ridge. This is followed by a packing wheel for consolidation.
The most basic four-row machine, working at 45cm row spacings, costs about £13,000, with the range going up to 16 rows. A seeding unit can be added for oilseed rape drilling.
Mr Sly is now planning his third crop of sugar beet on the 280ha family farm. Cereal fields destined for sugar beet are strip-cultivated in August, a few days after the cereal crop is harvested and the straw chopped.
With a cover crop sown at the same time, the field is completely green by October.
Strip-till is a conservation system that uses minimum tillage. It combines the soil-drying and warming benefits of conventional tillage with the soil-protecting advantages of no-till by disturbing only the portion of the soil that is to contain the seed.
He aims to spray off the cover crop with glyphosate in late January/early February. If glyphosate is ever restricted in the future, Mr Sly has plans to try crimping the cover crop to give an inter-row mulch or use clover, and then mow it to restrict its growth and release nitrogen.
One problem is that the system does not produce a table-top-flat sugar beet seed-bed, as with traditional ploughing and heavy cultivations, so he has built his own drill to carefully monitor the depth of the seed.
His 10ha of sugar beet is grown with just one herbicide, one fungicide and no insecticides. Other variable costs include seed and seed-bed fertiliser.
“We are aiming to maintain the yield at conventional levels for much lower growing costs,” he says.
One big advantage with the system is that land strip-tilled holds on to moisture better than that which has been ploughed, so is well adapted for dry springs, when traditionally worked seed-beds can dry out very quickly.
Mr Sly believes it is a lot easier to lift the beet without causing a plethora of wheeling, although in a dry autumn, sugar beet could be more difficult to lift.
His 80ha maize crop is grown the same way, with strip-till in the autumn in a “cover crop” of largely spring barley volunteers. Drilling takes place in the spring with seed-bed fertiliser and only one herbicide used.
“The maize yielded well this year, at an average of 40t/ha, with a crop range of 35-46t/ha,” he says.
This was especially good, as one-third of his maize was under water for a week in June, when flooding hit Lincolnshire.
