Sugar stocks buck falling market trend, as govt moves to stem price fall
Gain on a price rise following government's release quota, doubling import duty and a buzz of scrapping export duty
Last Updated at February 10, 2018 01:23 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Sugar stocks bucked the broader downward trend in the benchmark Sensex and Nifty on Friday, following the government's decision to impose stock holding limits to check excess release of sugar into the market and arrest a fall in its price. While the Uttam Sugar stock surged 11.42 per cent to Rs 128.25, that of Mawana Sugars Ltd moved up by 7.68 per cent to Rs 65.20.
Shares of Dhampur Sugar closed 5.5 per cent up to Rs 204.45 on Friday, In contrast, the S&P BSE Sensex shed 1.18 per cent or 407.40 points to end the day at 34005.76. Likewise, the Nifty 50 ended on Friday with a decline ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
