The four people from Mexico who have worked seasonally for many years at the Ramagos sugar cane and soybean farm in Iberville Parish were at the U.S. consulate in Monterrey, Mexico, in mid-March, going through the usual four-day process to get a temporary visa for agricultural work in the U.S., when the coronavirus caused a short-lived but unsettling state of limbo for both workers and farmers.
The consulate sent out an email saying it was suspending routine immigration and non-immigration services beginning May 18 until further notice, said Katie Ramagos Sistrunk, who farms alongside her father, Cecil Ramagos Jr., and two of her brothers on the family’s 1,100-acre farm near Plaquemine.
“I got about 1,000 phone calls, texts and emails that night,” said Katie Sistrunk, who also chairs the Louisiana Farm Bureau Federation’s labor committee and sits on the labor advisory committee of the American Farm Bureau Federation.
Many of the calls were from Louisiana farmers whose workers had interviews at the consulate scheduled after March 18.
The situation at the U.S. consulate in Monterrey continued to change over the next few days. The office announced it would continue processing temporary worker visas, but only for those who were renewing their visa and had worked in the U.S. within the last 12 months; later that was pushed out to the last 48 months.
“Everything was being changed as we learned about it,” Sistrunk said.
The Louisiana sugar cane industry is dependent on temporary workers from other countries, including Mexico, Guatemala and South Africa. These workers apply for and receive an H-2A temporary agriculture visa through the U.S. Department of Labor.
It’s difficult for farmers to find domestic workers even though by federal law, the farmers are required to place ads for job openings in the local newspapers, Sistrunk said.
Acadiana farmers leaning on online promotion, word-of-mouth more than ever during coronavirus
With in-person sale options limited, farmers and other local producers are relying on online promotion, drive-by pickups and word-of-mouth mor…
“I couldn’t tell you the last generation that was able to get domestic workers,” said Sistrunk, a fourth-generation farmer on her family’s farm.
“We wouldn’t have a farm without the H-2A workers,” Sistrunk said last week.
Louisiana ranked sixth in the country last year for the number of H-2A visa workers, at approximately 10,800 working with a variety of crops in 2019, said Brian Breaux, senior commodity and public policy director for the Louisiana Farm Bureau Federation.
