Strawberry sundae, carrot cake, lemon drizzle, berry delight … You can have any flavour of Nakd bar you like, as long as you like dates. Squished together into a caramelly goo, before being mixed with chopped nuts and dried fruit, flavoured with spices and shaped into bars, dates are the backbone of every product in the range. “We do actually call it date goo,” says the brand’s development manager, Mirka Butalova, holding an enormous log of it in her hands.
We are at the company’s head offices, in a Buckinghamshire business park. On the table before us is an assortment of bars, all containing between 40% and 55% dates. Nakd is one of the biggest consumers in the UK, purchasing 2,000 tonnes of the dried fruit yearly.
Earlier, snapping on a par of latex gloves, Butalova had demonstrated how the company’s cacao and orange bar is made. You mix the dates with chopped cashew nuts and raisins, and add cacao powder and orange essence before smushing the whole thing and shaping it into bars. It looks exactly like Play-Doh. I can’t figure out if I want to play patty-cake with it or eat it.
Since it was founded 14 years ago, Nakd has ridden the coat-tails of the healthy snacking revolution to become a national success story, with £2.6m of sales in 2018, up 11% from 2017. This is a business empire built on dates. And it’s not the only one. Snacking brands The Primal Pantry, The Protein Ball Co, RAW and Livia’s Kitchen all use dates as a core ingredient in their ranges.
Not so long ago, dates were an exotic luxury rarely seen in the UK. Perhaps they would be eaten at Christmas, scrawny and puckered in polystyrene packaging, bearing scant resemblance to their voluptuous medjool peers. In Middle Eastern households, such as the one I grew up in, dates are ever-present, arranged on silver platters ready to be served to visiting guests with hot sweet tea. Now, the whole of the UK has gone gaga for them – even if it is more as an ingredient than as a delicious treat in its own right.
This boom is a product of consumer demand for alternatives to refined sugar. Dates may be 80% sugar themselves, but because they are high in fibre, your body absorbs it more gradually, so your blood sugar levels won’t spike as much as they would if you ate a chocolate bar. Handily, the fibre in dates can also aid in easing constipation. With the rise of wellness culture, dates have become a sort of cure-all, the glue in everything from cookies to cake.
