Thiru Arooran Sugars, Dwarikesh Sugar Industries, Uttam Sugar Mills, Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries and Ponni Sugars (Erode) were up in the range of 14% to 20% on Monday.
Last Updated at October 15, 2018 11:58 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of sugar companies were trading higher for the fifth straight day, surging up 20% on Monday in an otherwise subdued market. Thiru Arooran Sugars, Dwarikesh Sugar Industries, Uttam Sugar Mills, Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries and Ponni Sugars (Erode) were up in the range of 14% to 20%, while Bannari Aman Sugars, Balrampur Chini Mills, EID Parry (India), Andhra Sugars and KCP Sugar gained between 5% and 9% on the BSE.
In comparison, the S&P BSE Sensex was down 0.41% at 34,589 points at 11:43 am. In past one week most of the sugar companies have outperformed the market by ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
