Thus far, 15 sugar companies have announced their Q4FY19 results, posting a combined net profit of Rs 919 crore
Last Updated at May 24, 2019 14:15 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of sugar companies are on a roll, rallied by up to 20 per cent on the BSE on improved operational performance in March quarter (Q4FY19). Mawana Sugars and Avadh Sugar & Energy have rallied by up to 20 per cent each on the BSE.
Uttam Sugar Mills, Magadh Sugar & Energy, Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries, Andhra Sugars, Rajshree Sugars & Chemicals, Dhampur Sugar Mills, Triveni Engineering & Industries and Dwarikesh Sugar Mills were up in the range of 8 to 18 per cent on the BSE. In comparison, the S&P BSE Sensex was up 1.1 per cent at 39,255 points at 12:56 pm. Thus far, 15 sugar ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
