Shree Renuka Sugars, Uttam Sugar Mills, Dalmia Bharat Sugar, Ugar Sugar Works, Dhampur Sugar Mills, Magadh Sugar & Energy, and Dwarikesh Sugar were up in the range of 6-12 per cent.
Last Updated at April 25, 2019 11:25 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of sugar companies rallied up to 12 per cent on the BSE in early morning deal on the back of heavy volumes on hopes that sweetener output may fall in 2019-20 due to low rains. Triveni Engineering & Industries and Balrampur Chini Mills were up 7 per cent each, hitting their respective 52-week highs in intra-day trade today.
Shree Renuka Sugars, Uttam Sugar Mills, Thiru Arooran Sugars, Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries, Ugar Sugar Works, Dhampur Sugar Mills, Magadh Sugar & Energy and Dwarikesh Sugar Industries were up in the range of 6 per cent to 12 per cent on the BSE. In ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
