Indian sugar production estimates for the 2019-20 season are unlikely to be revised upwards by much from 26 million tonnes, when the ISMA meets to review figures towards February-end, a report said
Last Updated at February 12, 2020 12:56 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of sugar companies were in focus in Wednesday's session and rallied by up to 8 per cent on the BSE on expectation of no significant upward revision in sugar production. Balrampur Chini Mills, Avadh Sugar & Energy, Dhampur Sugar Mills, Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries, Uttam Sugar Mills and Dwarikesh Sugar Industries were up 5 per cent to 8 per cent in intra-day trade today.
In comparison, the S&P BSE Sensex was up 0.8 per cent at 41,540 points at 12:24 pm. In the past four weeks, most of the sugar stocks have underperformed the market by falling in the range of 7 per cent ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
