ANDOVER TOWNSHIP — Following a complaint of alleged animal cruelty on Tuesday, authorities say there is insufficient evidence to support any additional charges against Dennis Sugar, the owner of Sugar Sweet Farms Petting Zoo. Authorities say the investigation is ongoing.
On Tuesday afternoon, authorities were sent to the Route 206 farm for a complaint about deceased animals on the property, according to Andover Township Police Chief Eric Danielson. Danielson said he did not know who made the initial complaint.
At the property, law enforcement officers did not find anything of concern other than a deer carcass that had been there for some time.
But as detectives with the Sussex County Prosecutor's Office and two humane law enforcement officers with the Andover Township Police Department, who were called to the scene, were investigating the property, sanctuary personnel of Found in Thyme Sanctuary, whose owners are in negotiations with Sugar to take over the farm along with Sugar's animals, alerted police to what they said were “animals in distress,” Danielson said Wednesday. Danielson said it was believed on Tuesday that it had been the owners of the sanctuary who had spoken to police on site, but clarified Wednesday he believed it to be an individual or individuals who were volunteering or working with Found in Thyme Sanctuary.
The potential concerns led to response by the state Department of Agriculture. Following their response, Danielson said two animals were found to be “of concern,” but added that both had been or were being tended to by a veterinarian.
Danielson said Sugar was cooperative and allowed authorities to walk around the property and in buildings and that the remaining animals were being cared for appropriately.
“There are no complaints forthcoming from our agency,” Danielson said.
Sussex County First Assistant Prosecutor Gregory Mueller said Wednesday that his office has been investigating the condition of the animals and also any alleged neglect, “and at this time there is insufficient evidence to support additional charges.”
Sugar has been leasing a portion of the roughly 28-acre property on Route 206 in Andover Township to operate a petting zoo since roughly October. For unknown reasons, Sugar left his prior petting zoo location on Route 94 in Lafayette, which was often quite busy on weekends and held multiple events, to re-open in Andover.
Sugar, who resides in Branchville, was indicted by a Sussex County grand jury on the following charges stemming from his arrest in August: Two counts of third-degree cruelty to animals causing serious bodily injury or death and two counts of fourth-degree cruelty to animals causing bodily injury. He also faces two disorderly persons offense for animal cruelty.
Sugar is expected to be arraigned on his indictment on Monday in state Superior Court in Newton. He is represented by attorney George Daggett.
Danielson said that police, the prosecutor's office and the state Department of Agriculture are working proactively to monitor Sugar's property. It is unknown when or if the property will be transferred to Found in Thyme Sanctuary, which has a location in Wantage.
Editor's Note: This story has been clarified to indicate that the individual who made the initial complaint call regarding the Sugar Sweet Farms Petting Zoo to authorities was not known by Andover Police Chief Eric Danielson. In addition, the story was clarified to state that Found in Thyme Sanctuary personnel notified police on-site — not in advance — of what they said were animals in distress.
Lori Comstock can also be reached on Twitter: @LoriComstockNJH, on Facebook: www.Facebook.com/LoriComstockNJH or by phone: 973-383-1194.
