Sugar stocks gain in weak market; Balrampur Chini, Dhampur Sugar up over 8%
Balrampur Chini, Dalmia Bharat Sugar, Dhampur Sugar, Uttam Sugar, Dwarikesh Sugar and Thiru Arooran were up in the range of 5% to 13% on the BSE, as compared to 0.45% decline in Sensex at 01:24 PM.
Last Updated at November 12, 2018 14:02 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of sugar companies were trading higher by up to 13% on the BSE in an otherwise weak market on hopes of posting better than expected operating numbers in coming quarters on the back of firming sugar prices, gains arising from sugar inventory revaluation, higher profitability from their distillery and co-gen segment.
Balrampur Chini Mills, Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries, Dhampur Sugar Mills, Uttam Sugar Mills, Triveni Engineering & Industries, Dwarikesh Sugar and Thiru Arooran Sugars were up in the range of 5% to 13% on the BSE. In comparison, the S&P BSE Sensex was down ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
