Sugar shares rise on heavy volume; Balrampur Chini hits over 2-year high
Dalmia Bharat Sugar, Avadh Sugar & Energy, Triveni Engineering & Industries, Dwarikesh Sugar Industries and Dhampur Sugar Mills were up in the range of 3 per cent to 7 per cent on the BSE.
Last Updated at December 18, 2019 16:07 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of sugar companies were in demand on the BSE, and rallied by up to 7 per cent in intra-day trade today on the back of heavy volumes. Balrampur Chini Mills, Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries, Avadh Sugar & Energy, Triveni Engineering & Industries, Dwarikesh Sugar Industries and Dhampur Sugar Mills advanced in the range of 3 to 7 per cent on the BSE.
In comparison, the S&P BSE Sensex was up 0.40 per cent at 41,517-mark at 02:33 pm. Acording to industry body ISMA, India's sugar production dropped 35 per cent to 4.58 million tonne till December 15 of the ongoing ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
