Sugar expert, Julian M Cooper, discusses the challenges that sugar reformulation presents to new developers, and outlines examples of attempts made on different products.
According to some experts we are consuming too much sugar. In 20151 the UK’s Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN) recommended that ‘free sugars’ intake should not exceed five percent of energy intake. This equates to no more than 30g/day for 11+ individuals. To put this into perspective, the sugar ration at the end of World War II2 was 8oz (227g) per week for adults, equal to 32g/day.
Building on the SACN report in 2016, Public Health England (PHE) published its Childhood Obesity – A Plan for Action3 report, in which reformulation (to reduce/replace sugar) was proposed as a key factor. The aim was to reduce sugar(sic) by 20 percent by 2020 in nine targeted categories (breakfast cereals, yogurts, biscuits, cakes, confectionery, pastries, puddings and spreads).
In addition, the Soft Drinks Industry Levy (SDL)4 was introduced in 2018; this is a levy on producers and importers to encourage them to reduce sugar in their products to mitigate the impact of the levy.
Sugars are not only sweet, they also deliver varied properties that are required in different food products. They provide texture, mouthfeel, bulk, colour, flavour, humectancy and preservative capability. They also interact with other ingredients during processing to provide additional desirable properties such as colour and flavour in cooking and baking.
When most people refer to sugar, they usually mean white granulated sugar, the sort they find in their kitchen cupboards at home. However, it is important to note that on food labels the term ‘carbohydrates – of which sugars’ not only includes granulated sugar – ie, sucrose – but all mono and disaccharides in the product, sometimes referred to as ‘total sugars’.
The most common sugars in foods are glucose, fructose and galactose (monosaccharides) and sucrose, maltose and lactose (disaccharides). The SACN report recommended that the definition for ‘free sugars’ be adopted in the UK. Free sugars include all mono and disaccharides added to foods by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, plus sugars naturally present in honey, syrups and unsweetened fruit juices. Under this definition, lactose when naturally present in milk and milk products is excluded. This distinction between intrinsic (present naturally in foods – eg, fruits and vegetables) and extrinsic (added or free) tends to be an arbitrary one and cannot be measured analytically. Legally, the term ‘sugar’ is a reserved description under the Specified Sugars Regulations (England)6 and should only be used when referring to white granulated sucrose. This leads to a lot of confusion, even among experts, and many labels do not conform to the correct usage of terms. In nutritional labelling it should always be sugars. The IFST Information Statement on Sugars7 provides comprehensive information on the different terminology used in relation to sugars.
There is a range of ingredients (replacers) that can be used in foods and drinks to replicate the many functions of sugars. Typically, they only replace one function of the sugars, sometimes two, but there is no unique ingredient that can replicate all the functions of sugars in all products. The types of ingredients that can be used as sugar replacers are high potency sweeteners, polyols, bulking agents and fibres.
In some products, the reformulation challenge is relatively easy and has already been achieved. In beverages, the sweetness of the sugars can be replaced readily with high potency sweeteners, which can be used in smaller quantities, while the bulk of the sugars is replaced by water, thus delivering a calorie reduction. In the UK, this type of reformulation has been underway for over 20 years. In 1994, the soft drinks regulations8 were revoked and beverages have been reformulated ever since.  Many soft drinks in the UK were reformulated years before the SDL was introduced and several have received a minor tweak to drop them under the SDL minimum threshold (<5g sugars/100ml).
Other products, particularly those containing significant levels of starch and/or fat combined with sugars, are more challenging to reformulate.
The key issues encountered with reformulation are increased numbers of ingredients, increased warnings on pack, insignificant changes to the energy content of products and impacts on food safety. In addition, the product developer must ensure a similar taste to the original product and deliver it with little or no increase in price.
Consumers are demanding cleaner labels and wish to see ingredients that they recognise on labels. The use of several ingredients to replicate the multifunctional properties of sugars brings reformulation into conflict with consumer demands.
When consumers see a ‘reduced sugars’ claim on a product, they expect to see a resultant reduction in energy in the product. Research at Leatherhead Food Research10 has indicated that consumers see sugar(s) as a proxy for calories and expect a similar reduction in calories if a reduced sugars claim is made on pack. Under the health and nutrition claims regulations,11 to make a reduced sugars claim the amount of sugar in a product must be reduced by at least 30 percent when compared to a similar product and the claim can only be made if the amount of energy in the product bearing the claim is equal to or less than the amount of energy in a similar product.
The PHE Childhood Obesity plan also highlights that sugar reductions should be accompanied by reductions in calories and should not be compensated for by increases in saturated fat. In practice this is very difficult to achieve in many products, as illustrated in Table 1.
