Sugar stocks rally for second straight day; Balrampur Chini hits 13-yr high
Balrampur Chini Mills surged 5% to Rs 183, to quote at its highest level since May 2006. In the past month, it has outperformed the market by zooming 24%, as compared to a 1% rise in the Sensex
Last Updated at December 27, 2019 13:17 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of sugar manufacturers extended their rally for the second day in a row, with sector giant Balrampur Chini Mills hitting 13-year high on Friday on the BSE. Lower cane crushing and subsequent decline in sugar production has led to sugar stocks ralling in the past few sessions.
Balrampur Chini Mills surged 5 per cent to Rs 183 in the intra-day trade, to quote at its highest level since May 2006. The stock had hit an all-time high of Rs 205 on April 2006. In the past one month, it has outperformed the market by zooming 24 per cent, as compared to a per cent rise in the S&P BSE ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
