Update (July 1): The tests at Sugar Hill Church are only available to uninsured individuals.
﻿Update (June 29): A spokesman said Monday morning the free testing would be postponed. The testing will now occur Tuesday, June 30 to Thursday, July 2. Additional testing dates are anticipated later in July, Brandon Stallings said.
Sugar Hill Church will be offering hundreds of free COVID-19 tests and antibody tests to the public next week.
The church has partnered with the COVID Consortium, a group of labs and medical professionals working to expand testing availability, for the three-day event from Tuesday, June 30 to Thursday, July 2.  Both tests for the COVID-19 virus and tests to determine whether a person has COVID-19 antibodies, indicating they have already had the disease and may have some degree of immunity, will be free to any uninsured individuals who need them, according to a press release.
Testing will be done in the church’s parking lot in a drive-thru style, similar to permanent testing sites across the metro Atlanta area. This minimizes contact between healthcare workers administering the tests and people who are potentially sick.
Appointments can be made online but are not necessary for testing; unlike many sites run by local health departments, the Sugar Hill Church testing event will also accept drive-ups. Results will be available within 24 hours and can be delivered via phone, email or physical mail.
Sugar Hill Church is located at 5091 Nelson Brogdon Boulevard in Sugar Hill.
Kemp did wear a mask as he toured the Gwinnett Public Health Department's testing site, but he said he would not join other states in making it mandatory for people to wear masks in public.
Support real journalism. Support local journalism. Subscribe to The Atlanta Journal-Constitution today. See offers.
Your subscription to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution funds in-depth reporting and investigations that keep you informed. Thank you for supporting real journalism.
Download the new AJC app. More local news, more breaking news and in-depth journalism.
Download the new AJC app. More local news, more breaking news and in-depth journalism.
With the largest team in the state, the AJC reports what’s really going on with your tax dollars 
				and your elected officials. Subscribe today. 
				the latest in Georgia politics.
		        that keep you informed. Thank you for supporting real journalism. 
		        the latest in Georgia politics.
