Last Updated at April 5, 2019 12:05 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of sugar companies rallied by up to 16 per cent on the BSE in intra-day trade on Friday. Shree Renuka Sugars and Mawana Sugars have rallied 16 per cent and 14 per cent, respectively, on the back of a two-fold jump in trading volumes.
Kesar Enterprises, Thiru Arooran Sugars, Uttam Sugar Mills, Simbhaoli Sugars, Bajaj Hindustan Sugar, Ugar Sugar Works, Dhampur Sugar Mills, Dalmia Bharat Sugar, Dwarikesh Sugar Industries and Triveni Engineering were up 5 per cent to 8 per cent on the BSE. In comparison, the S&P BSE Sensex was up 0.29 per cent at 38,797 at 10:38 am. On ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
