On the other hand, ICRA expects sugar consumption to increase to 26.5 million tonnes in sugar year 2020 and production is likely to outstrip consumption by around 1.7 million tonnes.
Sugar exports from India will be a challenge, given the subdued global sugar prices, said rating agency ICRA . However, it added that even if a part of the six million tonne of sugar exports target is achieved it was likely to relieve some pressure from the domestic stocks, support domestic sugar prices and facilitate timely cane payments to farmers.
The Government announced a Rs 6268-crore sugar export subsidy scheme on August 28, 2019, to enable exports.
Sabyasachi Majumdar, senior vice president and group head, ICRA, said, “The export subsidy comes in the wake of high opening sugar stocks of around 14.5 million tonnes for 2019-20 season. Given the prevailing subdued international prices, the companies are likely to make losses on sugar exports.”
However, these losses are likely to be largely offset by the subsidy of Rs 10.44 per kg of sugar exported, which is slightly lower than the cane production subsidy of the previous year, 2018-19, which translated to Rs. 11.5 per kg of sugar exported (including the transport subsidy), he said.
While the quantum of exports could be lower than the targeted 6 million tonne (as also witnessed in the previous year, wherein around 3.2 million MT of sugar was exported as against a target of 5 million MT) given the subdued global sugar prices, even part exports are likely to relieve the pressure on domestic sugar stocks and thus support domestic sugar realisations to a certain extent, said Majumdar.
Further, the mills would also save on the interest and storage costs to the extent of sugar exported, he said.
This subsidy is towards the export of six million tonne of sugar, starting October 2019 and is to be directly credited into the farmers’ account on behalf of the mills against cane price dues and the subsequent balance, if any, is to be credited to the mill’s account. The mills are expected to use this to meet expenses on marketing costs like handling, upgrading and other processing costs, including international and internal transport and freight charges on export.
Domestic sugar production in sugar year 2020 is likely to decline by 14% year on year to around 28.2 million tonnes from 32.9 million tonne in sugar year 2019, driven by the lower production in the key sugar-producing states like Maharashtra and Karnataka.
On the other hand, ICRA expects sugar consumption to increase to 26.5 million tonnes in sugar year 2020 and production is likely to outstrip consumption by around 1.7 million tonnes.
“The Government is taking various measures to improve the liquidity of the sugar mills and support them in clearing the cane dues. Earlier, in July 2019, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs ( CCEA ) approved the creation of 4 million tonne of sugar buffer stock for a year. This is expected to improve the demand-supply situation in the domestic market and benefit the industry through some hardening of the sugar prices,” said Majumdar.
