REYKJAVIK, Iceland– Good Good, the Icelandic brand known for their no sugar added products including jams, chocolate hazelnut spread, syrup and stevia drops, has announced the closing of a $3-million Series A round of investment from individual and angel investors. The new funding is poised to strengthen the brand’s marketing in the US market, as well as further propel new product development and distribution nationwide.
Good Good was founded in 2015 in response to a personal desire to create products that were diabetic-friendly and made with natural ingredients. With high-quality stevia and erythritol, Good Good was able to create a roster of products that deliver superior taste and guilt-free eating for all consumers, whether they are seeking keto, plant-based, or diabetic-friendly products. Today, the brand specializes in developing and producing food products without added sugar. The brand’s most popular products are jams, chocolate hazelnut spread, syrup and stevia drops. Good Good’s products can be found in 1,800 stores nationwide and on Amazon, with additional distribution via Walmart.com launching this June.
“This round of funding will be used to support Good Good’s growth as we expand our presence in the US,” said Gardar Stefansson, co-founder and CEO of Good Good. “Our keto jams are currently the most sold keto jam in the United States; however, we still see a great deal of untapped potential for our brand in the market. Now, we will have the capacity to hire additional team members to add expertise in US distribution and bolster our marketing efforts for continued growth within the US.”
Good Good builds on Icelandic ingenuity, knowledge, design, and marketing operations. Product design, sales and marketing, supply chain management and quality control is done from Iceland. The products are manufactured in the Netherlands and Belgium and distributed through warehouses in Tilburg in the Netherlands as well as Virginia in the United States.
For more information on Good Good, please visit goodgood.net
Good Good was founded in 2015 when Gardar Stefansson, Agnar Lemacks and Johann Kristjansson were searching for a solution to cut the sugar intake for close relatives with type 2 diabetes. The trio discovered stevia was the key to limiting sugar intake and created a blend of erythritol and stevia to replace sugar in their day-to-day foods. In the second year of operation, when they had an excess of their erythritol and stevia blend, they decided to create jams, which quickly became the brand’s most popular products. The brand’s current products include jams, chocolate hazelnut spread, syrup, stevia drops, stevia tablets and an erythritol and stevia blend. Good Good can currently be found in approximately 2,500 stores in 16 countries. For more information on Good Good, please visit goodgood.net
Subscribe today and get access to the leading industry resources in the food & beverage industries. News, trends, industry data, expert analysis and much more.
Access all of these benefits:
