Sugar stocks rally on rising demand, MSP hopes
Analysts said these stocks are catching up after a period of steep decline during the lockdown phase.
Mumbai: Shares of sugar companies rallied on Friday tracking the renewed optimism in the broad market and on potential hike in minimum selling price.
Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries ended up 20% at Rs 89.50 and those of Dhampur Sugar Mills NSE 2.81 % gained 14.7% to Rs 124.20. Balrampur Chini Mills NSE -0.15 % gained nearly 12%, Avadh Sugar gained 10% and Shree Renuka NSE -4.93 % ended up 5%.
Analysts said these stocks are catching up after a period of steep decline during the lockdown phase.
“With lockdown easing, demand is expected to come back. Sugar demand would have gone down by 2 million tonnes during the lockdown...ethanol demand is also robust,” said Pratik Tholiya, AVP-institutional research at Elara Capital. “All stocks had corrected significantly so valuations are inexpensive,” said Tholiya.
Following the hike in MSP for kharif crops by the central government recently, there are hopes that MSP for sugar will be increased as well. ET reported in its Friday edition that the government may increase MSP of sugar by up to Rs 2 a kg to help millers clear cane dues that have crossed Rs 22,000 crore.
The sugar industry argues that the raise in MSP would not affect public much as 65% of the sweetener is being used by bulk consumers like food products and soft drink manufacturers, according to a report by ET on Friday.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
