Sugar stocks gain on hopes of improvement in earnings; Dhampur Sugar up 5%
Avadh Sugar, Dhampur Sugar, Magadh Sugar, Thiru Arooran Sugars, Dalmia Bharat Sugar, Mawana Sugars, Uttam Sugar Mills, Dwarikesh Sugar Mills, EID Parry and Balrampur Chini were up 3-9% on the BSE.
Last Updated at February 25, 2019 10:45 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Shares of sugar companies were in focus with Balrampur Chini Mills and Dhampur Sugar Mills hitting their respective 52-week highs; gaining up to 7 per cent on hopes of improvement in earnings. Avadh Sugar, Dhampur Sugar Mills, Magadh Sugar, Thiru Arooran Sugars, DCM Shirram Industries, Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries, Mawana Sugars, Uttam Sugar Mills, Dwarikesh Sugar Mills, EID Parry and Balrampur Chini Mills were up between 3 per cent and 9 per cent on the BSE.
In comparison, the S&P BSE Sensex was up 0.17 per cent at 35,936 points. In the past one week, most of these stocks has ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
