Sugar industry expects to bounce back after price rise, govt measures
Tamil Nadu mills in the red still, seek financial package and loan relief.
Last Updated at September 26, 2019 01:06 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
The surge in sugar prices follows the central government’s announcements to support the industry weeks before the crushing season few weeks away. The expected decline in 2019-20 sugar production coupled with the announcement on creation of 4 million tonnes (MT) of sugar buffer stock and subsidy on 6 MT sugar exports resulted in sugar prices rising to Rs 34-34.5/kg (ex-mill Uttar Pradesh), according to a report by rating agency ICRA.
Sugarcane is Rs 31.8/32 per kg in Maharashtra against the minimum selling price of Rs 31. The ICRA raid the government’s measures were ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
