Sugar Grove woman faces DUI, property damage charges after police find 11 empty alcohol bottles in car
Several drivers called 911 after woman ran stop sign, almost caused accident
Jolie R. Dubinski, 49, of the 100 block of Goldenrod Dr., Sugar Grove, faces a Class 3 felony charge of criminal damage to government supported property, a Class 4 felony charge of aggravated DUI, a Class A misdemeanor charge of resisting a police office and a Class C misdemeanor charge of disorderly conduct- breach of peace.
A Sugar Grove woman faces several charges after several motorists called 911 Monday afternoon about a driver who ran a stop sign and almost caused an accident at Bunker Road and Main Street in Blackberry Township, and shouted threats and racial slurs at other drivers.
According to a news release from the Kane County State's Attorney's Office, Jolie R. Dubinski, 49, of the 100 block of Goldenrod Dr., Sugar Grove, faces a Class 3 felony charge of criminal damage to government supported property, a Class 4 felony charge of aggravated DUI, a Class A misdemeanor charge of resisting a police office and a Class C misdemeanor charge of disorderly conduct- breach of peace.
The release stated that when Kane County Sheriff’s deputies responded to the call they noticed an odor of alcohol coming from Dubinski's vehicle, and found 11 empty 50 ml. liquor bottles.
While talking to Dubinski the deputy noted multiple signs of impairment. After the deputy arrested Dubinski and put her in the police vehicle, she allegedly damaged the rear video camera and other parts of the vehicle’s interior, causing an estimated $1,300 in damage. Dubinski then uttered numerous racial epithets and threats at the deputies, the release stated.
Dubinski appeared in Kane County bond court on Wednesday, where Kane County Judge Michael Noland set Dubinski’s bail at $25,000, with 10 percent to apply for bond. If Dubinski posts bond, she is prohibited from drinking alcohol. As of Thursday morning, she remains in custody at the Kane County jail.
