Sugar prices have fallen to their lowest levels in a decade and are likely to drop further as record worldwide production collides with healthier eating.
Raw sugar futures traded on the ICE Futures U.S. exchange settled at 10.1 cents a pound on Monday, the lowest finish for a front-month contract since June 10, 2008, according to Dow Jones Market Data. Year to date, prices have lost more than 33%—the biggest percentage decline so far among major commodities.
“The world has gone from supply deficit to supply surplus in the past year and a half,” says Sal Gilbertie, president and chief investment officer at Teucrium Trading. “This year, both India, the world’s second-largest producer of sugar, and Thailand, the world’s fourth-largest sugar producer, are having record production years, which has ballooned the surplus.”
World sugar production is forecast to reach a record level of 187.6 million metric tons in the 2017-18 marketing year, according to the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization, or FAO. That would mark an increase of just over 11% from the previous session.
“The substantial expected expansion in world sugar output means that production is set to surpass utilization by as much as 17 million [metric tons], the largest production surplus in history, leading to significant accumulated inventories, in both importing and exporting countries,” the FAO wrote in a biannual report published in July.
Robin Shaw, a sugar analyst at brokerage Marex Spectron, explains that sugar cane production doesn’t decline significantly as prices fall because the crop, which is classified as a species of grass, can be cut back for five or six years in a row, meaning that it is seldom dug up to plant another crop.
He also points out that sugar is “protected all around the world by high import duties and export subsidies.” The Indian government —and, to a lesser extent, Pakistan—have been “keeping cane prices artificially high in order to win farmers’ votes, leading to massive surges in production.”
Demand is “stationary” or even declining in the European Union, the U.S. and Australia, says Shaw, as consumers opt for healthier alternatives. The U.S. Department of Agriculture forecasts total domestic sugar use for the 2018-19 fiscal year at 11.33 million metric tons, little changed from the 11.27 million expected for the current fiscal year. However, in the rest of the world, sugar demand is “almost certainly still rising” due to population growth, if nothing else, he says.
In China, sugar consumption for the 2018-19 marketing year is forecast to stand unchanged at 15.7 million tons, with growth “limited by increasing health concerns and competition from sugar and sweetener replacements,” according to the FAO.
