Also read: Share market LIVE updates! Sensex, Nifty trade in narrow range; Infosys down nearly 3%, sugar stocks surge
According to a commerce ministry statement issued on Thursday, India is planning to export 2 million tonnes of sugar to China to cut trade deficit with the neighbouring country. “Export of raw sugar from India to China will begin early next year. A contract for exporting 15,000 tonnes of raw sugar has been entered to by the Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA) and COFCO, a Government of China run public sector company,” the statement said, adding that India plans to export 2 million tonnes of raw sugar to China beginning from next year.
The statement pointed out that raw sugar is the second product after non-basmati rice that China will import from India. “It is a move to reduce the $60 billion trade deficit that China has with India,” the statement said. The country’s export to China in 2017-18 amounted to $33 billion, while imports from China stood at $76.2 billion. While the production stood at a record 32.5 million tonnes in the 2017-18 marketing year, the output is estimated to be around the same level or slightly lower in the current marketing year.
The annual domestic demand of sugar is around 26 million tonnes. India has an opening stock of 10 million tonnes at the start of the current marketing year last month. The Indian government has asked sugar mills to mandatory export 5 million tonnes in 2018-19 to liquidate the surplus stock and has even announced some financial assistance to facilitate outward shipments. To boost exports, the government is also negotiating with many countries, including China and Indonesia.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
