Investing.com — Thursday, the European stock market rose thanks to the positive results of tests of the potential vaccine Covid-19, while investors keep a cautious attitude, because of the incidence of coronavirus rises ahead of key employment data in the United States.
Wednesday evening news broke that a potential vaccine against Covid-19, was developed by Pfizer (NYSE: NYSE:PFE) and BioNTech, in the early stages of the tests were well tolerated by patients after 28 days were produced virus neutralizing antibodies.
As for corporate news, shares in AB Foods (LON: ABF) rose 7.6% after the retailer said that its sales in Primark stores opened after quarantine, were “encouraging”, despite a sharp earnings drop in the third quarter. The company also reported good results of its sugar business.
Shares of Meggitt (LON: LON:MGGT) rose 6.7% after the aerospace supplier said that he had noticed the first signs of recovery in the commercial aerospace industry, despite the fact that its revenues in the second quarter fell sharply.
Stock Engie (PA: ENGIE) rose 2.6% after French energy company, agreed to sell 49% of its shares of the U.S. portfolio investment in renewable energy.
The may unemployment data in the Eurozone should be published at 05:00 Eastern time (09:00 GMT), and as expected, the unemployment rate increased from 7.3% in April to 7.7% in may.
But the focus today will be publication of data on employment in the USA at 08:30 Eastern time (12:30 GMT). Economists predict that in June the U.S. economy added 3 million jobs, after a gain of 2.5 million a month earlier. But the two-month labour market growth still looks pale compared to about 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April.
Oil prices on Thursday rose after Wednesday night the data of the energy information Administration of the United States showed that oil stocks in the country fell by 7.2 million barrels from a record high last week, much more than expected.
At 03:45 Eastern time (07:45 GMT) futures on WTI oil grew by 1.2%, to $40,30 per barrel. International benchmark Brent crude rose 1.3% to $42,58.
Gold futures have remained largely unchanged and amounted to $1780,25 per ounce and EUR/USD was trading at 1.1280, an increase of 0.3% for the day.
Natasha Kumar has been a reporter on the news desk since 2018. Before that she wrote about young adolescence and family dynamics for Styles and was the legal affairs correspondent for the Metro desk. Before joining The Times Hub, Natasha Kumar worked as a staff writer at the Village Voice and a freelancer for Newsday, The Wall Street Journal, GQ and Mirabella. To get in touch, contact me through my natasha@thetimeshub.in 1-800-268-7116
