Save the hassle of making it on your own.
The Dalgona Coffee undoubtedly became a food trend a few months back, when all of us were stuck at home, and the highlight of our day was whisking coffee foam and posting it on Instagram.
The beverage, which first gained popularity in South Korea, features milk topped with an ultra fluffy foam consisting of coffee and sugar. Its main draw is arguably its smooth consistency and use of minimal ingredients.
Now, LiHO TEA has launched its own Dalgona Coffee series comprising three flavours to bring you the best of both worlds – brown sugar bubble tea and Dalgona Coffee. The flavours are: Dalgona Brown Sugar Pearl Coffee, Dalgona Brown Sugar Pearl Yuan Yang and Dalgona Blueberry Latte.
If you’re wondering why LiHO TEA is late to the Dalgona game, it’s because they were busy whipping their coffee 600 times to ensure an irresistibly creamy consistency just for you (Kidding not kidding).
The whipping of 600 times is based on LiHO’s own experimentation with the amount of coffee used in its drinks.
Here are the three flavours you can look forward to:
If you’ve been stuck in a rut while working from home, LiHO TEA’s Dalgona Blueberry Latte is a game changer. This concoction will surely perk you up with its fruity addition of blueberries.
Known to be rich in Vitamin C, blueberries are also great in lowering blood pressure, and improving one’s skin health.
If you’re a fan of fresh milk bubble tea and/or Dalgona Coffee, this creation is for you. LiHO’s Dalgona Brown Sugar Pearl Coffee features light and frothy Dalgona foam paired with fresh milk, and LiHO’s signature brown sugar pearls.
The Dalgona Brown Sugar Pearl Yuan Yang, is a perfect pairing of the slightly bitter Dalgona foam and the sweet milk tea, and comes complete with brown sugar pearls.
Alternatively, you can opt for Dalgona Foam as a topping for S$1.20 on any existing drink at LiHO TEA.
Whether you prefer something fruity, or are in need of a quick sugar and caffeine fix, the Dalgona Coffee series is sure to do the trick.
Skip the hassle of making it on your own and order it from LiHO TEA fuss-free. The beverages are available at all LiHO TEA outlets , and through delivery platforms such as GrabFood and Foodpanda.
That said, here’s something for you to ponder upon: How many times would LiHO TEA be whipping Dalgona foam islandwide for a week?
This sponsored article by LiHO TEA sent the writer into a Dalgona Coffee x bubble tea frenzy.
If you like what you read, follow us on Facebook , Instagram , Twitter and Telegram to get the latest updates.
