Women's Health may earn commission from the links on this page, but we only feature products we believe in. Why trust us?
The 7 Best Low-Sugar Yogurts, According to Dietitians
You don't have to totally avoid the flavored options.
Ever scarfed down a tub of yogurt in the name of health, only to catch a glimpse at the nutrition facts and realize it contains as much sugar as your favorite candy? Rough.
I don't know about you, but I used to think that yogurt was a safe, no-questions-asked breakfast option; any tub would do. High in protein, super portable, perfect for breakfast parfaits of sundae proportions—what could possibly go wrong?
Well, a lot, considering everything researchers have learned about the harmful effects of sugar (like inflammation, lethargy, and an increased risk of developing chronic disease). Given their high sugar counts, half the yogurts in the dairy aisle can start to feel like they aren't much healthier than gummy bears.
Believe it or not, though, low-sugar yogurts that you'll actually want to eat do exist.
“First, whether you like low-fat, whole milk, Greek or Icelandic, any plain unflavored yogurt will contain zero added sugar ," says dietitian Erin Coffield, RDN. You'll get some natural sugar, but nothing else. (Depending how much a plain yogurt is strained, it can contain anywhere from three to 13 grams of natural sugar, so don't be alarmed.)
And though plain yogurts make great bases for parfaits, life is too darn short to stick to the plain stuff all the time. When it's PSL season, go ahead and enjoy that limited edition pumpkin spice yogurt, says dietitian Elana Zelikovic, RD; just stick to yogurts with minimal ingredients and keep any added sugars as low as possible.
Check out these low (or at least lower) sugar yogurts in mind the next time you hit the dairy aisle.
Because of their straining process, Icelandic yogurts like Siggi's tend to contain the least natural milk sugar (lactose), says Coffield. This way, you can afford to add some natural sweetness from fruit or honey without driving the sugar count up too high.
Per serving: 90 calories, 0 g fat (0 g sat), 6 g carbs, 4 g sugar, 55 mg sodium, 0 g fiber, 16 g protein
Though not as low in sugar as Icelandic yogurt, Coffield also recommends this popular lower-sugar option from Chobani. It offers just enough tasty flavor, without racking up loads of sugar.
Per serving: 120 calories, 2.5 g fat (1.5 g sat), 11 g carbs, 9 g sugar, 55 mg sodium, 0 g fiber, 12 g protein
For a high-protein, low-sugar snack, Coffield recommends this Greek yogurt, which earns its "triple zero" title because it’s entirely free of fat, added sugar, and artificial sweeteners.
Unlike many yogurts, this one also contains some fiber.
Per serving: 100 calories, 0 g fat (0 g sat), 10 g carbs, 5 g sugar, 65 mg sodium, 3 g fiber, 15 g protein
“I’m pro any plain yogurt,” says Coffield, who personally loves the Fage brand. Since this pick contains a little fat, it's extra creamy and satisfying (and, yes, still low in sugar).
Per serving: 160 calories, 4.5 g fat (3 g sat), 7 g carbs, 7 g sugar, 75 mg sodium, 0 g fiber, 23 g protein
Sure, fresh fruit is the ideal yogurt mix-in, but a trip to the farmer’s market isn’t always possible when sweet cravings strike.
When she's on-the-go, Coffield sometimes turns to flavored yogurts. "One of my recent favorites is this fat-free orange and ginger Icelandic-style yogurt." For a flavored pick, it keeps sugar reasonable.
Per serving: 110 calories, 0 g fat (0 g sat), 12 g carbs, 9 g sugar, 55 mg sodium, 0 g fiber, 15 g protein
Zelikovic appreciates that this yogurt from Maple Hill is made from grass-fed milk, since grass-fed milk tends to be higher in healthy omega-3 fats. Plus, since this pick uses whole milk, it's super creamy.
Per serving: 130 calories, 8 g fat (5 g sat), 8 g carbs, 8 g sugar, 85 mg sodium, 0 g fiber, 6 g protein
This plain, fat-free Greek yogurt might be tart, and pairs well with other flavors.
“I prefer savory flavors, so I often mix it with za’atar or everything bagel seasoning and scoop it up with whole-grain pita or cut-up veggies,” says Coffield.
Per serving: 90 calories, 0 g fat (0 g sat), 7 g carbs, 5 g sugar, 60 mg sodium, 0 g fiber, 15 g protein
Marissa Miller Marissa Miller has spent a decade editing and reporting on women’s health issues from an intersectional lens with a focus on peer-reviewed nutrition, fitness trends, mental health, skincare, reproductive rights and beyond, and currently holds a certificate in plant-based nutrition from Cornell.
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
