The Founder & Executive Chairman of Dwarikesh Sugar Industries Limited (NSE:DWARKESH), Gautam Morarka, Just Bought 1.4% More Shares
Simply Wall St March 18, 2020
Potential Dwarikesh Sugar Industries Limited ( NSE:DWARKESH ) shareholders may wish to note that the Founder & Executive Chairman, Gautam Morarka, recently bought ₹7.6m worth of stock, paying ₹18.92 for each share. While that’s a very decent purchase to our minds, it was proportionally a bit modest, boosting their holding by just 1.4%.
Notably, that recent purchase by Gautam Morarka is the biggest insider purchase of Dwarikesh Sugar Industries shares that we’ve seen in the last year. That means that an insider was happy to buy shares at above the current price of ₹18.85. While their view may have changed since the purchase was made, this does at least suggest they have had confidence in the company’s future. In our view, the price an insider pays for shares is very important. It is encouraging to see an insider paid above the current price for shares, as it suggests they saw value, even at higher levels. Gautam Morarka was the only individual insider to buy over the year.
You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
Dwarikesh Sugar Industries is not the only stock insiders are buying. So take a peek at this free list of growing companies with insider buying.
Many investors like to check how much of a company is owned by insiders. A high insider ownership often makes company leadership more mindful of shareholder interests. Dwarikesh Sugar Industries insiders own about ₹916m worth of shares. That equates to 27% of the company. While this is a strong but not outstanding level of insider ownership, it’s enough to indicate some alignment between management and smaller shareholders.
So What Do The Dwarikesh Sugar Industries Insider Transactions Indicate?
It is good to see the recent insider purchase. And an analysis of the transactions over the last year also gives us confidence. When combined with notable insider ownership, these factors suggest Dwarikesh Sugar Industries insiders are well aligned, and quite possibly think the share price is too low. One for the watchlist, at least! While we like knowing what’s going on with the insider’s ownership and transactions, we make sure to also consider what risks are facing a stock before making any investment decision. For instance, we’ve identified 4 warning signs for Dwarikesh Sugar Industries (1 shouldn’t be ignored) you should be aware of.
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
