The MD & Director of K.M. Sugar Mills Limited (NSE:KMSUGAR), Aditya Jhunjhunwala, Just Bought 8.1% More Shares
Simply Wall St April 2, 2020
Even if it’s not a huge purchase, we think it was good to see that Aditya Jhunjhunwala, the MD & Director of K.M. Sugar Mills Limited ( NSE:KMSUGAR ) recently shelled out ₹2.0m to buy stock, at ₹5.71 per share. However, we do note that it only increased their holding by 8.1%, and it wasn’t a huge purchase by absolute value, either.
View our latest analysis for K.M. Sugar Mills
The Last 12 Months Of Insider Transactions At K.M. Sugar Mills
Notably, that recent purchase by Aditya Jhunjhunwala is the biggest insider purchase of K.M. Sugar Mills shares that we’ve seen in the last year. So it’s clear an insider wanted to buy, at around the current price, which is ₹6.75. While their view may have changed since the purchase was made, this does at least suggest they have had confidence in the company’s future. We do always like to see insider buying, but it is worth noting if those purchases were made at well below today’s share price, as the discount to value may have narrowed with the rising price. Happily, the K.M. Sugar Mills insiders decided to buy shares at close to current prices.
Happily, we note that in the last year insiders paid ₹4.2m for 741.60k shares. On the other hand they divested 45275 shares, for ₹352k. Overall, K.M. Sugar Mills insiders were net buyers last year. You can see a visual depiction of insider transactions (by individuals) over the last 12 months, below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
K.M. Sugar Mills is not the only stock insiders are buying. So take a peek at this free list of growing companies with insider buying.
Does K.M. Sugar Mills Boast High Insider Ownership?
I like to look at how many shares insiders own in a company, to help inform my view of how aligned they are with insiders. A high insider ownership often makes company leadership more mindful of shareholder interests. It appears that K.M. Sugar Mills insiders own 35% of the company, worth about ₹216m. We’ve certainly seen higher levels of insider ownership elsewhere, but these holdings are enough to suggest alignment between insiders and the other shareholders.
So What Does This Data Suggest About K.M. Sugar Mills Insiders?
The recent insider purchases are heartening. And the longer term insider transactions also give us confidence. Along with the high insider ownership, this analysis suggests that insiders are quite bullish about K.M. Sugar Mills. Looks promising! So these insider transactions can help us build a thesis about the stock, but it’s also worthwhile knowing the risks facing this company. Our analysis shows 3 warning signs for K.M. Sugar Mills (2 shouldn’t be ignored!) and we strongly recommend you look at them before investing.
But note: K.M. Sugar Mills may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
