These 6 Sweet Recipes Are Totally Sugar-Free, Thanks to 1 Key Ingredient
We’ve partnered with Pyure Organic to introduce you to a new way to satisfy your sweet tooth.
If you were born with a sweet tooth, the biggest healthy eating challenge you'll face is undoubtedly dessert. Trying not to indulge in a slice of triple chocolate cake or a few scoops of ice cream after dinner can take almost all your willpower — and feeling deprived of something you really enjoy isn't great, either.
For a healthy lifestyle to really stick, you have to find better ways to satisfy your cravings without overdoing it on junk food. That's where Pyure Organic Stevia Sweetener Blend comes in. This plant-based sugar substitute lends sweetness to everything from cakes to Popsicles to muffins — without adding calories. Once you've tasted it in one of your favorite dessert recipes, you'll wonder why you ever need to go back to the original version. Just try one of these six sweet recipes to see for yourself!
These rich fudgy muffins studded with dark chocolate chunks might technically be breakfast food, but they could easily serve as dessert, too. Avocado and grated zucchini create the moist, fluffy texture without eggs or butter.
Though these cookies have the same delicate mouthfeel and sweet flavor you'd expect in classic sugar cookies, they rely on Pyure Organic Stevia Sweetener Blend for sweetness instead of regular sugar. You can even make your own sugar-free icing for a colorful finish.
When your chocolate cravings coincide with breakfast, there's only one solution: Pyure Organic Hazelnut Spread With Cocoa . Swirl this decadent sugar-free spread on top of plain yogurt, then top with sugar-free granola and sliced fresh fruit for a restaurant-quality parfait.
Studded with kiwis, strawberries, watermelon, mango, and coconut, these refreshing pops are packed with tropical flavor. What better way to cool off on a hot afternoon?
Ready to take any fruit smoothie up a notch? Add a spoonful of Pyure Organic Hazelnut Spread With Cocoa to the blender, then serve the finished product as a smoothie bowl topped with chopped hazelnuts, sliced bananas, or your favorite granola.
Pyure Organic Stevia Sweetener Blend takes the edge off tart Granny Smith apples and cranberries in this pie recipe, striking the perfect balance between sweet and sour.
