Simply Wall St March 20, 2020
It’s not possible to invest over long periods without making some bad investments. But you have a problem if you face massive losses more than once in a while. So spare a thought for the long term shareholders of Rana Sugars Limited ( NSE:RANASUG ); the share price is down a whopping 73% in the last three years. That would certainly shake our confidence in the decision to own the stock. And over the last year the share price fell 23%, so we doubt many shareholders are delighted. Even worse, it’s down 40% in about a month, which isn’t fun at all. We do note, however, that the broader market is down 28% in that period, and this may have weighed on the share price.
Given that Rana Sugars only made minimal earnings in the last twelve months, we’ll focus on revenue to gauge its business development. Generally speaking, we’d consider a stock like this alongside loss-making companies, simply because the quantum of the profit is so low. It would be hard to believe in a more profitable future without growing revenues.
In the last three years, Rana Sugars saw its revenue grow by 3.6% per year, compound. That’s not a very high growth rate considering it doesn’t make profits. Nonetheless, it’s fair to say the rapidly declining share price (down 35%, compound, over three years) suggests the market is very disappointed with this level of growth. While we’re definitely wary of the stock, after that kind of performance, it could be an over-reaction. Of course, revenue growth is nice but generally speaking the lower the profits, the riskier the business – and this business isn’t making steady profits.
Balance sheet strength is crucial. It might be well worthwhile taking a look at our free report on how its financial position has changed over time .
While it’s never nice to take a loss, Rana Sugars shareholders can take comfort that their trailing twelve month loss of 23% wasn’t as bad as the market loss of around 26%. Of course, the long term returns are far more important and the good news is that over five years, the stock has returned 3.6% for each year. It could be that the business is just facing some short term problems, but shareholders should keep a close eye on the fundamentals. While it is well worth considering the different impacts that market conditions can have on the share price, there are other factors that are even more important. Case in point: We’ve spotted 3 warning signs for Rana Sugars you should be aware of, and 2 of them make us uncomfortable.
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of companies that have proven they can grow earnings.
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on IN exchanges.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
