It's the law, birthday cake needs to include both chocolate and sprinkles, lots of sprinkles.
Don't own every baking vessel known to man? That's OK. If you have a brownie tin and a few basic ingredients, you'll be able to make pretty much anything in British baker and food writer Edd Kimber's new cookbook, One Tin Bakes.
It shares 70 recipes, including cakes, cookies and brownies, desserts and even bread – every one cooked in a single 23cm x 33cm brownie tin (note: manufacturers measure this slightly differently, some are a little wider, some a little shorter, but so long as your tin is at least 5cm deep, these recipes will fit without any issues).
Why this tin? Why not a round cake tin or a loaf pan? Kimber believes this tin is the most flexible, useful tin there is – it's a mainstay of any baker's arsenal and if you bake there is a good chance you already own one. If not, you'll find them in every cookware shop going.
It's the law, birthday cake needs to include both chocolate and sprinkles, lots of sprinkles. When I was little, the birthday cake of choice was a simple cocoa affair topped with melted milk chocolate and decorations made from Smarties, chocolate fingers and any other candy desired that year. This recipe feels like another of those classic cakes, a simple yellow cake base and a chocolate fudge frosting. As this is not a layer cake, the fudge frosting doesn't need to be thick enough to hold a second cake layer. It's silky and smooth and stays that way, it won't harden over time.
Get the latest news and updates emailed straight to your inbox.
Preheat the oven to 160C fan-forced (180C conventional). Lightly grease the baking tin and line the base with a piece of baking paper.
For the cake, place the flour, baking powder and salt into a large bowl and whisk briefly to combine. Add the butter and sugar to a separate large bowl and, using an electric mixer, beat together on medium-high speed for about 5 minutes until light and fluffy. Add the eggs, one at a time, beating until fully combined before adding another. Add the vanilla and mix briefly to combine. Scrape the batter into the prepared tin and level out. Add the flour mixture in three additions, alternating with the sour cream, starting and finishing with the flour.
Bake for 35-40 minutes or until the cake springs back to a light touch. Leave to cool in the tin.
For the fudge frosting, place the butter in a large bowl and use an electric mixer to beat on high speed for a couple of minutes or until creamy and smooth. Add the sugar, golden syrup (or honey) and cocoa powder and beat on high speed for 5 minutes or until light and fluffy. Add the hot water, sour cream and vanilla to a small jug and whisk together. Add the sour cream mixture to the bowl and mix on medium speed until combined. It will look separated for a while but will come back together as a smooth frosting. Add the melted chocolate and beat briefly until smooth and silky.
Spread the frosting over the cake, finishing with a generous amount of sprinkles, which as far as I am concerned are mandatory. Cut into squares to serve. Store in a sealed container for up to 3 days.
The beauty of this dish is the textures.
What's better than a brownie? A brownie with a layer of peanut butter cookie, that's what. While you are technically making two recipes for just one dish, both are quick and easy and, trust me, these brownies are worth the little extra effort. The beauty of this dish (other than its flavours) is the textures, as the brownie is tender and fudgy, packed full of rich chocolate flavour, while the cookie is chewy and just a little bit salty from the peanuts, which really helps amp up the peanut flavour. As there is so much going on in this, I prefer to cut it into smaller pieces, 24 pieces per recipe, but you can serve these as normal brownies, so 12 pieces per recipe.
