Gear-obsessed editors choose every product we review. We may earn commission if you buy from a link. How we test gear.
Despite the momentary energy spike, your emotional wellbeing could suffer in the long run.
According to a recent review published in the journal Medical Hypotheses, consuming large amounts of added sugar can up your risk of clinical depression.
It’s best to curb your added sugar intake to no more than 9 teaspoons (or 36 grams) per day if you’re a man and no more than 6 teaspoons (or 25 grams) per day if you’re a woman.
That being said, you don’t have to skip the birthday cake at the office or never take another glimpse at the dessert menu—just be mindful of how much added sugar is in your diet.
If you’ve made 2020 into your “ year of less added sugar ,” you might find that it’s not just your waistline and heart health that’s affected—your mental wellbeing may be getting some sweet relief as well.
According to a recent review published in the journal Medical Hypotheses, consuming large amounts of added sugars are already associated with adverse health consequences, such as increasing risk of cardiovascular disease , affecting gut health , creating systemic inflammation , prompting insulin resistance , and disrupting hormone signaling—especially dopamine.
A wide range of research on the psychological and physiological effects of sugar consumption was analyzed, including several large studies, like the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study, which followed nearly 70,000 women over a three-year period.
Looking at sugar consumption and health, researchers observed that women who consumed the most amount of added sugar were at 23 percent greater risk of subsequent clinical depression than those who consumed the least amount.
Other studies in the Medical Hypotheses review found that incidence of depression for Australian, Chinese, Latino, and Iranian adolescents and adults were also higher in those who reported drinking sugar-sweetened beverages like soda regularly.
Although these reactions can do a number on your physical health, they also increase your risk of major depressive disorder, the researchers suggest. And the more you eat, the worse it gets—particularly for those who live in chilly climates during the winter , when sunlight is weaker and can lower intake of vitamin D . (However, the depression-sugar connection can happen during any season, the study suggests.)
The cycle gets worse as you become depressed, because a common characteristic of winter-onset depression is craving sugar, according to study coauthor Stephen Ilardi, Ph.D. , of the Department of Psychology at the University of Kansas.
Does that mean you always have to skip the birthday cake at the office, or never even glimpse at another dessert menu? Not at all, Ilardi said, but being aware of how much you’re eating is important.
