Trade Alert: The MD & Whole Time Director Of K.C.P. Sugar and Industries Corporation Limited (NSE:KCPSUGIND), Irmgard Rao, Has Just Spent ₹221k Buying Shares
Simply Wall St March 16, 2020
Even if it’s not a huge purchase, we think it was good to see that Irmgard Rao, the MD & Whole Time Director of K.C.P. Sugar and Industries Corporation Limited ( NSE:KCPSUGIND ) recently shelled out ₹221k to buy stock, at ₹11.06 per share. However, we do note that it only increased their holding by 1.1%, and it wasn’t a huge purchase by absolute value, either.
See our latest analysis for K.C.P. Sugar and Industries
Notably, that recent purchase by Irmgard Rao is the biggest insider purchase of K.C.P. Sugar and Industries shares that we’ve seen in the last year. That means that even when the share price was higher than ₹10.85 (the recent price), an insider wanted to purchase shares. Their view may have changed since then, but at least it shows they felt optimistic at the time. To us, it’s very important to consider the price insiders pay for shares is very important. Generally speaking, it catches our eye when insiders have purchased shares at above current prices, as it suggests they believed the shares were worth buying, even at a higher price.
K.C.P. Sugar and Industries insiders may have bought shares in the last year, but they didn’t sell any. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. By clicking on the graph below, you can see the precise details of each insider transaction!
There are always plenty of stocks that insiders are buying. So if that suits your style you could check each stock one by one or you could take a look at this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. I reckon it’s a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. From our data, it seems that K.C.P. Sugar and Industries insiders own 9.5% of the company, worth about ₹117m. We do note, however, it is possible insiders have an indirect interest through a private company or other corporate structure. Whilst better than nothing, we’re not overly impressed by these holdings.
So What Does This Data Suggest About K.C.P. Sugar and Industries Insiders?
It’s certainly positive to see the recent insider purchase. We also take confidence from the longer term picture of insider transactions. Along with the high insider ownership, this analysis suggests that insiders are quite bullish about K.C.P. Sugar and Industries. Nice! In addition to knowing about insider transactions going on, it’s beneficial to identify the risks facing K.C.P. Sugar and Industries. Every company has risks, and we’ve spotted 4 warning signs for K.C.P. Sugar and Industries (of which 1 can’t be ignored!) you should know about.
Of course K.C.P. Sugar and Industries may not be the best stock to buy. So you may wish to see this free collection of high quality companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
