Tully farmers are bracing for a battle with the Chinese owners of their local sugar mill, with the Federal Government set to announce it will appoint an arbitrator to settle a dispute over terms of a new cane-supply agreement.
A sugar code of conduct — legislated in 2017 and which mandates that arbitration binds millers, growers and marketers — is yet to be tested
The ABC understands the Tully Canegrowers Organisation, a union representing farmers in the mill supply zone, has rejected the terms offered by Tully Sugar, owned by food giant China Oil and Food Corporation (COFCO), for a cane-supply agreement for the 2020-22 harvest seasons.
COFCO is China's largest food processor, manufacturer and trader, which bought Tully Sugar in 2011 from majority Australian shareholders.
The state Member for Hill, Shane Knuth, said growers had told him they were concerned the miller had not budged on key issues during the 13-month negotiations.
"This has been going on since November [2018], so canegrowers have worked extremely hard to enter negotiations," he said.
"I don't believe they're playing hardball on this, they just feel with the milling companies, they have the edge now."
Under the terms of 2017 regulations brought in by the Commonwealth, a sugar code of conduct that mandates arbitration between parties binds millers, growers and marketers.
The arbitration period is 30 days and can be extended once.
Brought in to mediate a dispute between Australia's largest sugar milling company, Wilmar, and sugar marketer Queensland Sugar Limited, the code has not been tested before.
Tully Canegrowers and COFCO declined to comment on the dispute while the matter awaits arbitration.
Mr Knuth, the driver of Queensland's 2015 grower choice in marketing legislation , said dispute over the payment of harbour dues and extending the harvest season loomed as the biggest sticking points for farmers.
"I believe [harbour dues] was never part of the original agreement, this is an extra cost they're putting on canegrowers," he said.
The sugarcane industry is one of two pillars of the Tully district's economy, alongside the banana sector.
The Hill MP added he believed an attempt by COFCO to remove payments to farmers for extending the season past the agreed number of weeks had also been rejected by canegrowers.
"If you extended that season out, they've [previously] acknowledged there's going to be a cost to farmers, so they've been prepared to pay that extra cost to farmers," Mr Knuth said.
Tully Sugar was subject to competing offers in 2011 when offered for sale by its majority Australian shareholders.
Former chairman of Tully Sugar Dick Camilleri said he believed COFCO was not complying with the terms of the 2011 sale agreement approved by the Foreign Investment Review Board.
Rural news in your inbox?
Subscribe for the national headlines of the day.
"We had a full board of eight, I was responsible for setting up that board," he said.
"We had four growers, two independents and two Chinese … they changed that, brought the board back to five, they stopped having monthly board meetings."
Mr Camilleri said COFCO's failure to retain long-term local staff at the mill had eroded growers' trust in the company's direction.
He said the mill had lost several senior managers who had resigned in recent years, many of whom had experience in handling grower-miller relations.
Tully's economy is dominated by the sugar industry, and the town's mill is regarded as one of Australia's most efficient.
Former Tully Sugar board member Derrick Finlayson said high turnover of Tully Sugar staff concerned many farmers.
"Those frontline people, they're people we talk to on a daily basis, those people are public relations for Tully Sugar," he said.
"We're not used to a high turnover of staff in agriculture generally, we're used to talking to the same person for 10 years."
Mr Finlayson said while COFCO was a long-term player in the global sugar industry, he believed significant differences existed between each nation's agriculture sector.
"At the end of the day, Australia is different to China, but it's also different to Brazil, South Africa, different to India," he said.
"The whole idea of someone just coming in and just learning the ropes and then their three-year contract is up and they move on is new to us.
Canefarmer Derrick Finlayson says balance between miller and grower perspectives needs to be achieved.
"We need to do more to get those people hitting the ground running sooner, because at the end of their contract, we've just got to the point where they understand us and we understand them, and then they move on."
The Australian Sugar Milling Council, previously a critic of the sugar code of conduct, declined to comment on the arbitration process.
The office of Federal Agriculture Minister Bridget McKenzie has been contacted for comment.
With several months before the coming sugarcane crushing season, Mr Knuth said growers deserved certainty on their contracts as soon as possible.
"There's concern from the community, obviously growers need this [contract] to be finalised to plan for their future," he said.
"The milling companies, they've got a bigger structure behind them, they can last this out for some time, growers need to get their crops in."
Mr Finlayson said he hoped all parties would acknowledge responsibility for their actions and the outcome for the town of Tully.
"I own my cane farm, I expect to be able to make decisions on my cane farm, but when my decisions affect other people off my farm, that's when things get murky," he said.
"I think that's where Tully Sugar might be heading, trying to make decisions that affect too many people."
