Dr Shikha Sharma said: “To ensure optimal fat quality the use of a combination of vegetable oils is important.
“You could juggle between butter, ghee, olive oil, mustard oil, soybean, sesame or even groundnut oil for different meals.
Type 2 diabetes: Using this type of oil has been proven to lower blood sugar (Image: Getty Images)
Diabetes.co.uk said: “Extra virgin olive oil reduces blood sugar and cholesterol more than other kinds of fats.
“In a study conducted at Sapienza University in Romen, the health benefits associated with a traditional Mediterranean diet for people with diabetes was investigated.
“The findings of the study were consistent with previous studies, which have linked extra virgin olive oil to higher levels of insulin, making it beneficial to people with type 2 diabetes.
“More surprising were the reduced levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) or “bad” cholesterol, associated with the extra virgin olive oil meal.”
In study with the US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health, the effect of daily consumption of extra virgin olive oil on blood glucose among diabetic patients was analysed.
The study noted: “Saudi Arabia has the highest prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus among the modern nation states in the world.
“In addition, the majority of Saudi diabetic patients do not have their blood glucose controlled.
“Data suggests that diet, rich in olive oil and nuts, significantly reduces fasting plasma glucose and glycated haemoglobin.
Type 2 diabetes: Using extra virgin olive oil will reduce your blood sugar (Image: Getty Images)
In another study with the US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health, olive oil use in the prevention and management of type 2 diabetes mellitus was analysed.
The study noted: “Olive oil as food is composed mainly of fatty acids and bioactive compounds depending on the extraction method.
The study concluded that evidence from the intake of olive oil could be beneficial for the prevention and management of type 2 diabetes.
What are the warning signs of type 2 diabetes?
As the NHS explains, many people have type 2 diabetes without realising because symptoms do not necessarily make you feel unwell.
If you do experience symptoms, these may include:
Itching around your penis or vagina, or repeatedly getting thrush
