For a person suffering with chronically high blood sugar levels, serious complications may ensue.
Two conditions known as diabetic neuropathy and peripheral vascular disease can damage the feet in people who have type 2 diabetes.
Known as sensory diabetic neuropathy, the condition increases the risk to a person’s feet.
Type 2 diabetes: The worrying sign found in your feet (Image: Getty Images)
Nearly 10 percent of people with type 2 diabetes develop foot ulcers due to peripheral vascular disease and nerve damage.
Those with type 2 diabetes may not notice sores or cuts on the feet, which in turn, can lead to an infection.
Nerve damage can also affect the function of foot muscles, leading to improper alignment and injury.
Foot symptoms are caused by poor circulation which increases the healing time for cuts and sores.
High blood pressure: Which food can lower levels?
The Mayo Clinic explained: “Diabetic neuropathy is a type of nerve damage that can occur if you have diabetes.
“High blood sugar can injure nerves throughout your body.
“Diabetic neuropathy most often damages nerves in your legs and feet.
“Depending on the affected nerves, diabetic neuropathy symptoms can range from pain and numbness in your legs and feet to problems with your digestive system, urinary tract, blood vessels and heart.”
Type 2 diabetes: Noticing foot ulcers is an early warning sign of the condition (Image: Getty Images)
Diabetes UK added: “Having diabetes means you’re at much greater risk of developing foot problems.
“This is because raised blood glucose, also known as blood sugar, can damage the sensation in your feet.
“It can also affect your circulation which can lead to you getting less blood supply to your feet.
“Without a good blood supply, you may have problems with cuts and sores healing.
To reverse type 2 diabetes and reduce the risk of symptoms to your feet, the strongest evidence points towards weight loss in people who are overweight or obese.
This can be done by changing one’s lifestyle and diet or by weight loss surgery.
“Well our scientists believe that storing too much fat in the liver and pancreas affects how type 2 diabetes develops and losing this fat can help put your diabetes into remission,” states Diabetes UK.
