Services activity contracts for fourth month in a row in June; firms fear recession in 12 months
As per the government’s decision, those farmers who are willing to take sugar in lieu of their cane price dues would be allowed to take one quintal sugar per month for three months till June at the lowest price of the day, plus GST, and the amount would be settled from their overall dues. If no sugar has been sold on that day, the previous day’s lowest price would be applicable. The willing farmers would have to use his own transport to carry the sugar and they will not get any additional transportation cost for it. The GST would be deposited by the mills to the state treasury.
Giving details, Bhoosreddy said mills will distribute sugar to only willing cane farmers and it would be subject to sale quota allotted for the month to the mill concerned by the Government of India. “The cane farmers will have to lift sugar from sugar mill’s godown by their own means and no transport subsidy will be given for it. By doing so, the farmers can save around Rs 1,300 to Rs 1,400 per quintal as the price at the mill godown would be around Rs 31.50/kg, while if they buy in the open market, sugar price would be around Rs 42 per kg. So, in three months it would amount to more than Rs 4,000 for three quintals,” he said.
“There are almost 50 lakh farmers who supply cane in UP. If all agree to lift the sugar for three months, this will take care of 1.5 crore quintals of sugar stock. Mills would be happy as it would save them the holding and storage cost of this much sugar,” he said.
Do you know What is Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) , Finance Bill , Fiscal Policy in India , Expenditure Budget , Customs Duty ? FE Knowledge Desk explains each of these and more in detail at Financial Express Explained . Also get Live BSE/NSE Stock Prices , latest NAV of Mutual Funds , Best equity funds , Top Gainers , Top Losers on Financial Express . Don’t forget to try our free Income Tax Calculator tool.
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
