Yacon Syrup adds natural sweetness to foods and is ideal to satisfy the sweet tooth.
Chocolate is said to be one of the biggest draw-backs when it comes to weight gain and has even been labelled as being addictive.
Sugar activates the brain’s reward system and makes the body want to eat more.
Chocolate alternatives like Yacon’s Cacao Nibs will not only satisfy the craving for chocolate but are packed with antioxidants as well as providing a natural boost of energy.
Weight loss: Fizzy drinks are one of the highest added sugar beverages (Image: Getty)
Other sugar substitutes include agave nectar as well as honey but both should be consumed in moderation.
The key to weight loss is putting your body into a calorie deficit which means you are burning more calories than you are consuming.
This means that cutting out sugary drinks is one of the most effective ways of cutting down your sugar intake and drinking hot drinks without sweetener or sugar can be the first step to your weight loss journey.
Also sugary juices like apple and orange juice contain a lot of sugar and are highly processed so may not be as fresh and healthy as you think, it is advised to always check the labels or even make your own if you can.
Fruits naturally contain a sugar content but it is natural sugars so should not be worried about (Image: Getty)
Cutting sugar is essential in putting your body into a calorie deficit as most of the time people do not realise how much added sugar contains.
However, it is also recommended to have a balanced diet and to not strip your diet completely of the foods you like but this should be done in moderation.
For maximum weight loss results when cutting down on sugar it is also essential to incorporate exercise into your daily routine to help burn more calories.
Cutting out sugar can be hard at first but the NHS says after a few weeks your body should become used to it and eating fresh foods including fruit and vegetables is the key to a healthy balanced diet.
While fruits do contain a lot of sugar, these are natural ones and so should not be worried about when it comes to eating healthy fresh foods.
