Boiled sweet potatoes have a low to medium GI value, with a greater boiling time lowering the GI.
For example, when boiled for 30 minutes, sweet potatoes have a low GI value of about 46, but when boiled for just 8 minutes, they have a medium GI of 61 ( 7 , 8 ).
The roasting and baking processes destroy resistant starch, giving roasted or baked sweet potatoes a much higher glycemic index (
Sweet potatoes that have been peeled and roasted have a GI of 82, which is classified as high ( 9 ).
Baked sweet potatoes have a significantly higher glycemic index than any other form.
In fact, sweet potatoes that have been peeled and baked for 45 minutes have a GI of 94, making them a high-GI food ( 13 ).
This puts them on par with other high-GI foods, including white rice , baguettes, and instant mashed potatoes ( 14 , 15 , 16 ).
Compared with roasted or baked versions, fried sweet potatoes have a slightly lower glycemic index due to the presence of fat. This is because fat can delay the emptying of the stomach and slow the absorption of sugar in the bloodstream (
Still, when they’re fried they have a relatively high GI.
Although the GI value can vary, sweet potatoes that have been peeled and fried in vegetable oil typically have a GI of around 76 ( 17 ).
This puts them on par with cake, doughnuts, jelly beans, and waffles ( 18 , 19 , 20 ).
The GI of sweet potatoes varies based on the cooking method. While boiling gives a low to medium GI value, roasting, baking, and frying all give high GI values.
Sweet potatoes can have a low, medium, or high glycemic index depending on how they’re cooked and prepared.
Boiled sweet potatoes affect blood sugar levels far less than other varieties, such as fried, roasted, or baked versions. Longer boiling times reduce the GI further.
To support better blood sugar control , it’s best to select healthy cooking methods and enjoy sweet potatoes in moderation.
Last medically reviewed on  September 23, 2019
Written by Rachael Link, MS, RD on September 23, 2019 — Medically reviewed by Adda Bjarnadottir, MS, RDN (Ice)
