What Is K.M. Sugar Mills’s (NSE:KMSUGAR) P/E Ratio After Its Share Price Rocketed?
Simply Wall St April 11, 2020
K.M. Sugar Mills ( NSE:KMSUGAR ) shareholders are no doubt pleased to see that the share price has bounced 31% in the last month alone, although it is still down 15% over the last quarter. But shareholders may not all be feeling jubilant, since the share price is still down 15% in the last year.
All else being equal, a sharp share price increase should make a stock less attractive to potential investors. While the market sentiment towards a stock is very changeable, in the long run, the share price will tend to move in the same direction as earnings per share. So some would prefer to hold off buying when there is a lot of optimism towards a stock. Perhaps the simplest way to get a read on investors’ expectations of a business is to look at its Price to Earnings Ratio (PE Ratio). Investors have optimistic expectations of companies with higher P/E ratios, compared to companies with lower P/E ratios.
View our latest analysis for K.M. Sugar Mills
How Does K.M. Sugar Mills’s P/E Ratio Compare To Its Peers?
We can tell from its P/E ratio of 3.92 that sentiment around K.M. Sugar Mills isn’t particularly high. The image below shows that K.M. Sugar Mills has a lower P/E than the average (11.7) P/E for companies in the food industry.
This suggests that market participants think K.M. Sugar Mills will underperform other companies in its industry. Since the market seems unimpressed with K.M. Sugar Mills, it’s quite possible it could surprise on the upside. It is arguably worth checking if insiders are buying shares , because that might imply they believe the stock is undervalued.
If earnings fall then in the future the ‘E’ will be lower. Therefore, even if you pay a low multiple of earnings now, that multiple will become higher in the future. So while a stock may look cheap based on past earnings, it could be expensive based on future earnings.
K.M. Sugar Mills saw earnings per share decrease by 11% last year. But EPS is up 29% over the last 5 years. And EPS is down 14% a year, over the last 3 years. This growth rate might warrant a low P/E ratio.
It’s important to note that the P/E ratio considers the market capitalization, not the enterprise value. In other words, it does not consider any debt or cash that the company may have on the balance sheet. Theoretically, a business can improve its earnings (and produce a lower P/E in the future) by investing in growth. That means taking on debt (or spending its cash).
Such spending might be good or bad, overall, but the key point here is that you need to look at debt to understand the P/E ratio in context.
How Does K.M. Sugar Mills’s Debt Impact Its P/E Ratio?
K.M. Sugar Mills’s net debt is considerable, at 258% of its market cap. This level of debt justifies a relatively low P/E, so remain cognizant of the debt, if you’re comparing it to other stocks.
K.M. Sugar Mills trades on a P/E ratio of 3.9, which is below the IN market average of 10.0. The P/E reflects market pessimism that probably arises from the lack of recent EPS growth, paired with significant leverage. What is very clear is that the market has become less pessimistic about K.M. Sugar Mills over the last month, with the P/E ratio rising from 3.0 back then to 3.9 today. For those who like to invest in turnarounds, that might mean it’s time to put the stock on a watchlist, or research it. But others might consider the opportunity to have passed.
When the market is wrong about a stock, it gives savvy investors an opportunity. If the reality for a company is not as bad as the P/E ratio indicates, then the share price should increase as the market realizes this. We don’t have analyst forecasts, but you could get a better understanding of its growth by checking out this more detailed historical graph of earnings, revenue and cash flow.
But note: K.M. Sugar Mills may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with strong recent earnings growth (and a P/E ratio below 20).
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
