Invert sugar is also frequently used to ferment products like beer and kombucha.
Fully inverted sugar contains around 50% glucose and 50% fructose, but you can purchase or make it with varying concentrations of glucose, fructose, and sucrose depending on how long it’s heated.
Commercially prepared invert sugar is arguably the most convenient and chemically precise option, but it’s not always available in regular grocery stores.
If your local grocery store doesn’t carry it, you may have better luck finding it online or in specialty restaurants or bakery supply shops.
Although it may sound daunting, making invert sugar at home isn’t complicated. The process takes a little over an hour and all you need is water, sugar, cream of tartar , and a candy thermometer.
Start by mixing 2 cups (480 mL) of water with 4.4 cups (1 kg) of granulated sugar and 1/4 teaspoon of cream of tartar in a pot. Bring the mixture to a boil over medium heat until it reaches 236°F (114°C), stirring occasionally.
Next, remove the mixture from the heat, cover, and let cool. Once it’s cool enough to handle, transfer it to a jar and store it in your refrigerator for up to 6 months.
Invert sugar sweetens foods like cakes, ice cream, and candy while helping them maintain a smooth texture and improving moisture retention.
Invert sugar is a form of added sugar, and its nutritional features are almost identical to those of regular table sugar or corn syrup.
It’s important to limit your intake of foods that contain invert sugar. Overconsumption of any type of added sugar is associated with an increased risk of chronic conditions like heart disease, diabetes, liver disease, and obesity (
Although added sugar can be safely consumed in moderation, the American Heart Association recommends limiting your intake to no more than 6 teaspoons (25 grams per day) for women and 9 teaspoons (37.5 grams) per day for men (
Invert sugar is a liquid sweetener made from table sugar (sucrose) and water.
It’s formed when the bonds between the sugars in sucrose are broken, resulting in a thick, sweet syrup comprised of 50% fructose and 50% glucose.
Invert sugar adds sweetness and helps improve moisture retention and quality in a variety of sweets like ice cream, cakes, cookies, and candy.
Nutritionally, invert sugar is similar to any other type of added sugar like table sugar or corn syrup. You should consume it sparingly , as consuming too much may contribute to negative health outcomes.
If you’re interested in trying invert sugar, you can purchase it online or try making it at home.
Shop for invert sugar online.
Last medically reviewed on  July 1, 2020
Written by Ansley Hill, RD, LD on July 1, 2020 — Medically reviewed by Kathy W. Warwick, R.D., CDE
