Sugar is a part of many foods. While some foods contain natural sugar, others contain processed or artificial sugar. Sugar becomes one of the main causes of weight gain, especially on the belly.
What happens to your body when you cut off sugar from your diet? 5 tips to cut down your sugar intake  |  Photo Credit: iStock Images
When you cut out sugar from your diet, you are likely to experience certain symptoms like headache, irritation,etc
New Delhi: Our diet plays a very important role in keeping us healthy and fit. Even when we are trying to lose weight, we have to watch our diet. Our diet is the main source of nutrients for our body, many of which it cannot make on its own and requires for regular body functions.
Sugar is a part of many foods. While some foods contain natural sugar, others contain processed or artificial sugar. Sugar becomes one of the main causes of weight gain, especially on the belly. Ask an expert on how to lose weight, and one of the first things they will ask you is to cut down your sugar intake.
What happens when you cut down sugar from your diet?
Studies have shown that when you stop eating sugar, it can have a similar effect on your body as to when people get off drugs. You may see withdrawal symptoms such as headaches, exhaustion, brain fog, irritability, etc. Some people even experience digestive issues. However, with time, your body adapts to it. In the body processes, nothing really changes. Your body continues to burn calories for energy, but there are fewer or no extra calories to store as fat since the sugar is one of the main sources of calories that the body receives.
According to Dr SK Mundhra, HOD, Internal Medicine Saroj Super Speciality Hospital, New Delhi, there can be many reasons for increased sugar intake. "It is important to understand the sources of sugar intake along with the lifestyle habits that resort to increasing blood sugar levels. While not only eating sweets add to an increase in sugar levels but poor exercise habits, a sedentary lifestyle also act as catalysts. Bingeing on alcohol, not exercising, poor eating habits, sugar in tea or coffee all contribute to high blood sugar levels gradually." She also shares some tips to reduce your sugar intake and keep your weight, blood sugar levels in check.
Mindful Eating - Keeping a check on the quantity helps in enjoying the delicacies with moderate piling of calories. Always use a smaller plate while dining. Be mindful of what to eat and how much to eat.
Follow your diet plan - Having a heavy breakfast helps to keep the stomach fuller for a longer time. Plan your breakfast to be heaviest with lots of fibre and nutrients, and lunch packed with proteins. Try to avoid high carb foods in a day's time like bread, potatoes, sauces, white rice, etc.  Keep your kitchen and fridge full of healthy snacking options, green leafy vegetables and fruits.
Consume plenty of water – Eliminate sugary drinks, such as soda, packed juices and replace them with water. It is advised to drink plenty of water every day (optimal level). Start the day with drinking 1 l water on an empty stomach to clean the digestive tract. This helps in staying hydrated and cleans toxins from the blood. Make sure to consume at least 3 L of water on average per day.
Prefer dancing, if not exercising – We may find difficulty in exercising, but dancing out our heart can burn out the extra grams of calories. Even after consuming all the sweets and ghee, this can be the best workout to keep healthy.
Choose from the wisest– Choose to eat a healthier option as saying no to offerings may not be so difficult. Try not to overeat, and it is perfectly okay to choose nuts, fruits, flavoured yoghurts in the desserts.
Try this Detoxification Technique - Try detox body by replacing tea and coffee with green teas, starting your day with a glass of lukewarm water with a lemon in it. Try avoiding binge drinking. Choose a small portion like red wine instead of high alcoholic drinks like scotch, vodka etc.
A little sugar here and there can always be managed by doing an extra ten minutes of workout, yoga, walking, etc. However, being mindful of what you eat and how much is the key to a healthy, happy body.
