Ethanol is an active ingredient in the production of hand sanitisers and is manufactured by sugar mills in India.
Some analysts said sugar stocks are gaining also because they had fallen sharply during the meltdown in recent weeks.
Mumbai: Shares of sugar producers advanced in a falling market on Monday as investors bet on demand for the commodity remaining strong despite the ongoing 21-day lockdown . Hopes of sugar producers in Uttar Pradesh securing permission from the state government to manufacture hand sanitisers also boosted sentiment.
Rana Sugars gained 3 per cent to close at ₹3.15, Balrampur Chini Mills NSE 0.04 % ended in 10 per cent upper circuit at ₹99, Dhampur Sugar Mills ended up 5 per cent at ₹78.85, and Sakthi Sugars gained 8 per cent to close at ₹7.
“Sugar stocks have already seen a downturn in the last 2-3 weeks so there is not much negative left. Production is going on as sugar is an essential commodity and ethanol production is also going on smoothly,” said Pratik Tholiya, AVP-institutional research, Elara Capital.
“It is an essential commodity. The demand is soft because of shutdown, large consumers like restaurants and malls are closed- but sugar price will not go down because it is controlled by MSP.”
Ethanol is an active ingredient in the production of hand sanitisers and is manufactured by sugar mills in India.
The government has asked sugar mills as well as distilleries to prioritise supply of ethyl alcohol, extra neutral alcohol (ENA) and ethanol. The Indian Sugar Mills Association has assured the hand sanitiser industry that adequate supply of ethanol and ENA will be made available to them for the next 2-3 months.
The demand for ethanol has increased after the Covid-19 outbreak. Some UP-based sugar producers have also sought permission to produce hand sanitisers themselves. Some of the prominent sugar companies in the state are Balrampur Chini and Dhampur Sugar.
Some analysts said sugar stocks are gaining also because they had fallen sharply during the meltdown in recent weeks. For instance, Balrampur Chini’s shares fell to ₹72.85 on March 24 from ₹142.95 on March1, a decline of nearly 50 per cent.
Analysts said that on the offtake of ethanol, there is slight delay from oil marketing companies as petrol consumption has come down but that will also normalise in the due course of time.“Sugar is an essential commodity, and manufacturing ethanol for hand sanitizer will add to the bottomline,” said Ambareesh Baliga, independent market expert.
Tholiya and Baliga prefer Balrampur Chini following the recent correction in the stock.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
