Last Updated at September 17, 2019 15:26 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
The government’s recent decision to allow production of ethanol by reconverting sugar is a welcome step, but it remains to be seen how far the move will help address the immediate issue of burgeoning stocks of the sweetener in the 2019-20 season. This is because mills could take quite some time to make the necessary financial investments for conversion.
Also, ethanol can be made directly from sugar only in the off-season, as freshly produced stocks of the compound have very little shelf-life when storage options are limited. The 2019-20 sugar season starts next month and peak ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
