The matter is further complicated by a name change to the NYDIG Institutional Bitcoin Fund LP, updated today, which was previously called the NYDIG Institutional Digital Asset Fund LP. While we’ve been unable to confirm the $190 million NYDIG Institutional Bitcoin Fund LP updated today and the $140 million NYDIG Bitcoin Yield Enhancement Fund LP closed last month are in fact different, other evidence supports they are.
Namely, the Institutional Bitcoin Fund made its first sale on October 26, 2018, according to today’s documents, and the Bitcoin Yield Enhancement Fund started selling just a week before it closed. A third fund for bitcoin futures, called the Bitcoin Strategy Fund, is currently listed on Stone Ridge’s site under the ticker symbol, BTCNX.
Either way, the presence of a new major player in the institutional investing in bitcoin space is notable. To date, institutional investing in cryptocurrency has been largely dominated by Barry Silbert’s Grayscale, which has $4.0 billion in assets under management, with another new player, 3iQ announcing a smaller, but still significant $48 million exchange-traded product listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Editor’s note: This story has been updated to show that NYDIG was granted its BitLicense after hiring Lawsky,
I report on how blockchain and cryptocurrencies are being adopted by enterprises and the broader business community. My coverage includes the use of cryptocurrencies such
I report on how blockchain and cryptocurrencies are being adopted by enterprises and the broader business community. My coverage includes the use of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Ethereum and Ripple, and extends to non-cryptocurrency applications of blockchain in finance, supply chain management, digital identity and a number of other use cases. Previously, I was a staff reporter at blockchain news site, CoinDesk, where I covered the increasing willingness of enterprises to explore how blockchain could make their work more efficient and in some cases, unnecessary. I have been covering blockchain since 2011, been published in the New Yorker, and been nationally syndicated by American City Business Journals. My work has been published in Blockchain in Financial Markets and Beyond by Risk Books and I am regularly cited in industry research reports. Since 2009 I’ve run Literary Manhattan, a 501 (c) (3) non-profit organization dedicated to showing Manhattan’s rich literary heritage.
