Zurich – 23 January 2020 - Amun AG innovates the crypto market by launching the 21Shares Short Bitcoin ETP (SBTC) by Amun on the Swiss Stock Exchange (SIX), which tracks the opposite performance of Bitcoin to give investors an easy, cost effective and convenient way to gain exposure in both directions of the Bitcoin price movements.
The SBTC tracker is the first short or inverse product of its kind using a digital asset as the underlying for an ETP structure (Exchange Traded Products - ETP). It enables investors to capture falling price movements in Bitcoin BTC via their traditional broker or bank. In contrast to shorting, which is usually associated with high lending costs (or margin calls), the inverse ETP is reset at the end of each day and the performance is not rolled over to the next day. Therefore, it is ideally suited to capture short term price movements of Bitcoin for a short recommended period. With the SBTC tracker, investors can immediately and securely capitalize on falling adverse price movements of the largest and most liquid digital asset.
21Shares Short Bitcoin ETP by Amun is a natural extension to the existing unleveraged range of crypto ETPs and offers a greater choice to investors by which they may better manage the increased volatility and changing dynamics of the cryptocurrency markets.
“We have worked hard to be in a position to launch the first inverse Bitcoin ETP on a regulated trading venue here in Switzerland. Amun offers an existing suite of long investment products for a variety of crypto assets, however, the one missing puzzle was to deliver a product to capitalize on negative price movements.” Hany Rashwan, CEO Amun AG says. “Our platform is now near complete and marks an important step towards the introduction of derivative products in conventional ETP form for the still nascent crypto market and I am proud that the Amun team continues to pioneer innovation and bring new investor-friendly institutional grade products to the market.”
The 21Shares suite is composed of eleven trackers – both single underlying trackers as well as innovative crypto basket composite products. Fully collateralized, custodied in institutional segregated accounts with an independent custodian, these institutional-grade trackers are an ideal structure for both retail and institutional investors to get an exposure to these nascent digital asset classes. The full 21Shares suite of 11 ETPs are listed in US Dollars (USD) and additionally 2 in Swiss Francs and 3 in euros on the SIX Swiss exchange, six of them are also traded in Swiss Francs on BX Swiss, the second Swiss exchange. Further admissions to listing on European venues will occur in 2020 following the approval by the Financial Supervisory Authority (SFSA) of Amun’s Base Prospectus in November 2019.
21Shares represent the new name of the family of Exchange Traded Products issued by Amun AG. The entire suite of existing ETPs will be migrated over to the new brand in the course of the second quarter 2020. 21Shares by Amun will pave the way with a new financial markets identity distinguishing the conventional financial issuances from other digital issuances.
Amun makes investing in crypto assets as easy as buying shares using your conventional broker or bank. Investors can invest in cryptocurrencies using a conventional ETP structure (or tracker) easily, with total confidence and security, cost effectively thanks to the 21Shares suite of ETPs launched by Amun and now composed of 11 Crypto ETPs: the Amun Crypto Basket Index ETP (HODL:SW), Amun Bitcoin (ABTC:SW), Amun Ethereum (AETH:SW), Amun XRP (AXRP:SW), AMUN Bitcoin Cash ETP (ABCH:SW), Amun Binance ETP (ABNB:SW), Amun Tezos ETP (AXTZ:SW), Amun Bitcoin Suisse ETP (ABBA:SW), Amun Bitwise 10 ETP (KEYS:SW) and Amun Sygnum Platform Winners Index ETP (MOON:SW) . The entire suite is listed on a regulated framework on the SIX Swiss Exchange, BX Swiss and Boerse Stuttgart in CHF, USD and EUR. Founded in 2018, Amun is led by a team of talented serial entrepreneurs and experienced banking professionals from the technology and financial world. Incorporated in Zug, with offices in Zurich, Berlin and New York, the company has launched several world firsts, including the first listed crypto index (HODL) in November 2018. Amun has eleven crypto ETPs listed today and has over $50 million in AuM in total listed products.
This document and the information contained herein are not for distribution in or into (directly or indirectly) the United States, Canada, Australia or Japan or any other jurisdiction in which the distribution or release would be unlawful. This document does not constitute an offer of securities for sale in or into the United States, Canada, Australia or Japan.
This document does not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to purchase, any securities in the United States. The securities of Amun AG to which these materials relate have not been and will not be registered under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "Securities Act"), and may not be offered or sold in the United States absent registration or an applicable exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to, the registration requirements of the Securities Act. There will not be a public offering of securities in the United States.
This document is only being distributed to and is only directed at: (i) to investment professionals falling within Article 19(5) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Financial Promotion) Order 2005 (the "Order"); or (ii) high net worth entities, and other persons to whom it may lawfully be communicated, falling within Article 49(2)(a) to (d) of the Order (all such persons together being referred to as "relevant persons"); or (iv) persons who fall within Article 43(2) of the Order, including existing members and creditors of the Company or (v) any other persons to whom this document can be lawfully distributed in circumstances where section 21(1) of the FSMA does not apply. The Securities are only available to, and any invitation, offer or agreement to subscribe, purchase or otherwise acquire such securities will be engaged in only with, relevant persons. Any person who is not a relevant person should not act or rely on this document or any of its contents.
In any EEA Member State (other than the Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain and Sweden) that has implemented the Prospectus Regulation (EU) 2017/1129, together with any applicable implementing measures in any Member State, the "Prospectus Regulation") this communication is only addressed to and is only directed at qualified investors in that Member State within the meaning of the Prospectus Regulation. Exclusively for potential investors in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain and Sweden the 2019 Base Prospectus (EU) is made available on the Issuer’s website under www.amun.com . The approval of the 2019 Base Prospectus (EU) should not be understood as an endorsement by the SFSA of the securities offered or admitted to trading on a regulated market. Eligible potential investors should read the 2019 Base Prospectus (EU) and the relevant Final Terms before making an investment decision in order to understand the potential risks associated with the decision to invest in the securities. You are about to purchase a product that is not simple and may be difficult to understand.
This document is not an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy or subscribe for securities of Amun AG. Neither this document nor anything contained herein shall form the basis of, or be relied upon in connection with, any offer or commitment whatsoever in any jurisdiction.
This document constitutes advertisement within the meaning of the Swiss Financial Services Act (the "FinSA") and not a prospectus. In accordance with article 109 of the Swiss Financial Services Ordinance, the Base Prospectus dated 13 November 2019 (the "Base Prospectus") and the Final Terms for SBTC dated 22 January 2020 (the "Final Terms", and together with the Base Prospectus, the "Prospectus") have been prepared in compliance with articles 652a and 1156 of the Swiss Code of Obligations, as such  articles were in effect immediately prior to the entry into effect of the FinSA, and the Listing Rules of the SIX Swiss Exchange in their version in force as of January 1, 2020. Consequently, the Prospectus has not been and will not be reviewed or approved by a Swiss review body pursuant to article 51 of the FinSA, and does not comply with the disclosure requirements applicable to a prospectus approved by such a review body under the FinSA. Copies of the Prospectus are available free of charge from the website of the Issuer.
Copies of this document may not be sent to jurisdictions, or distributed in or sent from jurisdictions, in which this is barred or prohibited by law. The information contained herein does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy, in any jurisdiction in which such offer or solicitation would be unlawful prior to registration, exemption from registration or qualification under the securities laws of any jurisdiction.
