The massive rally was caused by interest in chainlink from China, the world's largest bitcoin and cryptocurrency exchange by volume, Binance, working with chainlink developers so-called decentralized finance products, and search giant Google using chainlink's blockchain to bridge legacy databases .
"As with most blockchain projects in their infancy given the low liquidity initially, any surge in demand is likely to cause significant impact on price," said Simon Peters, bitcoin and crypto analyst at investment platform eToro.
The chainlink price has fallen back somewhat from its all-time high but has broken the broader cryptocurrency downward trend—with almost all so-called altcoins failing to recover after the brutal crypto winter of late 2018 and early 2019.
The chainlink price hits an all-time high of $4.54 back in July of last year and has since fallen ... [+] back from there but remains significantly up on the start of 2019.
"With chainlink developers working with the likes of Swift to help connect banks to smart contracts, as well as major companies like Google, naturally this has caused excitement around the potential of the platform going forward," Peters added.
"This has subsequently encouraged investors to buy the link token, speculating on the project's future success. With link prices increasing over the last year, this was further compounded by the 'fear of missing out' phenomenon."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
