"Crypto prices have experienced upward movements that correspond with recent holidays—potentially because market participants may expect and try to front-run such holiday fluctuations," SFOX analysts wrote , noting that while bitcoin and crypto prices have dropped over the last few weeks, volatility has also fallen.
The SFOX reading of the bitcoin and crypto market as neutral "may be at least partly due to uncertainty regarding how bitcoin and other crypto-assets may react to upcoming investment product launches, together with holidays such as Christmas and New Year’s Eve," according to researchers.
Meanwhile, low trading volumes across bitcoin and crypto markets have weighed on trading sentiment for the past few months.
Technical data has also pointed to further declines for bitcoin, with its three-day candle yesterday closing below the 200-period moving average–thought to be a measure of the long-term market trend.
It's the first time the bitcoin price has breached the 200-day moving average since May, with bitcoin and crypto news outlet Coindesk reporting "bitcoin now faces stronger selling pressure."
However, SFOX highlighted the possibility of fresh institutional investment in bitcoin and cryptocurrency which could turn the market tide.
Bitcoin and crypto exchanges are beginning to roll out bitcoin options products, with the Intercontinental Exchange's Bakkt platform recording an all-time high in its open interest on December 16 even as the bitcoin price fell below $7,000.
Elsewhere, Germany has recently passed legislation that will allow the country's banks to custody bitcoin and crypto from the beginning of 2020, which "spells new regulatory clarity."
The bitcoin price has dropped by more than 20% over the last month.
Bitcoin-rivals ethereum, Ripple's XRP, litecoin, bitcoin cash, and EOS have all under performed bitcoin over the last few weeks, with traders and investors increasingly skeptical over the future of some so-called altcoins .
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
