With the UK set to leave the European Union on October 31st 2019, commentators are assessing the fair value of both stocks and the British Pound (GBP). The situation is fluid, with Harold Wilson famously being attributed to the quote that “a week is a long time in politics”. Whilst it is not my job to speculate on politics, I would definitely flag concern over the correlation between the FTSE 100 and GBP.
Historically, when GBP falls in value, companies within the FTSE 100 gain in value. For example, in the three months following the EU referendum in 2016, the FTSE 100 gained over 10%, whilst GBP fell over 12% against the US dollar.
On a company level, this correlation holds true. In the month following the EU referendum, GlaxoSmithKline rallied almost 20%, against GBP falling in value. An important note on this is that GSK generates over 90% of its revenue from outside of the UK.
With companies who generate most of their revenue from outside of the UK exhibiting a stronger correlation, this must offer a clue to the reason behind it.
Why is there a correlation?
The primary driver behind this correlation is that when GBP falls in value, companies who have large overseas earning are able to gain when they repatriate it back into the base currency.
Take Burberry for example. It has been performing well and has a large market selling to consumers in Asia, with proceeds in Chinese Yuan, Hong Kong dollars and US dollars. With GBP weaker than it was in early 2016, this in effect makes the other currencies stronger on a relative basis. When Burberry repatriates Yuan and HK Dollars back into British Pounds, they receive more Pounds now than they did a few years ago.
The consequences of exchange rate gains ultimately goes onto the bottom line for the respective business, boosting profitability and therefore a higher share price.
Whilst usually gains and losses offset each other over the year, post referendum we have seen continued and sustained weakness in GBP, meaning net exporters in the FTSE 100 have seen large exchange rate gains for at least two years.
Why should I be worried?
The British Pound has seen an extreme levels of weakness in mid-2019, with some analysts saying that it does not have much further to fall.
If the UK economy manages to survive past October 31st, then pessimism over GBP is likely to subside. Even if this is not evident in the short term, over the next one/two years, the value of the pound is likely to rally from current levels.
This should make the FTSE 100 net exporters (of which around 70% of the index are) less profitable by having to take on exchange rate losses via stronger GBP. In term, this could drag the FTSE 100 index lower.
Overall, this correlation could be an unpleasant reminder to equity investors that asset classes do not always work together positively.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Jonathan Smith has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK owns shares of and has recommended GlaxoSmithKline. The Motley Fool UK has recommended Burberry. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
