Job losses will jeopardise sustained gains in UK consumer confidence with strong pressure for further political action to underpin employment as job cuts continue.
According to July’ flash reading, the UK GfK consumer confidence index recovered to -27 from -30 the previous month and slightly above consensus forecasts of -29. This was the highest reading for 4 months, although still well below pre-covid readings and the figure of -9 for March.
Four of the indicators posted a monthly improvement with a significant increase in expectations of the economic outlook over the next 12 months. The only indicator which recorded a decline was an assessment of the economic situation over the past 12 months.
Joe Staton, GfK‘s Client Strategy Director, commented: “Despite the backdrop of dire warnings about the state of the economy, large-scale job losses, the end of furlough with the prospect of further unemployment, and a possible second-wave of COVID-19, consumers appear to be slightly more confident as lockdown loosens across parts of the UK.
"The seven-point jump in the Major Purchase Index could bode well for ‘reopening day’ this Saturday as more shoppers hit the high streets after a trip to the pub and visit to the hairdresser.
There will inevitably an important element of pent-up demand following the lockdown which will help underpin spending in the near term.
There was still an important element of caution and Staton added:
There will be further concerns over the labour market as the announcement of heavy job losses continue within the economy.
The Resolution Foundation has estimated that 1 million furloughed workers could lose their job when the scheme is wound down in October.
There will also be stresses from August when employers have to bear a proportion of the costs.
The survey also indicated that it will be difficult for workers to switch sectors and commented that 75% of workers who lost their jobs return to work in the same sector.
The immediate focus will be on Chancellor Sunak’s economic statement due on Tuesday.
Labour-market specialists have called for a £3.0bn package of measures to help workers make career changes including training grants. There have also been calls for redundancy laws to be tightened.
Stephen Evans, chief executive of Learning and Work Institute, said: “Without urgent action, we risk a second spike in unemployment as the furlough scheme is withdrawn which could take unemployment to levels last seen after the Great Depression.”
Prime Minister Johnson commented on Friday; "You'll be hearing more about what we're going to do to support people next week from the chancellor Rishi Sunak.”
Trade developments remain extremely important for Sterling sentiment after the latest round of UK/EU talks ended early on Thursday.
ING Bank commented; “Ahead of a new round of [Brexit] talks next week, the two parties have reportedly softened their stances on a few issues and took steps towards a general compromise.”
Underlying political developments remained an important dimension for the talks with the resignation of the French Prime Minster while German Chancellor Merkel stating that Germany was preparing for a ‘no-deal’ Brexit.
Viraj Patel, FX and global macro strategist at Arkera commented; “We’re seeing some of the political uncertainties in Europe - around the French cabinet reshuffle - spilling over into the pound.”
Sterling stalled on Friday with Euro/Sterling holding above 0.9000.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
Tim is an economist and has been involved in financial markets for over 20 years as an analyst. He...
