GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) is a global pharmaceutical giant that operates around the world, but reports in sterling (unlike its peers AstraZeneca or Hikma ). The company’s results have been mildly impacted by fluctuations in the pound, particularly versus the dollar. GSK has said the weakness in sterling could boost revenue by 2% in 2019 while adjusted earnings per share (EPS) could benefit by 4%.
Diageo , the alcoholic drinks giant, reports in sterling, but generates the majority of its sales in other countries, meaning it is well positioned to benefit when revenue and earnings are translated back into pounds. The company reported minor gains from exchange rates in its recently ended financial year to the end of June 2019, which was principally driven by sterling’s weakness against the dollar, the euro, and the Kenyan shilling.
The company has said that it should continue to benefit in the new financial year. Based on assumptions that the pound will average $1.25 and €1.11 (close to the current levels, but weaker than the average seen in the 2019 financial year), Diageo expects to report a £375 million boost to net sales in the year to June 30, 2020, while operating profit would benefit by £135 million.
British American Tobacco (BAT) is one of the most geographically-diverse businesses in the world and sells cigarettes globally. The UK is a relatively minor market for the company in the grand scheme of things – 38% of revenue comes from the US, 20% from Asia and the Middle East and 18% from the Americas and Sub-Saharan Africa. That leaves 24% from Europe and North Africa, and the UK will only account for a fraction of that. However, the UK is crucially important for its vaping business, which is where tobacco companies are finding growth amid the fall in smoking rates.
In 2017, when BAT’s average exchange rate fell to $1.301 from $1.344 the year before, revenue jumped 4.3% year-on-year (YoY). That was largely thanks to the weaker pound as the increase was just 0.2% at constant-exchange rates. Similarly, when sterling strengthened to $1.330 in 2018, revenue fell 1.8% but would have risen 5.7% at constant currency.
AB Foods is another company that largely benefits from a weaker pound, with over 60% of its operating profit earned outside the UK but exchanged into sterling. It said a 10% rise in sterling against the dollar and the euro would have knocked £14 million and £31 million off its 2018 annual profit, respectively.
The company, which has a unique business built around ingredients and clothing, says British Sugar is particularly sensitive to the GBP/EUR exchange rate. Notably, clothing store Primark predominantly buys in dollars and sells to customers with euros, and has been benefiting from relative weakness in EUR/USD over the past 18 months.
Rotork , which makes actuators and flow control systems, benefits when the pound’s value falls against the dollar and the euro. It said the average GBP/USD exchange rate in 2018 was four cents stronger than the year before and that this knocked over £16 million – or 2% - off revenue for the year, demonstrating how fairly mild movements can have a big impact. It added that the euro strengthening against sterling by one cent would boost profit by £400,000, based on its 2018 results, while a one cent increase in the dollar would provide a £600,000 increase.
Renishaw , which specialises in precision measurement technology used in everything from agriculture to healthcare, reports in sterling but generates 96% of its revenue overseas. This exposes it to movements between the sterling and the US dollar, the euro and the Japanese yen. It booked sizeable gains in the recently ended financial year (to the end of June 2019) thanks to the depreciation of sterling against the US dollar. The company said its pre-tax profit would have been £300,000 lower if the pound had been 5% stronger.
Victrex , known for producing polymers used in a wide variety of high-end applications, is one of those companies that imports materials to make goods in the UK and then exports the majority of it to overseas customers. The majority of its cost base is in sterling, but 98% of its revenue is generated outside the UK – with up to 60% coming from Europe. It is mostly exposed to sterling’s relationship with the US dollar, the euro and the Japanese yen.
The company has said that, if the pound loses further value following a no-deal Brexit as expected, then this may help mitigate the introduction of tariffs on both imports and exports during the first year of trade between the UK and the EU. It said, assuming the pound weakens by a further 10% under such a scenario, this could ‘provide a high degree of mitigation’ against the threat of tariffs.
The company has something of a monopoly as it is the only producer of PEEK polymers - a material with high levels of mechanical and chemical resistance - in the whole of Europe. Therefore, many of its European customers will have little choice but to keep buying from the UK-based business regardless of Brexit.
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Discover the range of markets you can trade on - and learn how they work - with IG Academy's online course.
