Growing global anxiety over the spread of Covid-19 and its likely impact on economic growth was not enough to prevent the US Dollar (USD) and Pound Sterling (GBP) from softening this week.
While market risk appetite generally diminished USD exchange rates were generally unable to capitalise on this deterioration in sentiment, given growing concerns over the likely fallout for the US economy.
The White House’s lacklustre response to the growing crisis left the US Dollar on a weak footing, with the odds of a US outbreak of Covid-19 continuing to rise.
As former Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen warned that a significant increase in the number of US cases could push the world’s largest economy into a recession the mood towards the US Dollar soured.
Although January’s durable goods orders data bettered forecasts, showing a smaller monthly decline than anticipated, this was not enough to shore up USD exchange rates at this stage.
Increasing signs of caution among Federal Reserve policymakers could exert further pressure on the US Dollar ahead of the weekend.
With the central bank already showing signs of leaning towards renewed dovishness in 2020 any fresh evidence of policymaker anxiety may weigh heavily on the US Dollar.
If markets see reason to bet that interest rates could see another cut sooner rather than later this could push USD exchange rates lower across the board.
As policy action from the Fed would only have limited effectiveness in staving off the impact of any slowdown stemming from Covid-19 disruption sentiment looks set to remain muted in the days ahead.
Unless the central bank appears prepared to leave monetary policy on hold for longer, in spite of domestic political pressure, the potential for a US Dollar recovery may prove limited.
Further volatility may be in store for USD exchange rates if January’s advance goods trade balance slips deeper into a state of deficit.
Fresh evidence of underlying weakness within the US trade outlook could drive the US Dollar to shed further ground against its rivals, even in the face of lingering market risk aversion.
However, the US Dollar could find a rallying point on the back of the latest US personal consumption expenditure report.
As the personal consumption expenditure core is the Federal Reserve’s preferred gauge of inflationary pressure any uptick here may give policymakers greater cause for confidence.
Any indication that inflationary pressure picked up at the start of the year could reduce bets on the prospect of an imminent interest rate cut, to the benefit of USD exchange rates.
Save money on your currency transfers with TorFX, voted International Money Transfer Provider of the Year 2016, 2017 and 2018. Their goal is to connect clients with ultra competitive exchange rates and a uniquely dedicated service whether they choose to trade online or over the telephone. 
As well as producing in-depth analysis of the latest currency trends for ERUK, Colin heads up the Business...
