Sterling dipped as the UK lockdown continues. (PA)
Here are the top business, market, and economic stories you should be watching today in the UK, Europe, and abroad:
The pound fell against the euro and the dollar on Monday, with no end in sight to the lockdown that is hobbling the UK economy.
On Sunday, 596 more coronavirus-linked deaths in hospital were reported, the smallest daily rise in almost a fortnight. Cabinet member Michael Gove dubbed the figures “deeply worrying” over the weekend, with government ministers playing down talk of an easing of restrictions any time soon.
Sterling was trading 0.3% lower against the dollar ( GBPUSD=X ) and the euro (GBPEUR=X) in early trading in London.
A key benchmark of US oil prices plunged to a 21-year low on Monday, amid continued fears about oversupply in the market.
US West Texas Intermediate crude futures ( CL=F ) dropped over 18% to a low of $14.45 a barrel on Monday morning, a level not seen since 1999. By 8.20am UK time, US crude futures were still down 17.9% to $15.00.
Brent oil futures ( BZ=F ), the international benchmark, were more resilient. Brent was down just 2.2% to $27.46 per barrel at the same.
“The steep fall in the price is because of the lack of sufficient demand and lack of storage place, given the fact that the production cut has failed to address the supply glut,” said Naeem Aslam, chief market analyst at Avatrade.
The economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic threatens 59 million jobs across the European Union and the UK, according to a report from McKinsey.
The consultancy predicts that the unemployment rate across the EU could almost double by 2020 to 11.2% in a worst-case scenario where the pandemic would not be contained within three months. In this scenario, the unemployment rate would not return to current levels until 2024.
One in four jobs could be under threat, McKinsey notes, from either permanent redundancies, furloughs or reduced hours.
Sofa maker DFS ( DFS.L ) on Monday that it was in “advanced” negotiations with its existing banks to secure an additional credit line of between £60m ($73.6m) and £70m so that it can weather the coronavirus pandemic.
Its shares soared 11% on the announcement. The new debt will supplement an existing £250m facility and will bolster its working capital until sofa deliveries can resume, the UK’s largest furniture retailer said.
DFS, which was forced to close all of its stores in March, also said that it was hoping to raise further money from investors via an equity issue of up to 19.9% of its existing share capital.
European markets were fairly steady in early trading on Monday in London.
The Europe-wide Stoxx 600 ( ^STOXX ) index of large and mid-cap firms was trading 0.2% higher, and the FTSE ( FTSE 100 ) in London was up 0.1%. Germany’s DAXX ( ^GDAXI ) was also trading 0.2% higher, while the French CAC 40 ( ^FCHI ) dipped 0.2%.
Trading was also mixed in Asia overnight. China’s SSE composite index ( 000001.SS ) was up 0.5%, but Japan’s Nikkei ( ^N225 ) dipped 1.2%.
Futures were also pointing to a decline in US stocks on Wednesday. S&P 500 futures ( ES=F ) were down 0.8%, Dow Jones Industrial Average futures ( YM=F ) were down 0.9% and Nasdaq futures ( NQ=F ) slid 0.5%.
